 BIS Review 21/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s March report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 22 March 2002  *      *      * The Bank’s View2 Japan’s economy still continues to deteriorate as a whole, although the downward pressure from exports and inventories is gradually abating. With regard to final demand, the decline in net exports (real exports minus real imports) has almost ceased amid the improvement in exporting conditions. Meanwhile, business fixed investment continues to decrease and private consumption remains weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is also declining.  To be sure, final demand overall is still weak, but exports—which have a relatively large impact on production—have recently stopped declining. Also, inventory adjustment is progressing further in many industries including electronic parts due to the continued production cutbacks to date. Reflecting these developments, the decline in industrial production is moderating further. However, firms maintain their stance on reducing personnel expenses under strong excessiveness in employment. Under this situation, the severity of employment and income conditions of households is rather intensifying, with unemployment being on a rising trend and the rate of decline in wages expanding. Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, the synchronized inventory adjustment in IT-related goods worldwide is nearing an end. Under this condition, the East Asian economies appear to have hit bottom. As for the U.S., the possibility is increasing that the economy will recover since household spending remains solid and inventory adjustment has almost finished, although there still remain uncertain factors. Furthermore, the yen is at low levels compared to last autumn. Under these circumstances, exports are expected to turn up toward the middle of this year. Still, the pace of recovery in exports will be modest, while the anticipated expansion in overseas economies is only gradual and final demand for IT-related goods worldwide remains stagnant for the time being.  Meanwhile, with respect to domestic demand, business fixed investment is expected to follow a downtrend reflecting the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption is also likely to remain lackluster mainly due to worsening employment and income conditions. While domestic private demand generally weakens as mentioned above, government spending is basically projected to follow a downward trend. Consequently, it may take quite a while for economic activity as a whole to stop declining, even though the decrease in industrial production may come to an end against the background of the improvement in exporting conditions and completion of inventory adjustment.  Overall, the economic deterioration in Japan is projected to moderate steadily, as production stops declining due mainly to the recovery in exports. Still, while the economy continues to be in a fragile state, continuous attention should be paid to the risk of a negative impact on the economy from developments in foreign and domestic financial markets. With regard to prices, import prices are increasing reflecting the depreciation of the yen since around the end of last year and the rise in international commodity prices. The decline in domestic wholesale prices is recently contracting somewhat against the background of the increase in import prices and the progress in inventory adjustment. Consumer prices continue to decline with the effects of the fall in crude oil prices in the latter half of last year persisting, while the prices of imported products and their substitutes keep on falling. Corporate service prices continue to decline. As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the depreciation of the yen from around the end of last year and the rise in international commodity prices are regarded as factors to support prices for the time being. However, since domestic demand is projected to remain weak for a time, the balance between supply and demand is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices. Furthermore, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining                                                       1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on March 19 and 20, 2002. 2 The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on March 19 and 20 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 21/2002 of distribution channels will restrain prices. In addition, the expansion in the rate of decline in wages may also work as a factor to push prices downward, mainly in services prices which are apt to be influenced by this factor. Overall, prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will further intensify downward pressure on prices continuously warrants careful monitoring. In the financial market, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent as the Bank of Japan provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank at around 10 to 15 trillion yen. Interest rates on term instruments rose somewhat temporarily generated by the activation of fund-raising beyond the fiscal year-end since mid-February, but continue to be at low levels since this rise was constrained due to additional measures decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting on February 28. Yields on long-term government bonds are mainly moving in the range of 1.4-1.5 percent recently. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are expanding slightly. Stock prices started to turn up due to tighter regulations on short-selling of stocks and the rise in U.S. stocks, and are subsequently increasing as domestic and foreign institutional investors bought back. In the foreign exchange market, the yen surged temporarily in reaction to the rise in Japanese stock prices but is weakening once again thereafter. With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming more cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming more severe. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the fund-raising conditions are generally favorable particularly for firms with high credit ratings, but the issuing environment for those with low credit ratings continues to be severe on the whole. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms are decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-on-year basis. Meanwhile, the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is growing at around 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued continues to decline, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base has increased further and is recording a substantial increase of somewhat less than 30 percent. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock (M2 + CDs) has increased slightly.  Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding costs for some firms and the long-term prime lending rate are rising somewhat. Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy on the whole in terms of money market conditions. However, the fund-raising conditions of firms with high credit risks, especially of small firms, are gradually becoming more severe as private banks and investors continue to be more cautious in taking credit risks. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing continue to require closer monitoring. 
 BIS Review 21/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Corporate governance Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, 26 March 2002. *      *      * Corporate governance1 has evolved over the past century to more effectively promote the allocation of the nation’s savings to its most productive uses. And, generally speaking, the resulting structure of business incentives, reporting, and accountability has served us well. We could not have achieved our current level of national productivity if corporate governance had been deeply flawed.  And yet, our most recent experiences with the bankruptcy of Enron and, preceding that, several lesser such incidents suggest that the governance of our corporations has strayed from our perceptions of how it is supposed to work. By law, shareholders own our corporations and, ideally, corporate managers should be working on behalf of shareholders to allocate business resources to their optimum use.  But as our economy has grown, and our business units have become ever larger, de facto shareholder control has diminished: Ownership has become more dispersed and few shareholders have sufficient stakes to individually influence the choice of boards of directors or chief executive officers. The vast majority of corporate share ownership is for investment, not to achieve operating control of a company.  Thus, it has increasingly fallen to corporate officers, especially the chief executive officer, to guide the business, hopefully in what he or she perceives to be in the best interests of shareholders. Indeed, the boards of directors appointed by shareholders are in the overwhelming majority of cases chosen from the slate proposed by the CEO. The CEO sets the business strategy of the organization and strongly influences the choice of the accounting practices that measure the ongoing degree of success or failure of that strategy. Outside auditors are generally chosen by the CEO or by an audit committee of CEO-chosen directors. Shareholders usually perfunctorily affirm such choices.  To be sure, a CEO can maintain control over corporate governance only so long as companies are not demonstrably in difficulty. When companies do run into trouble, the carte blanche granted CEOs by shareholders is withdrawn. Existing shareholders, or successful hostile bidders for the corporation, usually then displace the board of directors and the CEO. Such changes in corporate leadership have been relatively rare but, more often than not, have contributed to a more-effective allocation of corporate capital.  For the most part, despite providing limited incentives for board members to safeguard shareholder interests, this paradigm has worked well. We are fortunate, for financial markets have had no realistic alternative other than to depend on the chief executive officer to ensure an objective evaluation of the prospects of the corporation. Apart from a relatively few large institutional investors, not many existing or potential shareholders have the research capability to analyze corporate reports and thus to judge the investment value of a corporation. This vitally important service has become dominated by firms in the business of underwriting or selling securities.  But, as we can see from recent history, long-term earnings forecasts of brokerage-based securities analysts, on average, have been persistently overly optimistic. Three- to five-year earnings forecasts for each of the S&P 500 corporations, compiled from projections of securities analysts by I/B/E/S, averaged almost 12 percent per year between 1985 and 2001. Actual earnings growth over that period averaged about 7 percent.  Perhaps the last sixteen years, for which systematic data have been available, are an historical aberration. But the persistence of the bias year after year suggests that it more likely results, at least in part, from the proclivity of firms that sell securities to retain and promote analysts with an optimistic inclination. Moreover, the bias apparently has been especially large when the brokerage firm issuing the forecast also serves as an underwriter for the company’s securities.                                                        1  On topics such as nonfinancial corporate governance, which is not in the Federal Reserve Board’s jurisdiction, I am obviously speaking for myself. In addition, my comments do not represent the official views on this subject of the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, of which I am a member. 
 2 BIS Review 21/2002 The performance of securities analysts may improve as a result of the recent joint initiative by the National Association of Securities Dealers and the New York Stock Exchange to require brokerage firms to include in research reports the distribution of the firms’ ratings, among “buy,” “sell,” and “hold,” for example. Brokerage firms must also include in research reports a record that indicates when an analyst assigned or changed a rating for a company.  I suspect that with the underlying database publicly available, it is just a matter of time before the ex post results of analysts’ recommendations are compiled and published on a regular basis. I venture to say that with such transparency, the current upward bias of analysts’ earnings projections would diminish rather rapidly, because investment firms are well aware that security analysis without credibility has no market value.  *     *      * Prior to the past several decades, earnings forecasts were not nearly so important a factor in assessing the value of corporations. In fact, I do not recall price-to-earnings ratios as a prominent statistic in the 1950s. Instead, investors tended to value stocks on the basis of their dividend yields. Since the early 1980s, however, corporations increasingly have been paying out cash to shareholders in the form of share repurchases rather than dividends. The marginal individual tax rate on dividends, with rare exceptions, has always been higher than the marginal tax rate on capital gains that repurchases create by raising per share earnings through share reduction. But, until the early 1980s, share repurchases were frowned upon by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and companies that repurchased shares took the risk of being investigated for price manipulation.  In 1982, the SEC gave companies a safe harbor to conduct share repurchases without risk of investigation. This action prompted a marked shift toward repurchases in lieu of dividends to avail shareholders of a lower tax rate on their cash receipts. More recently, a desire to manage shareholder dilution from the rising incidence of employee stock options has also spurred repurchases.  As a consequence, dividend payout ratios, which in decades past averaged about 55 percent, have in recent years fallen on average to about 35 percent. But because share prices have risen so much more than earnings in recent years, dividend yields--the ratio of dividends per share to a company’s share price--have fallen appreciably more than the payout ratio. A half-century ago, for example, dividend yields on stocks typically averaged 6 percent. Today such yields are barely above 1 percent.  The sharp fall in dividend payout ratios and yields has dramatically shifted the focus of stock price evaluation toward earnings. Unlike cash dividends, whose value is unambiguous, there is no unambiguously “correct” value of earnings.  Although most pretax profits reflect cash receipts less out-of-pocket cash costs, a significant part results from changes in balance-sheet valuations. The values of almost all assets are based on the assets’ ability to produce future income. But an appropriate judgment of that asset value depends critically on a forecast of forthcoming events, which by their nature are uncertain.  A bank, for example, books interest paid on a loan as current revenue. However, if the borrower subsequently defaults, that presumed interest payment would, in retrospect, be seen as a partial return of principal. We seek to cope with this uncertainty by constructing loan reserves, but the adequacy of those reserves is also subject to a forecast. Depreciation charges against income, based on book values, are very crude approximations of deterioration in the economic value of physical plant. The actual deterioration will not be known until the asset is retired or sold. And projections of future investment returns on defined-benefit pension plans markedly affect corporate pension contributions and, hence, pre-tax profits. Thus, how one chooses to evaluate the future income potential of the balance sheet has a significant impact on current reported earnings.  *      *      * Earnings uncertainty has been particularly elevated in recent years. Improvements in information technology have created new opportunities for innovative companies, but an environment of rapid technological change is also one in which the resulting profit opportunities are difficult to assess and project. In particular, such rapid change has heightened the potential for competitors to encroach on established market positions. This process of capital reallocation has not only increased the long-term earnings growth potential of the economy as a whole, but has widened as well the degree of uncertainty for individual firms.  Not surprisingly then, with the longer-term outlook increasingly amorphous, the level and recent growth of short-term earnings have taken on especial significance in stock price evaluation, with 
 BIS Review 21/2002 3 quarterly earnings reports subject to anticipation, rumor, and “spin.” Such tactics, presumably, attempt to induce investors to extrapolate short-term trends into a favorable long-term view that would raise the current stock price.  CEOs, under increasing pressure from the investment community to meet short-term elevated expectations, in too many instances have been drawn to accounting devices whose sole purpose is arguably to obscure potential adverse results. Outside auditors, on several well-publicized occasions, have sanctioned such devices, allegedly for fear of losing valued corporate clients. Thus, it is not surprising that since 1998 earnings restatements have proliferated. This situation is a far cry from earlier decades when, if my recollection serves me correctly, firms competed on the basis of which one had the most conservative set of books. Short-term stock price values then seemed less of a focus than maintaining unquestioned credit worthiness.  *      *      * A change in behavior, however, may already be in train. The sharp decline in stock and bond prices following Enron’s collapse has chastened many of the uncritical practitioners of questionable accounting. Corporate reputation is fortunately reemerging out of the ashes of the Enron debacle as a significant economic value. Markets are evidently beginning to put a price-earnings premium on reported earnings that appear free of spin. Likewise, perceptions of the reliability of firms’ financial statements are increasingly reflected in yield spreads on corporate bonds. Corporate governance has doubtless already measurably improved as a result of this greater market discipline in the wake of recent events.  But the Congress is clearly signaling that more needs to be done. I hope that any legislative and regulatory initiatives will move to further realign current practice with the de jure governance model that served us well in generations past. Most success in that direction would seem to come primarily from changes in incentives for corporate officers.  In particular, as President Bush has suggested, defining more clearly the duties of CEOs with respect to accounting and disclosure appears appropriate. There are, doubtless, other measures that could reinforce the aforementioned Enron-induced market incentives for disclosures and thereby strengthen investors’ trust, which is so essential to the effective functioning of free-market capitalism.  We have to be careful, however, not to look to a significant expansion of regulation as the solution to current problems, especially as price-earnings ratios increasingly reflect the market’s perception of the quality of accounting. Regulation has, over the years, proven only partially successful in dissuading individuals from playing with the rules of accounting.  *      *      * Some changes, however, appear overdue. In principle, stock-option grants, properly constructed, can be highly effective in aligning corporate officers’ incentives with those of shareholders. Regrettably, the current accounting for options has created some perverse effects on the quality of corporate disclosures that, arguably, is further complicating the evaluation of earnings and hence diminishing the effectiveness of published income statements in supporting good corporate governance. The failure to include the value of most stock-option grants as employee compensation and, hence, to subtract them from pretax profits, has increased reported earnings and presumably stock prices. This would be the case even if offsets for expired, unexercised options were made. The Financial Accounting Standards Board proposed to require expensing in the early to middle 1990s but abandoned the proposal in the face of significant political pressure.  The Federal Reserve staff estimates that the substitution of unexpensed option grants for cash compensation added about 2-1/2 percentage points to reported annual growth in earnings of our larger corporations between 1995 and 2000. Many argue that this distortion to reported earnings growth contributed to a misallocation of capital investment, especially in high-tech firms.  If market participants indeed have been misled, that, in itself, should be surprising, for there is little mystery about the effect of stock-option grants on earnings reported to shareholders. Accounting rules require that enough data on option grants be reported in footnotes to corporate financial statements to enable analysts to calculate reasonable estimates of their effect on earnings.  Some have argued that Black-Scholes option pricing, the prevailing means of estimating option expense, is approximate. But so is a good deal of all other earnings estimation, as I indicated earlier. Moreover, every corporation does report an implicit estimate of option expense on its income statement. That number for most, of course, is zero. Are option grants truly without any value?  
 4 BIS Review 21/2002 Critics of option expensing have also argued that expensing will make raising capital more difficult. But expensing is only a bookkeeping transaction. Nothing real is changed in the actual operations or cash flow of the corporation. If investors are dissuaded by lower reported earnings as a result of expensing, it means only that they were less informed than they should have been. Capital employed on the basis of misinformation is likely to be capital misused.  Critics of expensing also argue that the availability of options enables corporations to attract more-productive employees. That may well be true. But option expensing in no way precludes the issuance of options. To be sure, lower reported earnings as a result of expensing could temper stock price increases and thereby exacerbate the effects of share dilution. That, presumably, could inhibit option issuance. But again, that inhibition would be appropriate, because it would reflect the correction of misinformation.  *     *      * In a further endeavor to align boards of directors with shareholders, rather than management, considerable attention has been placed on filling board seats with so-called independent directors. However, in my experience, few directors in modern times have seen their interests as separate from those of the CEO, who effectively appointed them and, presumably, could remove them from future slates of directors submitted to shareholders.  I do not deny that laws could be passed to force selection of slates of directors who are patently independent of CEO influence and thereby significantly diminish the role of the CEO. I suspect, however, that such an initiative, while ensuring independent directors, would create competing power centers within a corporation, and thus dilute coherent control and impair effective governance.  *      *      * After considerable soul-searching and many congressional hearings, the current CEO-dominant paradigm, with all its faults, will likely continue to be viewed as the most viable form of corporate governance for today’s world. The only credible alternative is for large--primarily institutional--shareholders to exert far more control over corporate affairs than they appear to be willing to exercise.  Fortunately, it seems clear that, if the CEO chooses to govern in the interests of shareholders, he or she can, by example and through oversight, induce corporate colleagues and outside auditors to behave in ways that produce de facto governance that matches the de jure shareholder-led model. Such CEO leadership is critical for achieving the optimum allocation of the nation’s corporate capital.  *      *      * Before concluding, I should like to emphasize that a market economy requires a structure of formal rules--a law of contracts, bankruptcy statutes, a code of shareholder rights--to name but a few. But rules cannot substitute for character. In virtually all transactions, whether with customers or with colleagues, we rely on the word of those with whom we do business. If we could not do so, goods and services could not be exchanged efficiently.  Companies run by people with high ethical standards arguably do not need detailed rules to act in the long-run interests of shareholders and, presumably, themselves. But, regrettably, human beings come as we are--some with enviable standards, but others who continually seek to cut corners. Yet there can be only one set of rules for corporate governance, and it must apply to all. Crafting the rules to provide the proper mix of regulatory and market-based incentives and penalties has never been easy. And I suspect that even after we get beyond the Enron debacle, crafting and updating such rules will continue to be a challenge.  
 BIS Review 20/2002 1 Otmar Issing: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in Brussels, 20 March 2002. *      *      * Today, I would like to review economic developments in the euro area in the context of the monetary policy strategy of the ECB. Before doing this, allow me to mention that we are extremely pleased to see that the euro cash changeover went so smoothly. There were no significant technical problems in this complex logistical process and the fact that national banknotes were largely withdrawn well before the final deadline of their ceasing to be legal tender confirms that the European public became familiar with the new banknotes and coins very quickly. The Governing Council would like to express its gratitude once more to all those who helped to make the euro cash changeover such a success. Turning to monetary policy, let me start with some remarks on the first pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. In 2001, the annual rate of M3 growth doubled from a low of almost 4% in March to 8% in November, before declining slightly in January 2002. From June 2001 onwards, M3 growth stood clearly above the reference value of 4½%. However, the Governing Council has so far assessed that these developments do not imply risks to price stability over the medium term. Let me explain in some more detail this assessment. As you are well aware, the Governing Council of the ECB does not react in a mechanistic way to deviations of M3 growth from its reference value. Rather, it conducts a thorough analysis of monetary analysis with a view to derive information about the outlook for price stability in the medium term. This analysis is based on clear evidence of high M3 growth leading to inflation over the medium term in the euro area. However, in addition, we need to take into account that monetary developments are at times affected by a number of temporary factors such as changes in tax regulations or, as has been the case, turmoil in financial markets. Hence, an appropriate assessment of monetary developments always needs to take a medium-term perspective and in addition requires a detailed knowledge of their underlying factors.  The year 2001 highlighted the importance of taking a broad-based approach to monetary analysis. M3 growth in 2001 was driven to a significant extent by a number of factors which we continue to judge as not indicating upward risks to price stability over the medium-term. Let me just point to one important factor, namely the fact that M3 growth was significantly influenced by portfolio decisions of economic agents. Initially, the relatively flat yield curve until August 2001 and the persistent decline in stock prices until September seemed to induce many investors to shift parts of their portfolios out of the capital markets and into shorter-term assets, such as those included in M3. Subsequently, in the aftermath of the events of 11 September, the exceptional rise in economic and financial uncertainty led to further shifts out of longer-term assets and into low-risk, liquid instruments included in M3.  In addition, let me point to the substantial decline in the growth of loans to the private sector in 2001. This contrasting development of money and loans is a feature which clearly distinguishes the monetary situation in 2001 from that in 1999, when the strengthening of M3 growth was accompanied by very strong loan dynamics. Hence, our overall assessment was that monetary developments in the euro area in 2001 have so far not indicated risks to price stability. However, this assessment needs to be continuously checked, because what matters in monetary analysis are the medium-term trends. It will therefore be crucial to monitor how M3 develops this year. Should a moderation in monetary growth not materialise the implications of monetary developments for risks to price stability may need to be reassessed, in particular in conjunction with a stronger economic recovery in the euro area. On the basis of the available evidence on the fundamental long run stability of money demand in the euro area, which has not been affected by the events of 2001, the analysis of monetary developments over the medium term thus remains crucial for assessing future inflation. It is also worth pointing out that the strong increase in liquidity in 2001 was not specific to the euro area but was a global phenomenon which pointed to the existence of common (financial market) factors influencing monetary developments as well as reflecting the stance of monetary policy in the major economies in 2001. Turning now to the second pillar, recent data releases have been providing further evidence on the improvement of economic conditions in the euro area. This has in turn increased the likelihood that the economic cycle reached a trough at the end of last year.  
 2 BIS Review 20/2002 Starting with external developments, there are indications of a gradual firming of economic activity, which should in turn lead to a gradual strengthening of the external demand for euro area products and services. These developments certainly reinforce the expectation of an upturn in economic activity in the euro area in 2002. The recovery should be supported by continuous favourable financing conditions and the significant positive impact of past and expected future declines in inflation on real disposable income. In addition, the recovery should not encounter any fundamental impediments, given the lack of major economic imbalances in the euro area which require a longer adjustment process. Recent data point to a recovery starting moderately in early 2002 and accelerating in the course of the year, an assessment that seems to be shared by expectations formed in financial markets. Our expectation is that real GDP growth might be in line with potential towards the end of 2002. Overall, however, we still face significant uncertainty as regards the strength of the economic upswing this year. Turning to price developments, the current outlook for a gradual economic recovery in the euro area should imply that inflationary pressures stemming from economic activity are likely to remain subdued for some time. In fact, the downward trend in annual HICP inflation observed since May 2001 is expected to continue in the coming months. However, annual inflation rates are, as expected, undergoing some volatility in the first few months of this year. The pick-up in HICP inflation in January 2002 has to be seen in this light. It was partly due to base effects stemming from falling energy prices in early 2001 and to higher indirect taxes in some euro area countries early this year. The increase also reflected a considerable rise in unprocessed food prices due to adverse weather conditions in some parts of Europe and a slight increase in energy prices at the start of 2002. In the next few months, the effects of past increases in energy and food prices should gradually subside, as the data for February 2002, when annual HICP inflation declined to 2.4% from 2.7%, have already indicated, and annual inflation rates should fall to below 2%.  It is now well known that there is no evidence that the euro cash changeover has had a significant upward effect on the average price level in the euro area. While we have observed some significant increases in some sub-components of service price inflation, we have also seen other prices rounded down in the context of the cash changeover. In our view, and also replying to one of the questions addressed to the ECB in the letter of the Chairperson of this Committee a few weeks ago, it is expected that the greater transparency resulting from the introduction of the euro and the move to exclusive euro pricing will strengthen competition in the retail sector and thereby support the maintenance of price stability in the euro area.  Besides uncertainty about the oil price, a key factor in the current assessment of risks to price stability is the development of wages. The Governing Council will closely monitor forthcoming wage negotiations and analyse their implications for future price developments. A favourable outlook for price stability in the euro area rests fundamentally on the assumption that wage moderation will continue. This is also a major condition for employment growth and decline in unemployment. In this respect, and following up to the letter from the President of the ECB to the Chairperson of this Committee, let me briefly recall that the Governing Council is very satisfied with its definition of price stability, which – by the way – is fully consistent with the goals pursued by the most successful national central banks in the euro area prior to Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union. It is worth pointing out that this quantitative definition, namely an annual increase of below 2% in the HICP for the euro area, is symmetric, i.e. it is also definitely not compatible with deflation. Furthermore, by also stating that price stability is to be maintained "over the medium term", the Governing Council acknowledges the existence of shocks to inflation which monetary policy cannot control and makes clear that the ECB intends to pursue its objective by responding differently to different economic shocks. This consideration may lead, in some cases, to a gradual response by monetary policy to risks to price stability. Our forward-looking strategy with its medium-term orientation towards maintaining price stability thus helps to avoid harmful trade-offs with growth and employment. Most importantly, our definition of price stability has contributed to anchoring inflation expectations in the euro area, thereby reducing risk premia and ultimately supporting an efficient allocation of resources and favourable long-term financing conditions for the economy. For all these reasons, the maintenance of price stability over the medium term is the best contribution of monetary policy to sustainable growth and employment creation. Turning to the main challenges that the euro area faces at present, let me start by mentioning that stability-oriented macroeconomic policies require further steps towards fiscal consolidation. The recently reaffirmed commitment of the governments of the euro area countries with fiscal imbalances to avoid breaching the 3% deficit limit this year and to adhere to the objective of achieving balanced 
 BIS Review 20/2002 3 budgets by 2003-2004 is the appropriate policy to pursue. The Governing Council supports the actions taken by the European Commission in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact and the subsequent outcome of the ECOFIN Council meeting last month. In this same vein, vigilance is necessary to ensure strict adherence to the medium-term plans and implementation of the existing procedures. In particular, countries that still have sizeable fiscal imbalances should take advantage of the coming upswing to strengthen their budgetary positions and attain the targets presented in their stability programmes. Finally, in order to put the expected recovery on a broad and sustainable basis, it is of the utmost importance that euro area countries now strengthen their efforts to implement comprehensive structural reforms. Over the past few years, considerable progress has been made in enhancing the flexibility of the euro area's product and capital markets, as well as in improving the way its labour markets operate. These reforms, together with moderate wage developments, have contributed to the strong employment growth and the considerable reduction in unemployment witnessed in many euro area countries in the last cyclical upswing. However, unemployment is still intolerably high and much more remains to be done.  In this context, it is important to make headway with the reform agenda put forward in the Lisbon strategy. We should just not accept that the recovery might again be constrained by the unsatisfactory potential growth level. The sound macroeconomic situation which can be expected presents a perfect opportunity to accelerate badly needed reforms. This requires the acceleration of financial market reforms as well as product markets reforms, such as those related to network industries. As regards labour market reforms, it is worth noting that despite the continued high level of unemployment in the euro area significant mismatches between labour supply and demand in a number of areas in euro area countries are still reported. As concluded in a recent report prepared by Eurosystem experts, published on 11 March, this provides evidence that despite some improvements, there is still much work to be done in the labour market reform process. With respect to reform on the financial markets, the ECB very much supports the implementation of the procedures suggested in the Lamfalussy report on securities regulation. The ECB believes that the procedures suggested in this report will allow for a swift implementation of the priorities set out in the Financial Services Action Plan relating to the integration of securities markets. The reform of financial market regulation, also including the other measures foreseen in the Action Plan, will complement and enhance the effects of reform in the labour and product market. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 1 Christian Noyer: France, Europe, the euro and the ECB Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the University of Nantes, 22 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction  Ladies and gentlemen, I should like to begin by expressing my pleasure at being invited here to talk about the euro, the ECB and the single monetary policy in the first three years of Stage Three of European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).  The primary objective of the ECB The Treaty establishing the European Community assigned to the single monetary policy the maintenance of price stability in the euro area as its primary objective. Monetary policy can only pursue one primary objective. The participating national central banks have long held the belief, resulting from years of experience, that it is with the credible and lasting maintenance of price stability that the single monetary policy can best contribute to sustained long-run economic growth, employment creation and better standards of living. Asking monetary policy to do more, or to serve other purposes, risks creating illusions about what monetary policy can do. The events of the 1970s, in particular, demonstrated that when a central bank aims at boosting real activity by implementing an excessively expansionary monetary policy, it faces higher inflation and risks of financial instability. Due to the need for a disinflation process afterwards, the long-run disadvantages of such an expansionary policy in terms of output and employment losses turn out always to be much higher than the immediate advantages in terms of the transitory growth push. Price stability, on the contrary, contributes to the efficient allocation of the economy's resources by enhancing the transparency of the price mechanism and by preventing both tax distortions and an individual misallocation of savings and wealth. Moreover, by neutralising the need to hedge against inflation and in particular by minimising the inflation risk premium in long-term interest rates, price stability contributes to the channelling of real resources towards production and investment. Thus it favours economic and employment growth. For the purposes of supporting and safeguarding the pursuit of price stability, the Treaty has endowed the ECB with a high degree of institutional independence. At the same time, to ensure transparency and accountability in the ECB's policy design and implementation, the Treaty has also imposed certain reporting requirements on the ECB. The ECB has, in fact, exceeded these, thereby setting very high standards. Monetary policy decisions are regularly explained in the press conference given by the President and myself after the first meeting of the ECB Governing Council every month, in the Monthly Bulletin of the ECB, in the speeches given by members of the Governing Council and in the testimonies of the President and other Board members to the European Parliament. Key aspects of the ECB's monetary policy strategy To achieve its Treaty mandate, the ECB has designed a medium term-oriented monetary policy strategy.  To enhance clarity, to anchor expectations and to offer a yardstick against which the ECB can be held accountable, the Governing Council of the ECB provided a numerical definition of price stability as "a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%". This is very close to the objectives of most participating national central banks before the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). The Banque de France, for example, in 1998 had defined price stability as consumer price inflation "not exceeding 2%". The Governing Council also emphasised that price stability has to be maintained over the medium term. The focus on the medium term guarantees that an appropriate orientation be imparted to monetary policy. This ensures measured policy reactions to the threats to price stability and prevents 
 2 BIS Review 20/2002 unnecessary volatility being introduced into the economy. The medium-term orientation also realistically acknowledges that short-term volatility in prices cannot be controlled by monetary policy and that monetary policy should therefore only be held accountable for price developments over a longer horizon. The recognition that monetary policy has to cope with an ever changing and imperfectly known world has been a key consideration in the design of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. The Governing Council chose to equip itself with a broad but robust framework for analysing economic developments and shocks, which we call the two pillars of our of monetary policy strategy. Given the long-term monetary nature of inflation, the first pillar assigns a prominent role to money. This implies the use of monetary analyses and of models in which monetary aggregates play an important role in analysing risks to price stability. In parallel, the second pillar ensures that other forms of analysis and models, such as the investigation of the interplay between supply and demand as well as cost-push dynamics, are incorporated into the analysis of price developments. Together, the two pillars ensure a comprehensive assessment of the economic situation and allow a focus on the nature of the shocks hitting the euro area, thereby providing adequate guidance to the policy process.  Can one size fit all? The ECB's definition of price stability should be seen as a quantification of the ECB's primary objective, which applies to the euro area as a whole. This implies that for the single monetary policy to be considered successful in fulfilling its primary objective only aggregate developments matter. The euro area countries need not and will not always exhibit similar price developments. In the same way as the maintenance of price stability within a single country is consistent with divergences in the rate of price change among different regions and cities, price stability in the euro area is generally in line with inflation differentials among individual member countries. Indeed, studies of price differentials between major US cities show that these differentials are at least as large and sometimes even larger than between countries of the euro area. Whether such differentials are a cause for concern depends on their source. Inflation differentials which result from what in public debates is often quoted as "a catching-up process", as illustrated by the Balassa-Samuelson theory, should be seen as part of a normal process of adjustment consistent with a well-functioning economy. Thus they are not a cause for concern. A catching-up process may start when the level of productivity – and thus of per capita income – of a country in the monetary union is (much) lower than the other participating economies. When some of its productive sectors, notably the traded goods sectors, become exposed to international competition, this country typically goes through a transitional, catching-up period when it may experience in the same sectors productivity growth faster than that attained by more mature participating countries. This catching-up process may, in turn, lead to faster price increases if the productivity growth the country gained in tradables is not matched by a similar productivity growth in its non-tradable sectors, as wages in tradables and non-tradables tend to converge. In the euro area, the impact of pure catching-up effects on the price level is likely to be minor as a substantial process of convergence in per capita income has already taken place over the last few decades.  However, when inflation differentials arise from excessive wage increases, unsustainable expansion of profit margins or an expansionary stance in fiscal policy, the situation may become a cause for concern. Each of these factors, in fact, may well lead to losses in competitiveness and, eventually, to losses in output and employment growth. These are, however, problems that the single monetary policy is not in a position to address. It is the task of national economic policies to avoid and to counteract such situations. I will come back to these issues later.  Inflation differentials may also be induced by economic or policy shocks which affect the euro area countries and regions in different ways and at different times. Also, local economies may respond dissimilarly to a common shock because of their individual economic structures. Especially in the run-up to Stage Three of EMU, the quantitative relevance of asymmetric shocks has attracted a lot of attention both among analysts and among economic observers. The economic framework they had in mind, known as the optimum currency area theory, predicts that the creation of a common monetary area becomes more costly the more the participating countries experience idiosyncratic shocks, in terms of size, nature and frequency, and the more varied their responses to such shocks are. While asymmetric shocks and adjustment mechanisms have to be recognised as realities, they also have to be seen in a more general framework, within which all gains from Stage 
 BIS Review 20/2002 3 Three of EMU are taken into account. These gains are sizeable. From a political point of view, monetary unification, as part of a more general process of European integration, should be seen as bringing long-lasting peace and a higher level of co-operation between participating countries. From an economic point of view, monetary unification should be seen as bringing greater prosperity and stability. There is no doubt in fact that Stage Three of EMU has, and will have, a net positive impact on France and all other participating countries. It is, however, worth examining its potential effects resulting from asymmetries. To what extent do these asymmetries still exist and are they a concern? One useful way of approaching this problem is to compare the euro area with the United States. The US appears to be a fairly natural benchmark. Its economy is similar in several ways to that of the euro area, not least in the size of its economy and population. One line suggested by this approach is to compare the degree of synchronisation of economic activity among euro area countries with that of US states or regions. One interesting finding that emerges from the empirical literature is that asynchronous fluctuations also take place in the US. We therefore should not be surprised to observe a similar fact in the euro area. However, the evidence resulting from several studies carried out in the past few years points unambiguously to a higher degree of co-movement in the US than in the euro area. Yet, most studies have also found a high and increasing degree of synchronisation within the euro area, not only over a longer period of time, but also in more recent years. This degree of convergence appears to be approaching the levels recorded in the US. Similar conclusions can be reached with reference to analyses which estimate the differentiated impact of asymmetric shocks and the resulting adjustment.  These findings appear to contrast with the more diversified production structure of several euro area countries compared with that of states in the US. However, this evidence is the result of the combination of two factors: the distribution of shocks and the resulting country-specific adjustment processes to the shocks. The relative impact of these two forces across countries in Europe is unclear. In addition to this evidence, it can been argued that analysing the evolution of the euro area economies only over the years preceding monetary union in order to gain insights into likely future developments can be misleading. Indeed, their entry into a currency union may well have fostered economic integration, enhanced intra-area trade and, with the increased interdependence, raised the degree of synchronisation of the participating countries' macroeconomic fluctuations. In addition, the adoption of the same currency eliminated one source of major external instability which affected euro area economies in the past, namely exchange rate shocks of significant magnitude. Moreover, higher synchronisation will follow from closer trade links. The adoption of a common currency, in fact, promotes trade among members of the Union by eliminating exchange rate risk and diminishing transaction costs.  In theory, an increase in trade among two or more countries could also have the opposite effect, which is to increase the divergence of business cycles. This could happen, for instance, if closer integration and trade induce a higher degree of specialisation, with the consequence that production structures will become more heterogeneous across countries, making them more vulnerable to idiosyncratic shocks. The question of which effect prevails is mainly an empirical one, as both are plausible. The evidence for the euro area so far appears to suggest that the more countries are integrated and the more they trade with each other, the more correlated the respective business cycles will be.  At the present stage, it is too early to estimate the effect of Stage Three of EMU on reducing the severity of asymmetric shocks and on increasing business cycle synchronisation among participating countries. While this impact is likely to be taking place already, the period of time needed for its full effect to develop is very uncertain. Although useful lessons can be gained from a comparison with the US, these should not be over-emphasised. As a matter of fact, some important differences between the euro area and the US can also be identified. In the US, for example, the importance of stock markets is higher, and these markets can represent a mechanism amplifying the impact of shocks in the real economy. Moreover, evidence has been found that in the US the adjustment to asymmetric shocks is faster than in the euro area, largely because of the latter's lower mobility of capital and labour. In particular, labour mobility, which is one of the most important adjustment mechanisms in the US, is often found to be much lower in the euro area. While this is partly offset by the increased mobility of capital, which has been enhanced by the creation of the Single Market in Europe, in many euro area countries labour still remains too immobile. 
 4 BIS Review 20/2002 A currency union needs flexible markets When labour mobility is low, the efficient response to economic shocks having asymmetrical effects on euro area countries requires prompt adjustments in prices and wages at local levels. Flexibility in price and wage setting is therefore particularly crucial for the euro area. More precisely, an increased flexibility would allow regions or national economies to adjust more rapidly and smoothly to shocks affecting particular sectors. We should always bear in mind, moreover, that our economies operate in an increasingly competitive global environment requiring ever more frequent adjustments, particularly in some sectors.  For these and many other reasons, structural reforms aimed at increasing mobility, boosting competition and reducing rigidities and distortions in goods, service and labour markets are needed in the euro area. In product markets, some progress has been made over the past few years. These markets have become more integrated and some sectors, such as the network industries, are being liberalised. The adoption of the European Company Statute by the Council of Ministers, for example, is a step in the right direction. This Statute allows for, and regulates, the creation of firms operating on an EU-wide basis and being governed by Community law. Another ambitious reform is the liberalisation of the EU's postal sector, although its full implementation will take time. Despite these and other encouraging developments, the pace of liberalisation has been uneven across participating countries and more efforts are still needed as several sectors in various areas remain burdened by excessive regulation. These delays act as a brake on the flexibility and competition that is required to improve the long-term sustainable employment and growth prospects.  One area still requiring much attention, as I already mentioned, is the labour market. The potential benefits, in terms of higher aggregate welfare and employment growth, of reforming euro area labour markets are high. Following the reforms implemented in the 1990s, positive effects can already be felt. These include the stronger employment growth and the sharp decline in unemployment rates recorded in the euro area in recent years.  Progress with labour market structural reforms has, however, been very uneven among euro area countries. Indeed, rigidities persist. For example, although the euro area unemployment rate in 2001 stood at 8.5%, survey studies show that companies often had problems in recruiting workers. Such labour mismatches demonstrate that more reforms are needed not only to increase labour supply and demand and improve job creation, but also to increase the likelihood that vacancies be filled and the unemployed find work more quickly. In addition, an unemployment rate still above 8%, low levels of labour force participation and uneven labour market performances across euro area countries clearly indicate that further measures need to be taken. Reforms, in particular, are required to improve job intermediation, to enhance wage flexibility and increase wage differentiation, to improve education and to promote training and life-long learning in order to maintain and develop human capital. Moreover, reforms of the tax and benefit systems, the introduction of less restrictive employment protection, working time flexibility, and measures to increase labour mobility are also needed.  It is also important to keep in mind that these reforms should be carried out in a broader, more systematic and co-ordinated manner across sectors and countries than at present. If the objective is to transform the euro area into the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world, as was decided at the Lisbon European Council in 2000, more efforts are needed. Challenges for fiscal policy I would now like to devote my attention to fiscal policy. National fiscal policies in Europe are guided by the budgetary provisions contained in the Maastricht Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact. The provisions in the Maastricht Treaty, which limit the levels of government deficit and government debt, have been key to achieving sounder public finances. The Stability and Growth Pact, agreed upon in 1997, introduced the target of a budgetary position close to balance or in surplus as a medium-term objective for Member States.  With monetary policy being conducted for the euro area as a whole, fiscal policy can be an important instrument in the hands of national governments to stabilise domestic demand and output. Disciplined and sound fiscal policies support the ECB's stability-oriented policy by reducing risks to price stability.  The so-called automatic stabilisers are one mechanism which can cushion fluctuations in demand and price developments at national level. Automatic fiscal stabilisers are mechanisms built into tax codes 
 BIS Review 20/2002 5 and social legislation. They lead to a timely and symmetrical reaction of the budget policies to economic fluctuations by reducing demand pressures in an economy during periods of strong growth and by supporting the economy in downturns, without requiring further government action. The full benefits of automatic stabilisers can however only be secured if countries preserve the sustainability of public finances through prudent fiscal positions and low debt. Otherwise, the burden of debt servicing and the risk of excessive deficits limit their ability to let the automatic stabilisers operate. The strategy of attaining and preserving a medium-term position close to balance or in surplus, as required by the Stability and Growth Pact, promotes sustainable public finances and therefore also fully supports the stabilising role of public finances. Nevertheless, there are considerable doubts about the effectiveness of discretionary fiscal fine-tuning as a way to manage aggregate demand due to the well-know implementation lags and problems of policy reversal.  Let me finally add a few thoughts on the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy. The ECB closely monitors fiscal policy since this is one of the main areas where significant shocks to price stability – and also to long-term interest rates – can originate. In fact, many episodes of high inflation in the past were related to a mismanagement of public finances combined with a very accommodating monetary stance. Monetary policy is geared to maintaining price stability over the medium term and to this end it takes fiscal developments into account. The ECB's monetary policy framework however does not envisage any mechanistic reaction to fiscal policy changes.  Moreover, there is no further need to co-ordinate monetary and fiscal policy at euro-area level if all authorities act within the clear, medium-term-oriented policy framework set out in the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact. As long as participating countries comply with the objectives of this European fiscal framework, their budgetary stance supports a stability-oriented common monetary policy and each of them has the fiscal instruments at its disposal to accommodate asymmetric cyclical fluctuations or temporary shocks. Some reflections on the first three years of the single monetary policy I will devote the rest of my speech to an overview of the ECB's experience in the first three years of the single currency.  During this period, the single monetary policy has been challenged by, among other things, fluctuations in economic activity both inside and outside the euro area, by a depreciation of the exchange rate of the euro, and by strong oil and food price rises at various stages. Despite this, forecasters and financial markets have remained confident about the ability of the ECB to achieve its primary objective over the medium term. Surveys on long-term inflation expectations and inflation expectations as embedded in long-term interest rates have invariably been in line with our objective of price stability. The launch of the euro three years ago and the euro cash changeover this year are two other indisputable achievements of the ECB and its single monetary policy. The changeover was a challenge of unprecedented dimensions and its success went far beyond our own expectations. People in the euro area have been enthusiastic about the currency since the very beginning of the cash changeover.  The euro's arrival in 1999 brought about fundamental changes in the way governments, financial institutions and the private sector operate in the financial markets in the euro area and the rest of the world. Within the euro area, the elimination of exchange rate risks and the lower transaction costs which followed, together with the much more transparent marketplace the euro has brought with it, have been creating new opportunities for business and driven firms towards higher levels of efficiency and competitiveness. The euro has also acted as a catalyst in the process of financial integration by widening and deepening the euro area financial markets. A large, liquid and integrated money market rapidly came into being after 1 January 1999. This in turn triggered a considerable growth in interest rate instruments denominated in euro. On the unsecured money market, the EONIA reference interest rate, which is an interbank overnight rate index collected by the ECB, has established itself as one of the most important, or even the most important, reference rate. The EONIA swap market is now considered the largest overnight swap market in the world. Also in the bond market, the euro played a crucial role in fostering the deeper and more liquid euro area bond market that we see today.  
 6 BIS Review 20/2002 At international level, the euro has become the no. 2 currency. It is the second most widely used reserve currency after the US dollar. The gap between the two currencies is wide. Experience shows, however, that there is a considerable time-lag between a currency becoming important, as reflected by the economic weight of the issuing country or region, and becoming used as an official reserve currency.  As an anchor currency, the euro plays a role in the exchange rate regimes of more than 50 countries outside the euro area. These countries have either opted for very close or even full links to the euro, in some cases unilaterally deciding to use the euro as legal tender, i.e. "euroisation", or they have chosen looser types of anchoring, such as peg arrangements and crawling fluctuation bands. Conclusion Let me conclude by considering the challenges that lie ahead. I am referring in particular to the enlargement of the European Union and, subsequently, of the euro area. Currently, 12 countries from central, eastern and southern Europe are negotiating to join the EU. Integrating this large group into the European Union will be an enormous undertaking for all parties involved, not least because of the considerable economic gap between most of these countries and the current Member States. Major efforts will be required. However, we firmly believe that both the current and future EU Member States will benefit significantly over the long term from political and economic integration. I thank you. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: The economic situation in Norway Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, 21 March 2002. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. *      *      * Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen The economic outlook   The world economy has been experiencing a slowdown. Economic growth stagnated in the US and the euro area in the last three quarters of 2001. Growth remained somewhat firmer in the UK, but was moderate towards the end of the year. GDP has fallen in Japan. In most countries, public and private consumption fuelled growth in demand, while a fall in capital formation and inventories has exerted downward pressure. Growth in the US economy came to a halt last spring. Overinvestment, particularly in IT and telecom equipment led to low returns on capital and reduced corporate earnings. The stock market declined when growth prospects were revised. The unemployment rate rose. Terrorism and war added to the uncertainty. The US economy is flexible and seldom remains in recession for a long period. There are some signs of an early recovery. Monetary policy and fiscal easing have supported continued growth in private consumption. Equity prices, commodity prices and long-term interest rates have picked up since the sharp decline following the events of September 11. Oil prices plunged by around 40 per cent between autumn 2000 and the end of 2001. Developments towards the end of last year were marked by lower demand for oil. In December, the OPEC countries together with Russia, Mexico and Norway decided to limit oil production. This may have contributed to increasing the oil price during the last months. The risk of war in the Middle East and the decline in commercial oil stocks in the US may also have contributed to increasing the oil price. Oil prices plunged by around 40 per cent between autumn 2000 and the end of 2001. Developments towards the end of last year were marked by lower demand for oil. In December, the OPEC countries together with Russia, Mexico and Norway decided to limit oil production. This may have contributed to increasing the oil price during the last months. The risk of war in the Middle East and the decline in commercial oil stocks in the US may also have contributed to increasing the oil price. 
 2 BIS Review 20/2002      
 BIS Review 20/2002 3 The global slowdown started to have ripple effects on the Norwegian economy during autumn and winter. Prices for important Norwegian export products fell, and markets for many export industries have weakened. Salmon prices dropped by close to 20 per cent in 2001, after reaching record levels the previous year. The trade policy in the EU stipulates a minimum price for salmon exports, to the benefit of ineffective and high cost producers. The volume of traditional exports fell in autumn last year. Fish, iron and steel exports showed the steepest declines.   Employment stagnated early last autumn, but picked up again towards the end of the year. Unemployment edged up somewhat in the latter half of 2001, but has remained low. In February 2002, registered unemployment was 3.1 per cent, or 0.3 percentage points higher than one year earlier.     Norwegian households seem relatively unaffected by the international downturn. Overall consumer confidence rose sharply in the first quarter of 2002, back to the level recorded early in 2000. Households’ confidence in their own financial situation remained high throughout the autumn, reflecting solid growth in real disposable income and a comfortable net asset position.    
 4 BIS Review 20/2002  We estimate that price inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be 2½ per cent two years ahead. The overall uncertainty surrounding the inflation projection is illustrated in this chart. On the whole, the risks seem balanced around our central projection of 2½ per cent. Norway’s real disposable income is highly affected by export prices. As most of the income from exports of oil and gas is transferred to the Government Petroleum Fund, the effects of the global downturn on the activity level in Norway have been limited. The Norwegian economy may weather the downturn without any substantial impact on the level of activity or employment, but with a continued risk of high growth in labour costs in the business and public sectors.  Economic policy The guidelines for economic policy were revised last year. Henceforth, the real return on the Government Petroleum Fund shall be used over the central government budget. Central government petroleum revenues shall continue to be transferred to the Government Petroleum Fund and invested abroad. Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards low and stable inflation. Since March 2001 the inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. When monetary policy is oriented towards stabilising inflation, it also contributes to stabilising aggregate demand and output. The inflation target is the nominal anchor for the Norwegian economy. Low inflation is the objective and the interest rate is the instrument. If it appears that inflation with unchanged interest rates will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation with unchanged interest rates will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be lowered. Low and stable inflation will be a fixed feature of economic developments. This is something that the social partners, businesses, borrowers and investors in property and securities can take as a given. From 1986, changes in the exchange rate or the prospect of changes in the exchange rate had implications for interest rates. A stable krone exchange rate was the nominal anchor. In Norway, this has been reflected in wage determination because labour cost developments among trading partner countries have been an important reference. Exchange rates between major international currencies fluctuate widely. The US dollar has appreciated by more than 30 per cent since 1995. The German mark – the euro since January 1999 – has depreciated by about the same between 1995 and autumn 2000. The Japanese yen has been particularly volatile. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 5   Smaller countries have also experienced fairly wide exchange rate fluctuations. The Swedish krona has depreciated by more than 10 per cent since summer 2000. The Australian dollar has weakened by over 30 per cent since spring 1997. The UK, Canada and New Zealand have also experienced wide exchange rate fluctuations. The Norwegian krone exchange rate, on the other hand, has been relatively stable.    Countries whose exports include a large component of raw materials tend to experience considerable volatility in their exchange rate. Australia is one example. Fluctuations in commodity prices entail changes in countries’ terms of trade, which measures the ratio of export to import prices. Changes in the terms of trade have an impact on the exchange rate, which in turn curbs the effects of changes in commodity prices on profitability in the business sector. Hence, the exchange rate serves as a buffer against changes in the terms of trade. Norway’s terms of trade also fluctuate considerably, primarily reflecting changes in oil prices. However, a substantial portion of petroleum revenues is invested in foreign equities and bonds through the Government Petroleum Fund. Changes in oil prices influence the size of the Fund, but 
 6 BIS Review 20/2002 have little effect on the use of petroleum revenues at home. The Government Petroleum Fund thus serves as a buffer against swings in the oil price, and thereby stabilises the krone exchange rate. The Norwegian economy may nevertheless be exposed to disturbances of a type that cannot be absorbed by the Petroleum Fund. In the future, fluctuations in the value of our currency will probably be more in line with the fluctuations observed in other countries. The exchange rate will vary.    The increase in labour costs is important when Norges Bank’s assesses the outlook for price inflation and sets interest rates. Since 1997, labour costs have increased annually by between 5 and 7 per cent. In spite of this, consumer price inflation has been close to 2½ per cent over the past few years. The krone exchange rate has appreciated as a result of a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. Combined with low growth abroad and increased trade with low-cost countries such as China, this led to a slower rise in import prices.  In Norway, Voluntary Export Restraints on clothing have been removed and tariffs on clothing have been reduced considerably. In the EU and the US, a similar tendency has not been seen to the same extent. This may explain why prices for clothing have fallen in Norway relative to the EU and the US. However, there is still a long way to go before restrictions on clothing imports to Norway are entirely dismantled. For example, there is a duty today on imported children’s clothing and on shirts, suits, jackets and trousers for men and boys. As the world economy recovers, import price inflation will edge up. A rise in labour costs of more than 5 per cent will then only be consistent with the inflation target if the krone continues to appreciate. In the long run, wages must be compatible with the value added that is generated by workers, i.e. labour productivity. Over time, the increase in real wages is therefore determined by developments in labour productivity. In Norway, productivity growth has averaged 1½-2 per cent over the last 20 years. If this continues to be the case, an increase in nominal labour costs of around 4-4½ per cent in the long term will be consistent with the inflation target. There is an important interaction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. According to the guidelines for fiscal policy, petroleum revenues are to be phased in approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. This guideline implies that fiscal policy will contribute to stimulating aggregate demand in the Norwegian economy every year for many years ahead. The guideline also implies that the use of petroleum revenues will increase as long as the Petroleum Fund is expanding. Variations in oil prices are accompanied by considerable fluctuations in government petroleum revenues from one year to the next. It is important to prevent these fluctuations from spilling over to the mainland economy. Public expenditure and taxes that vary in relation to oil prices would result in an unstable economic environment. Financial markets would be marked by uncertainty and turbulence, with an increase in the risk premium on Norwegian securities. This would have resulted in 
 BIS Review 20/2002 7 higher and more variable interest rates. The risk of financial crises in Norway would also have increased because the cyclical fluctuations in the Norwegian economy would have been more pronounced. It is therefore an advantage that fiscal policy is now predictable and anchored in a long-term strategy. The future size of the Petroleum Fund depends on oil price developments. The guideline ensures that we only use the return on wealth that has already been accumulated. This makes policy robust to changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in the future. The guideline provides a framework that contributes to making the central government budget an appropriate tool for setting political priorities. It sets a limit on the share of petroleum revenues that the government can use each year and does not distinguish between domestic and foreign spending. This eliminates the waste of resources that two separate budgets would necessarily entail. The government invests petroleum wealth in foreign securities through the Petroleum Fund. Government wealth is thereby more diversified. These investments have no impact on the Norwegian capital market. Both mainland private saving and business fixed investment have been high in recent years. In Norway, credit and capital markets nevertheless feature some weaknesses, with thin securities markets and a narrow investor and ownership base compared with other countries. The reasons, and hence the solutions, can probably be found in the structure of the taxation of dwellings, property and financial assets, in a high level of state ownership of enterprises and in the organisation of pension saving in Norway. Investing even more government capital in Norway would reduce the return on investments in the Norwegian business sector and prompt other investors to invest elsewhere. Allocating even more capital to the Norwegian economy would probably lead to a rapid relocation of jobs to other countries, as the krone would tend to appreciate. Effects on industry structure The planned use of petroleum revenues will increase demand for public and private services. The guidelines imply an increase in the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget of around 3½ per cent of mainland GDP by 2010. This may add 2½ -3 per cent of total employment in the service sector. As long as there are labour shortages in Norway, a comparable decline in manufacturing employment is likely to occur. Although the phasing in of petroleum revenues is a gradual process, the contest for labour resources will intensify. As a result, monetary policy is likely to remain fairly tight in the years ahead. A high interest rate level may in periods result in a strong krone. This may accelerate the scaling back of manufacturing industry. However, in the long run monetary policy cannot influence overall employment or its distribution across industries. A lower interest rate would have resulted in higher price and cost inflation, which would also have weakened profitability in the manufacturing sector. The end result would have been the same for employment and production, but in addition we would have had to face the costs of high inflation. Even if employment and production in manufacturing are affected, the situation for Norwegian enterprises will not necessarily be negative. Some enterprises could be at the forefront of technological developments and increase efficiency in pace with the relatively high rate of growth in real wages in Norway. In recent years, we have also seen that many enterprises have moved large portions of their production abroad, particularly the most labour-intensive production. Norwegian manufacturing companies could therefore remain profitable even if the size of the manufacturing sector in the Norwegian economy is reduced. However, the scaling back of manufacturing also involves a risk. It makes the economy more vulnerable. The growth potential of the economy – the basis for learning, innovation and development – may be impaired when less of the business sector is exposed to intense foreign competition. Over the last thirty years, manufacturing industry has been scaled back in waves. The sharpest declines were observed in the years between 1977 and 1984 and from 1987 to 1992. The declines were preceded by a fall in profitability in this industry. It may take time for a weakening to spill over to output and employment, but when the turnaround first occurs it takes place rapidly and on a large scale. Primary industries, in contrast, are scaled back gradually. These developments will take place in addition to the effects associated with the increased spending of petroleum revenues. All in all, employment in manufacturing and agriculture may fall by 2 - 5 per cent of total employment in the period to 2010. Employment in manufacturing may drop towards 10 per cent of the total. Agriculture may employ less than 2 per cent of total employment. 
 8 BIS Review 20/2002   Changes in industry structure, with an increase in the number employed in services and a decrease in manufacturing, will probably reduce the role of pay increases in manufacturing as a benchmark for wage determination. Among many of Norway’s trading partners, similar developments have occurred. However, the share of employment in manufacturing and agriculture in Norway is already relatively low.  Pensions While high oil prices have resulted in sizeable revenues and surpluses on the current account and government budgets, growth in mainland output has been low over the last three years, at only 1 ¼ per cent per year. The sluggish growth rate may be attributed to the supply side of the Norwegian economy. Extensive labour reforms have limited the supply of labour. Measured by person-hours, employment has fallen by 0.4 per cent annually in this period. At the same time, labour shortages have persisted in many sectors and overt unemployment has been stable and low.  The business sector must restructure rapidly when real wages increase sharply. Many activities will no longer be profitable and will be shut down. This could lead to higher unemployment. However, lower employment will not necessarily be reflected in unemployment figures. We may instead see a flow of discouraged workers into, for example, disability pensions, early retirement schemes or different types of adjustment packages. The extent to which these schemes are used will depend on financial incentives and entitlement thresholds. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 9 In Norway, the employment rate is among the highest in the OECD area. This reflects both high labour force participation and low unemployment.  The picture becomes more mixed when average working hours are taken into account. The average is lower in Norway than in other countries. The sickness absence rate is high. Part-time employment is widespread.  The average number of person-hours worked in the working-age population is relatively low, despite high labour force participation and low unemployment. Among OECD countries, the only countries with lower figures than Norway are those with very high unemployment. In Norway, average working hours have fallen by more than 20 per cent in the last thirty years. This can be partly explained by the way working life and child care are organised, but similar trends are also seen in many other countries, especially in Scandinavia. We cannot simply assume that people want to work more, even if an increased labour input will result in higher income and greater prosperity. It is natural to use some of the increase in prosperity for leisure. The considerable share of part-time employment may reflect choices that individuals do not necessarily want to change. 
 10 BIS Review 20/2002 On the other hand, if we increase our labour input to the level in Sweden, without reducing productivity, our future income would increase by more than the increase resulting from a doubling of our petroleum wealth.  The structure of the tax and pension system influences the choice between work and leisure. Lower tax rates on employment income could boost labour input. The pension system is also of significance to labour input, as it influences employers’ labour investment decisions.   The expansion of the labour force is coming to a halt. At the same time, the number of old-age and disability pensioners is rising rapidly. Twenty years ago, there were nearly three persons in the labour force for every pensioner, whereas in 20 years, there will be fewer than two. Although life expectancy is high, the average retirement age in Norway is steadily falling. For men over 50, the average retirement age fell from nearly 67 in 1970 to a little more than 63 at the end of the 1990s. For the entire labour force, including all age groups, the average pension age in the National Insurance Scheme was down to 58. Flexibility in working hours and in the retirement age gives each worker the opportunity to choose between work and leisure. This freedom to choose is a benefit in itself. However, the terms - wages, 
 BIS Review 20/2002 11 working hours and pension schemes - should reflect the value added of labour. Pension benefits should therefore depend on how long each person chooses to remain in employment. Many countries have evaluated and some countries have worked out changes in their pension systems to cover a higher portion of pension expenditure through accumulated capital, i.e. a funded system. Sweden has recently implemented a pension reform that ensures that annual pension benefits increase in relation to the number of years the person has worked. At the same time, an increase in life expectancy for each age group will reduce the annual pension. This motivates the person to remain in employment and helps to ensure that the system is sustainable.  Due to the duration of the transfers to pension reserves in Sweden, the replacement of the former pension system by the reformed one requires a transitional period over several years. In Norway, the surpluses on the current account and the Government Petroleum Fund simplify any replacement of today’s pension system by a funded pension system.  Labour is our most important resource. The decline in average hours worked cannot continue if we are to have a sustainable pension system. The current evaluation of our public pension system must focus on the incentives to work and the effects on the average retirement age. A fund-based system may be an appropriate approach and at the same time make pension savings transparent for each individual. This may in itself provide an incentive to increase working hours. Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 19/2002 1 Urban Bäckström: The monetary policy situation in Sweden Opening remarks by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag's Finance Committee, Stockholm, 19 March 2002. *      *      * First I want to express my thanks for this opportunity of discussing the Swedish economy and monetary policy with members of the Finance Committee. The Riksbank is required by law to present your Committee with a written account of monetary policy at least twice a year. The first of this year’s accounts was handed over this morning. It contains a description of the Riksbank’s view of economic developments and the prospects for inflation. In my opening remarks I shall summarise the report and then discuss the consequences the Riksbank’s Executive Board draws as regards monetary policy. Then I look forward to a discussion with members of the Committee and shall do my best to answer your questions. Brightening outlook for the world economy The discussion at our previous meeting last autumn was coloured to a high degree by the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September and their effects. At that time there was considerable uncertainty about the extent to which economic activity, which was already weak, would be affected. There was a risk of the attacks making households and firms even more uncertain and eroding their confidence in the future, with negative consequences for demand. As inflationary pressure varies with the state of demand and resource utilisation, the events influenced the formulation of monetary policy in many countries, including Sweden. Six months later, however, we are now seeing more and more signs of an imminent improvement in activity abroad. The attacks’ impact on the global economy were fortunately limited, though certain sectors, such as air transport and insurance, have been heavily hit by the attacks and their repercussions. Production last year was constrained by excessively large stocks but it now looks as though stock adjustments have come a long way, which is a good sign for output. A certain amount of optimism is beginning to spread. Order books are becoming more stable and in some cases even improving. Then there is the additional impetus that comes from the expansionary economic policy in many countries. A proper global recovery that becomes increasingly strong does, however, presuppose a broad and sustained increase in demand. An increase in production that is generated solely by an end to stock reductions is liable to be relatively brief. In this respect there may be some uncertainty. There are still large imbalances in the American economy and stock market values are high, both in a historical comparison and in relation to the current cyclical phase. Opinions differ somewhat about the imbalances in the United States. Many observers focus on and are worried about structural imbalances in the U.S. economy. The adjustment problems, after undue optimism among households and firms in the late 1990s had given rise to the imbalances, will lead to the recovery being more sluggish than usual. Some even consider there could be a more drastic correction that breaks a global upswing in the coming years. Those who are more optimistic point instead to the U.S. economy’s productivity growth; if this remains high, there is less cause to be concerned about the imbalances because a higher potential growth rate permits higher incomes with which to service the debt burden. The Riksbank’s current analysis does not envisage a quick correction of the imbalances. Still, there are grounds for supposing that growth in the American economy in the coming years will not be as high as in the late 1990s. And if the imbalances were to be adjusted more quickly, the Riksbank would, of course, have to take that into account in the formation of monetary policy. Turning now to Europe, we see fewer signs of a recovery. The prospects for Germany, the largest economy in the euro area, are still uncertain. However, a look at the leading indicators does show that firms have become more positive. Imbalances like those in the United States have not accumulated in the euro area and this may benefit a recovery. Moreover, economic policy is also markedly expansionary in Europe, although the scope for fiscal measures is not as great as on the other side of the Atlantic. In addition, an upswing is likely to be held back by product and labour market rigidities. 
 2 BIS Review 19/2002 So all in all, it is hard to see how the coming economic upswing can be as rapid as earlier recoveries. But the world economic picture is now appreciably brighter than last autumn and the outlines of an upturn are becoming increasingly clear. Inflation in Sweden is high If the picture we present in the Inflation Report holds good, the present cyclical dip in the Swedish economy will turn out to have been the mildest for over thirty years. GDP growth was admittedly subdued in 2001 but the figures from Statistics Sweden do not show any negative rates. Neither has the labour market deteriorated as much as usual. Nor have any serious imbalances arisen. So thus far there is reason to be positive about the economic situation; most leading indicators point to an economic recovery, with an upturn in activity during 2002. There is, however, the problem that inflation has for a time been clearly above the Riksbank’s 2 per cent target. To a certain extent the comparatively high inflation can be explained by various supply shocks that have raised the prices of electricity, meat, fruit and vegetables, for instance. The background to these shocks includes the previous winter’s low precipitation for hydroelectric power, livestock diseases and poor harvests due to last autumn’s unusually cold weather in Europe. As I said, shocks of this type can raise the general price level and lead, as in these cases, to a transitory increase in the rate of inflation. But even if one disregards these price increases, inflation has risen. As we discussed in a number of Inflation Reports last year, this probably has a number of interacting explanations. One is that resource utilisation in the Swedish economy has probably been somewhat higher than envisaged earlier. This in turn no doubt explains why wage increases, particularly in domestic sectors, have been higher than expected. As this has been accompanied by weak productivity growth, mainly it seems for cyclical reasons, it has led to upward pressure on prices. A general contraction of profit shares in the economy as a whole has presumably helped to modify price increases in recent years. But this has also left firms with less room to “absorb” further additions to costs and weak underlying productivity growth. All this naturally raises questions about potential growth resource utilisation, inflationary pressure, competition in various markets and the workings of the economy. Resource utilisation higher than expected Ever since inflation expectations closed onto the target some time after the mid 1990s, a very important consideration for inflation forecasts and thereby for the formation of monetary policy has been resource utilisation. This indicator concerns the relationship between actual demand and what the economy is capable of producing in the longer run without price and wage increases accelerating. Let me point out first that neither the potential growth rate, resource utilisation nor the inflation propensity in a wide sense is something that can be measured directly. For some years now the Riksbank has been drawing attention to questions of this type, analysing them and presenting detailed accounts in the Inflation Report. Although we have mainly referred to various supply shocks as explanations for inflation’s relatively high rate in the past year, we have also drawn attention to other conceivable factors right from the start. In the Inflation Report last May, for example, we wrote: The risks for inflation connected with domestic demand and the relationship between growth and inflation in Sweden are somewhat more on the upside than foreseen in the March Report. The inflation forecast in the main scenario has admittedly been revised upwards in view of the unexpectedly high domestic inflation but this has been done mainly for the coming year. It is conceivable that the higher registered inflation is partly a sign that resource utilisation is more strained than assumed in the main scenario. (Inflation Report 2001:2, pp. 24–25) Some upward revision of resource utilisation is incorporated in the Inflation Report the Riksbank is presenting today. That was done partly because the underlying rate of price and wage increases has been moving gradually upwards for a time. This resembles our response, though with the opposite sign, when inflation repeatedly turned out to be a positive surprise in the late 1990s. The present adjustments imply that there are less unutilised resources that can be brought into production without this leading to a rising rate of price and wage increases. That in turn affects the prospects for future 
 BIS Review 19/2002 3 inflation, particularly as economic activity, in Sweden as well as elsewhere, seems to be improving and overall economic policy is expansionary. This analysis has ramifications in the labour market. The general weakening of demand during 2001 did not show up in employment. Unemployment has been more or less stable. Both the economy as a whole and the labour market show signs of a dichotomy; industrial output and employment have fallen, accompanied by an increase in demand and jobs in the services sector. At the same time it is mainly in services that wages and prices have risen. Thus, in the light of what has been happening to prices and wages during the past year, the Riksbank has gradually arrived at a somewhat altered view of the Swedish economy’s inflation propensity. Higher resource utilisation, together with higher wage increases and a weak exchange rate, has led to somewhat stronger inflationary pressure. This affects the forecast we are presenting today. Meanwhile, we are, of course, continuing the work of developing our analysis and interpreting new data as they become available. Rising inflation All in all, in the Inflation Report the Riksbank notes that incoming statistics confirm the impression that activity in Sweden has probably stopped falling. The expansionary fiscal policy is contributing to a strong development of household disposable income in the coming years, providing a basis for higher private consumption as well as increased saving. Exports rise during the forecast period but the increase is relatively modest both on account of the international upswing being tentative initially and because the krona is expected to appreciate. GDP growth is judged to be 1.6 per cent this year and then accelerate to between 2.5 and 3 per cent in the coming years, which as fare as can be judged is somewhat more than the Swedish economy can sustain in the longer run without giving rise to inflationary tensions. With the high resource utilisation, labour costs are judged to rise somewhat more than we foresaw in the December Report. Partly for this reason, domestic inflation in the forecast period is somewhat higher than foreseen earlier. CPI inflation stops at 2.2 per cent one year ahead and 2.4 per cent after two years. The corresponding forecast for inflation’s underlying rate, UND1X, is 2.2 per cent both one and two years ahead. Monetary policy focuses in the first place on the latter rate. In this price forecast, the supply shocks that are now leaving their mark on inflation are judged to drop out of the twelve-month change figures successively during the late spring. Inflation is accordingly expected to approach 2 per cent in the early summer. After that, however, it is foreseen that the more strained resource utilisation connected with stronger economy activity will lead to a renewed increase in inflation. The risk spectrum mainly concerns domestic inflationary pressure. If resource utilisation is more strained than the Riksbank now assumes or if potential growth has been overestimated, there is a risk of future inflation being higher than in the main scenario. When the risk spectrum is taken into account, underlying inflation, measured by UND1X, amounts to 2.3 per cent both one and two years ahead. Monetary policy conclusions I should like to conclude with some words about monetary policy. In the light of increasingly clear signs of an economic recovery and resource utilisation that is somewhat more strained than expected, the Riksbank has decided to raise the repo rate 0.25 percentage points, to 4.0 per cent. By safeguarding price stability, we aim to create conditions for a stable and sustainable development of production and employment in the Swedish economy. Last year’s higher inflation and our assessment that it was not solely transitory have already left their mark on monetary policy. That was the case not least last summer, when we raised the repo rate because of concern that the weak exchange rate combined with comparatively high resource utilisation might lead to the higher inflation becoming entrenched. In September we, like other central banks, cut the interest rate 0.5 percentage points; later in the autumn, however, we were more cautious about lowering the instrumental rate than, for example, the European Central Bank. Since last May, the risk of higher domestic inflation has been weighted into our decisions. Whereas the 
 4 BIS Review 19/2002 Swedish repo rate at the beginning of last year was lower than its counterparts in the euro area and the United States, it is now higher. Looking ahead, we have as usual not committed ourselves. What we do or refrain from doing with the repo rate will depend on the new information that becomes available and on how we assess and analyse it. What happened last year is a good illustration of the appropriateness of this approach. Neither positive nor negative surprises can be ruled out. We have to be ready to cope with that. That said, we have inflation that is relatively high, even though we count on it becoming a good deal lower in the coming six months. Resource utilisation is probably relatively high, too. The path of the interest rate will then depend – as long as inflation expectations remain in place – on how economic activity develops. If activity continues to strengthen as expected and there is no reason to reappraise the economy’s inflation propensity, it is reasonable to assume that the repo rate in Sweden will be adjusted successively upwards. This does not come as a surprise to participants in financial markets. It is a natural consequence of the Riksbank being in earnest about its task of ensuring a rate of price and wage increases that is in line with the inflation target in a situation where economic activity in Sweden is become gradually stronger. Here I am prompted to refer to what Knut Wicksell, the well-known political economist, pointed out in his day; it is a matter of looking for the “natural” rate of interest at which the economy can expand without prices and wages rising too quickly. 
 BIS Review 19/2002 1 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: A broad brush picture of the UK economy Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Asian Business Association Dinner, London, 19 March 2002. *      *      * Thank you, Mr President, for that kind introduction. I'm delighted to be here.  In fact it's the second time this year that I've had the pleasure of dining with representatives of the Asian Business Community in the UK.  Just a couple of months ago, in Glasgow, I joined the Association of Business Community in paying tribute to Mr Yaqub Ali for the remarkable contribution that he has made to Scottish commercial and community life since he arrived here from Pakistan some 50 years ago. It was a very poignant occasion, coming as it did when the terrorist attacks of 11th September in New York and Washington were still fresh in our minds. Those events sadly have been sometimes represented - or misrepresented - as having something to do with ethnic or religious differences.  But, as the universal condemnation of terrorism which followed the events of 11th September showed, they had nothing to do with ethnic or religious differences; they were a reflection of a fanaticism which has no place in any civilised society. Nevertheless they clearly had the capacity to accentuate perceived differences, and to provoke unwanted tensions within our international, national and local communities.  The contrast between this concern and the example and experience of Mr Ali, which we celebrated that evening in Glasgow, could not have been more pronounced. Whatever the difficulties he faced - of social disadvantage, and no doubt, too, of some degree of ethnic prejudice in the UK - Mr Ali overcame them. From modest beginnings, he moved on to build a whole series of substantial businesses not simply to his own benefit but to the great benefit, in terms of both the goods and services, and the income and employment which he provided to the community which adopted him. But, beyond this impressive business achievement, he also made a great contribution in terms of community service and charitable involvement both here in the UK and in relation to Pakistan. Now this example of the contribution that ethnic minority business - given the proper opportunity and encouragement - can make to our economy is certainly not unique. The Bank of England's investigation some 18 months ago into the availability of finance to ethnic minority firms suggested that while the ethnic minorities represent some 5% of the UK population, they controlled some 7% of UK businesses and accounted for around 9% of new business start-ups. Those national figures relate to 1997, so they are a little out of date. But more recent figures from the London Chamber's report, published last December, on the contribution of Asian business to London's economy, suggest that the ethnic minority population manages or owns some 20% of London's private sector businesses, with the Asian community alone accounting for half that - or some 10% of the total. These figures make a powerful point, which is underlined by the presence of so many Asian and non-Asian business and professional people here this evening.  They illustrate very vividly the great benefit that can accrue to our society, as a whole, from providing the opportunity to all the people in the UK, whatever their background, to realise their full potential and achieve all that they can in their different fields. It underscores the importance of non-discrimination, whether ethnic or religious, sexual or social, to the material as well as the moral progress of our whole community. It is a real pleasure to be with you. In his letter of invitation to me, your Chairman - Subhash Thakrar - suggested that I could talk about anything I wanted to this evening, provided it was the state of the economy, and provided I tell you what precisely will happen to interest rates. Let me begin by trying to explain to you what we at the Bank - through the MPC - are tasked to do, and why. The task sounds straightforward. It is to set short-term interest rates with the consistent aim of hitting the Government's symmetrical 2½% inflation target (on a precisely defined measure of retail price inflation - RPIX). Now the reason we've been set that task is not - as some people imagine - because either we or the Government think that consistently low inflation is the be all and end all of economic life. It is because we've learned from long experience that consistently low inflation is a necessary 
 2 BIS Review 19/2002 (though not in itself sufficient) condition for the sustained growth of output of the economy as a whole, for high levels of employment, and for rising living standards, which are, of course, more fundamentally the things that we are all seeking to achieve. Carrying out our task is not as straightforward as it sounds because there is no simple, direct, link between short-term interest rates - the only instrument we have - and the rate of inflation.  Interest rates essentially affect the demand side of the economy. They don't directly influence the supply side, which depends upon a whole host of structural characteristics which are largely beyond the direct reach of monetary policy. What we have to do in managing short-term interest rates is to keep overall demand growing broadly in line with the underlying - sustainable - supply-side capacity of the economy as a whole to meet that demand. In other words we are trying to maintain overall, macro-economic, stability in a much broader sense, in the medium- and longer- term and not just the short-term; and the Government's inflation target is the criterion against which our success, or otherwise, in achieving that broader macro-economic stability is to be measured.  Our problem is that we don't know with any great precision or confidence exactly what is happening on the supply-side:- we don't know that's to say precisely what rate of growth we can hope to sustain. We don't know precisely either what is currently happening, or what is likely to happen looking forward over the next couple of years or so, to overall, aggregate, demand. And nor do we know precisely what the full impact of a change in interest rates will be on aggregate demand, or how long it will take before the full impact is felt. Ours is not a precise science. In fact it's more of an art than a science. And, although we bring as much economic and statistical science to bear as we can, we know that our forecasts, and indeed our policy judgements, are subject to a range of error. They can't be accurate to every last digit. So, we can't expect to hit the inflation target all the time, but by consistently aiming to do so we can hope to get reasonably close to the target on average over time. The uncertainties are well illustrated by the sudden jump in the RPIX inflation rate in January to 2.6% announced a month ago, only to fall back to 2.2% in February - published this morning. And, given these uncertainties, the overall results over the past decade since the recession of the early 1990's have been encouraging. Whether that's a result of good luck or good judgement I leave to others to decide - I'm more interested in the outcome. Since the Summer of 1992, inflation, on the target measure has averaged just 2.6% - and has been more stable than at any time in our history. And it has been consistently remarkably close to target over the past 5 years. But the even better news is that stable, low, inflation has been accompanied by steadily increasing overall output and employment, and by a progressive fall, until very recently at least, in the rate of unemployment. Over the same period, to the fourth quarter of last year, GDP growth averaged just under 3% a year - which is well above most estimates of our trend rate of 2¼%-2½%. GDP has in fact grown for 38 successive quarters which is the longest period of sustained quarter-by-quarter growth we have enjoyed since quarterly records began in the UK in 1955 - though I have to admit it was a close run thing in the fourth quarter of last year! Employment has increased steadily from a low point of 25 ½ mn people - and we are taking people here, not just statistics - in the Spring of 1993 to its current level of around 28 mn. And the rate of unemployment fell from a peak of over 10½% on the internationally comparable LFS measure to around 5% last summer; while on the claimant count measure it fell from some 10% to just over 3%, which meant that the number of people claiming unemployment benefit, at under 950,000, was the lowest for 26 years. Now some of you - given what's happening in your own businesses - are probably thinking that I must live on a different planet. And yes, we do have a problem. Once you look beneath this apparently benign surface of the economy as a whole, you find very substantial differences between many internationally-exposed sectors of the economy - including particularly many manufacturing businesses - which have recently been having a really tough time, and other businesses largely serving our domestic market which have generally been doing very much better. There are two main reasons for the pressures affecting the internationally-exposed sectors: the synchronised economic slowdown over the past year or so in all major industrial countries, on the one 
 BIS Review 19/2002 3 hand; and the puzzling and persistent weakness of the euro in foreign exchange markets not just against sterling but even more against the dollar, on the other. The frustrating thing is that, with the best will in the world, there was not much that either we at the Bank or the UK Government could have done to ward off the pressures on UK manufacturing, which had their origins abroad.  It's fairly obvious where we are talking about the global slowdown - with negative growth last year of about ½ % in Japan and very slow growth of just 1¼ % in the US and 1½% in the Eurozone. We can go to international meetings and encourage the respective authorities there to stimulate their economies, but there is nothing that we can do about it directly ourselves. It's perhaps less obvious that we cannot influence the exchange rate. Many people think that we could weaken sterling against the euro quite simply by cutting our interest rate relative to the interest rate in the eurozone. But it's not as simple as that. The US has reduced its interest rate far more aggressively than the ECB over the past year or so, but the dollar is actually stronger against the euro than it was to begin with; and the same is true, to a lesser degree, of ourselves, here in the UK, with sterling also stronger against the euro (though weaker against the dollar) than it was a year ago. So there was nothing much - as I say - that we could have done directly to affect these depressing effects coming from the global economy and the resulting weakness of external demand on the UK. But what we were able to do - given that inflation was marginally below target - was to try to compensate for that external weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. The Bank sought to do this by cutting interest rates to buoy up consumer spending. And the Government has stepped up its own spending, which was certainly helpful in the recent international environment. Although we couldn't avoid an overall slowdown altogether we did manage to keep the UK economy as a whole moving forward despite the recession in the internationally-exposed sectors of manufacturing. In fact overall GDP growth in 2001, at 2.4%, was by some margin, the highest among the G7 countries, and the rate of UK unemployment is currently the lowest, on a comparable basis, in the G7. And interest rates are, as I said, the lowest they've been in this country in a generation. Of course we'd all have been much happier with better balanced growth. Stimulating domestic demand to offset the external weakness - the only option available to us - was very much a second best option, and not without its own risks, but it was better than doing nothing at all. That would have meant a much sharper slowdown, and probably recession, in the economy as a whole. And, given the fact that inflationary pressure remained subdued, it would have meant a quite unnecessary loss of overall output - and income and employment. In effect we took the view that unbalanced growth was better than no growth. The question now, of course, is where do we go from here. There have recently been encouraging, but still tentative, signs that the worst of the global slowdown may now be behind us, and that the US and Eurozone economies are now beginning to bottom out and will pick up, perhaps to around trend, as we go through this year. Some Asian countries actively involved in the ICT sector are showing a strong recovery, and even in Japan financial markets have recently strengthened. As for the exchange rate, the euro, which has, as I say, been puzzlingly weak since soon after its introduction 3 years ago, still seems likely to strengthen eventually. As it becomes clearer that the international environment really is improving, and that external demand really is picking up, then we can look forward to better balanced and generally stronger growth in our own economy. That will in due course mean that domestic demand growth - and consumer demand growth in particular - will need to moderate if we are to avoid a build up of inflationary pressure. But let me be quite clear - that's not a warning, still less is it a threat. It is essentially just a matter of arithmetic! It's quite possible, even quite likely, that the necessary moderation of consumer demand - and I emphasise the word moderation - will come about of its own accord, given the gradual increase in unemployment we are currently seeing, and the build up of household debt. And provided it does not happen too abruptly, that would be the best possible outcome. But if consumer spending were not to moderate of its own accord, we would, in the context of strengthening external demand, clearly need at some point to consider raising interest rates to bring that moderation about. I don't suggest that the timing of any such move is imminent - that will obviously depend upon the timing and the strength of the recovery abroad and on the strength of domestic demand as we move forward. 
 4 BIS Review 19/2002 And that, Subhash, is of course my answer to your second question - "what precisely will happen to interest rates?" In case any of you are confused, I think that what I said was that interest rates will rise - unless they fall or stay the same! Mr President, there is no doubt that the past year or so has been a difficult time for the world economy which made life increasingly difficult for the internationally-exposed sectors of our own economy. We are not yet altogether out of the wood, but there is increasing light between the trees. I am "cautiously optimistic" that the overseas environment will improve as we move through 2002, and that by this time next year we here in the UK will have seen a return to somewhat stronger and better balanced growth, with unemployment not far above its recent lows, and with continuing low inflation. If that is indeed how things turn out, we will have weathered the international storm as well as anyone could reasonably have expected. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 1 Lars Nyberg: Financial disturbances and the real economy Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to Danske Securities, Stockholm, 11 March 2002. *      *      * I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here to Danske Securities and speak to you, who are at the real heart of the financial sector, but also heavily dependent on occurrences in the real economy. In my speech today I intend to concentrate mainly on the relationship between developments in the real economy and financial developments, as it has looked in the past and as it may look in the future. The Riksbank's two objectives, maintaining price stability and promoting efficiency and stability in the payment system in a broader context, have both real economy and financial aspects. The objectives are more closely linked than might be thought initially. Turbulence on the financial markets has repercussions for economic activity and developments in the real economy and thus great significance for the shaping of monetary policy. It is difficult, if not impossible, to pursue an effective monetary policy when the financial markets are functioning inefficiently. At the same time, price stability and stable, low inflation expectations help to create security and stability in the financial markets. This far it is quite simple. It is rather more difficult to make an in-depth survey and understand the relationship between the financial and the real economies. Moreover, developments in the financial markets are very rapid and there is every reason to believe that the relationship changes over time. If one looks back at global developments over the past year, the financial markets appear to have coped with more and greater shocks than many would have thought possible. The IT and telecom bubble burst, a simultaneous international slowdown in economic activity began, Turkey experienced a financial crisis, the USA suffered terrorist attacks on 11 September and began a war against Afghanistan and the American energy company, Enron, collapsed. Finally, Argentina suffered a severe crisis. The private market operators were not saved by further measures from the IMF, as many had expected. However, not even all of these events together appear to have had any serious long-term effects on the global financial markets. In addition, it now seems as though the repercussions for the real economy were relatively slight, despite the fact that households and companies, particularly in the USA, were heavily indebted when the economic upturn began. Does this mean that we can now write down the risk of financial imbalances and crises delaying the economic upturn most analysts predict to be on its way? Have economic policy, the financial infrastructure and the behaviour of market operators been adapted to the globalised, technologically well developed financial markets to the extent that the contagion effects on the real economy of financial disturbances has declined significantly during the past decade? These are questions I wish to discuss now, however more with the aim of provoking some interesting ideas rather than providing any ready-made answers. Are the markets more robust? Let me begin with the question of whether the markets have really become more robust, in the sense that they are now less sensitive to disturbances. There are some arguments in favour of this theory. One of these is directly linked to monetary policy and inflation. This is namely that an increasing number of countries have abandoned the ambition of maintaining a fixed exchange rate and chosen instead to focus their monetary policy directly on an inflation target. Openness and transparency have increased as a result of this, which in itself has probably improved the functioning of the markets. Inflation rates and inflation expectations have fallen and become more stable, which has led to significantly lower nominal rates. Uncertainty with regard to the future has thereby declined and the conditions for making the right investment and savings decisions have improved. All of this should have increased the stability of the markets. However, there are other arguments. Greater awareness of the need for maintaining central government finances under control has increased budgetary discipline and led to reductions in central government debts in most countries. It could possibly be claimed that the stricter budgetary discipline 
 2 BIS Review 18/2002 is a rather last-minute conversion, as countries with large deficits are often forced to borrow on the international markets and there submit to the requirements made, in only to keep down the loan costs. Large, growing budget deficits also reduce the possibilities for parties other than the central government to assess the future and increase their costs. Borrowers are forced to pay high and varying risk premiums to borrow on the bond markets, as financial investors want to be paid for the uncertainty regarding the inflation rate or exchange rate. In addition, there is always a risk that if the debt becomes too large the central government will be forced to implement large savings that will in themselves lead to increased unemployment and poor profitability for domestically oriented companies. Large international efforts have been made and are being made to create new regulations and standards that will reduce the risk of financial instability in a deregulated environment. The Basel Committee's new capital adequacy rules are an example of this. Financial supervisory authorities in most countries have been strengthened considerably, although the complexity of the markets always threatens to increase more rapidly than the competence to supervise them. Quantitative deregulation of the financial markets is largely complete and the adaptations have been made. Increased experience of acting in a deregulated environment should in itself have reduced the risk of financial crises. The banks, which are particularly important because of the role they play in the payment system, are better capitalised than they were a decade ago. Credit risk management has also improved considerably. This applies in particular to the Swedish banks, which are now much better equipped to manage risks than they were prior to the bank crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. Central banks and financial supervisory authorities have also become better at assessing risks. Looking back, the really devastating bank crises have stemmed from a combination of soaring property prices and rapid growth in bank lending, and they have often taken place in countries with a fixed exchange rate. A growing number of central banks now closely follow macroeconomic factors that could lead to a build-up of imbalances in the financial system and publish their conclusions in special stability reports. The Riksbank is one of the forerunners in this field, based on the experiences gained from the Swedish bank crisis. For some years now, the IMF has carried out assessments of the functioning and safety of the entire financial sector in both developing countries and industrial nations. Sweden was subject to one of these FSAPs (Financial Sector Assessment Programs) last year and this year it will be the turn of Japan and the United Kingdom. These assessment programs compare the entire financial systems of the countries; banks, clearing houses, payment systems, legislation, supervisory authorities, central banks, etc. with the "best practice" in the world and any shortcomings are pointed out. Each country can then choose whether or not to publish the results of the assessment. A summary of the assessment is included in the IMF's annual assessment of member countries' economies. Dependence and complexity are increasing While the markets have thus (hopefully, I should perhaps add) become more robust, our use of them has grown. Households and companies have become operators on the financial markets, mainly because these offer better and cheaper services than those traditionally offered via the banks. An increasing percentage of the investments made are financed on the market through shares and bonds in other countries than the USA. This has become possible because households' savings are to an increasing degree channelled into shares and mutual funds. We use the financial markets much more than we did just ten years ago. This means that we have good reason to be concerned over their functioning. It has also meant that questions regarding financial stability have acquired greater importance on the international political agenda. At the same time as use of the markets has grown, new instruments are being traded that are increasingly complicated in structure and their risk content has become more difficult to assess. Various forms of derivative have been developed, for instance, to spread risks more efficiently. This in itself creates conditions for reducing the vulnerability of the banks as well as the financing costs of the investments. Essentially, this development benefits long-term growth. In recent years, the use of credit risk derivatives and securitisation has increased, for instance. However, there is a risk that the complexity of these instruments will increase the difficulty of seeing to which credit risks companies and banks are actually exposed. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 3 The complexity of the financial instruments and the fact that they are often found, in various forms, on both the asset side and the liability side of companies' balance sheets as well as "off balance sheet", makes it difficult to detect the financial risks within banks and companies. This is particularly serious as an increasing number of households have their savings in these companies' shares, but nor is it easy for professional analysts and portfolio managers to see. The collapse of the American company Enron can serve as an example of the problems connected with the development of complicated financial instruments. A lack of understanding of the instruments used and a lack of transparency in the company's accounting meant that directly after the collapse there was considerable concern over possible contagion effects. Here I do not mean the evident breach of the regulations in force, where auditors burn documents and senior managers sell shares in the company prior to publishing negative information. Enron raises a number of other, in the long term more fundamental, issues. Today, I shall limit myself to discussing three of these. Firstly, Enron was basically an energy company, which in time came to pursue financial operations on a large scale, but without coming under the supervision to which financial companies are normally subjected. The lack of supervision also applied to Long Term Capital Management, LTCM, some years earlier. One might wonder whether function rather than company type might not be a better base for supervision. There is otherwise a risk that functions essential to society and thus needing protection will be transferred to companies not subject to supervision. At the same time, the public sector is in practice forced to intervene if the failure comprises a threat to the system, regardless of whether it has been able to exercise supervision. To what extent Enron was involved with functions that can be assessed as worth protecting is a question for discussion, but it is an important question of principle. We cannot and should not regulate all companies involved with financial operations, e.g. in managing their own funds. Secondly, it appears obvious that accounting regulations, at least those in the US, have not developed at the same rate as the instruments and forms for capital acquisition on the financial markets. Is it really reasonable in the long term for an increasing number of companies' risks to be reported off balance sheets? In the case of Enron, it also appears that there were risks that did not need to be reported at all, according to the regulations in force, such as liquidity risks that were triggered by a down-rating. Thirdly, it is educational (and frightening) to see exactly how the shortage of liquidity brought about Enron's downfall when questions were raised regarding the quality of the balance sheet and the market lost confidence in the company. Enron's balance sheet had some similarities with that of a bank, in that the liabilities side consisted of borrowing that proved to be rather short term, while the asset side was difficult to value and had much poorer liquidity. A bank that found itself in an equivalent situation could face a run, with customers withdrawing their deposits, and this was really what happened to Enron. This makes some form of liquidation necessary, even if there later proved to be some value left in the balance sheet. The experiences of the Enron case led to investors temporarily fleeing companies with complicated constructions and ownership or companies suspected of being rather too creative in their accounting. However, this seems to be just a temporary phenomenon. Companies' credit spreads have not been affected as much as was feared and the stock market shook a little, but has begun to recover again. The effect appears rather to have been that accounting methods and procedures have been voluntarily revised, a development welcomed by both market operators and authorities alike. Perhaps the Enron case can become a further indication that the markets have actually become more robust. However, the Enron collapse also illustrates clearly some of the risks that might arise when the markets grow in both significance and complexity. These risks and their effects on the real economy should not be underestimated. The markets' increasing dependence on one another both within and between countries could lead to considerable contagion effects when there is a disturbance in one part of the system. To summarise; the risks of large financial imbalances building up in economies have probably declined over the past decade as a result of more predictable economic policy. Regulations and risk management systems have also improved. At the same time, the complexity of the financial instruments and the opportunities for extensive positions off the balance sheets have increased the difficulty in assessing future profits and risks in companies. Meanwhile, increased saving and financing in market-listed instruments have made households and companies more dependent on the safe and efficient functioning of the financial markets. This could mean that the effects of disturbances from the 
 4 BIS Review 18/2002 financial system on the real economy could increase in the long term if regulatory frameworks and supervision are not adapted sufficiently rapidly. Can we live with large imbalances? When share prices plummeted almost two years ago and when uncertainty increased following the terrorist attack in September last year, there were fears that expectations for the future would be revised down so strongly that households' willingness to consume and companies willingness to invest would decline drastically. The fears concerned the US economy in particular, but the uncertainty was also expected to affect the rest of the world. The high level of indebtedness built up during the economic upturn in many countries significantly increased this risk. Positive expectations of the future had increased companies' financing needs for investment. At the same time, a bright picture painted of the future and an increase in wealth had stimulated households' consumption and increased their investment in housing. It was easy to imagine a risk scenario where household sector demand declined so rapidly that heavily indebted companies went bankrupt, where unemployment rose drastically and where banks an other lenders suffered extensive loan losses. This negative spiral could continue with further falls in share prices and household wealth and rising credit risk premiums would make lending more expensive. If this negative sequence of events were not broken, high loan losses could eventually lead to bank crises and credit crunches, which would contribute further to the downward spiral. A credit boom, large increases in asset prices and a high rate of growth in investment, often concentrated on a particular sector, have been the factors preceding serious financial crises around the world. However, it is important to remember that neither a credit boom nor a large deficit on the current account need be interpreted as an accumulation of financial imbalances. If savings and investment decisions are based on realistic expectations of future growth and banks and financial investors have been able to make realistic assessments of the credit risks connected with investment projects and consumption loans, then this development is more a sign that the international capital markets are functioning efficiently. The task of the capital markets is to channel capital to investment projects with a high return. If financial investors assess the return on investments in a particular country to be higher than in other countries, there is reason for the exchange rate to strengthen. One cannot rule out the possibility that this is exactly what happened in the USA. Whether the level of indebtedness, the deficit on the current account and the strong USD exchange rate comprise a significant risk of large fluctuations in growth and a threat to global financial stability in the near future depends to a great extent on whether the long-term growth in the US economy will develop much more weakly than was expected when decisions on loans and investment were made. And, as I mentioned earlier, the shaping of economic policy and improvements in regulatory frameworks and risk management systems should have reduced the uncertainty in investment and savings decisions and thereby also the risk of a build-up of large financial imbalances. However, it remains to be seen whether globalisation, IT and telecommunications technology and perhaps also more efficient financial markets have really created the potential for higher growth that lay behind the expectations that pushed up economic activity. So far, the economies have reacted fairly moderately to the shocks they have faced over the past year. The risk of financial imbalances being built up as a result of over-optimism still remains, but is now assessed to comprise less of a threat to the recovery of the economy than was previously thought. Monetary policy considerations Developments over the past months also indicate that the risks of a profound and prolonged international economic slowdown have declined considerably. There are a number of signs that the lowest point has now been reached. One condition for an upturn in international economic activity is that growth in the US economy picks up. Productivity has continued to develop very positively relative to the economic situation, which is a good sign. The fact that American households' demand for consumption has improved since the autumn also indicates that the lowest point has been reached and a turnaround is on the way. The unease that has existed, and which was accentuated after the terrorist attack on 11 September, over the possibility that rapid and perhaps exaggerated adjustments of financial imbalances in the American households' and companies' balance sheets might cause a deeper decline appears, at least 
 BIS Review 18/2002 5 so far, to have been quite unfounded. Better functioning financial markets as a result of the changes in economic policy and the improvements in regulatory frameworks and supervision that I mentioned earlier may have contributed to this. If so, the level of indebtedness in the corporate and household sectors should not comprise such a great threat to economic activity in the coming years as many have feared, including the Riksbank in a number of Inflation Reports. In Sweden, the decline in economic activity has not affected capacity utilisation and unemployment to the same extent as in previous cases in the economy. This means that the upward turn will be from a relatively high level of resource utilisation in the economy. Low interest rates, a weak krona and a very expansive fiscal policy have been contributing factors here. One consequence of the high level of resource utilisation could be the unexpectedly high inflation rate registered recently. Earlier price increases on certain product groups are assumed to be temporary, which would mean that inflation should fall this year. However, price rises in the services sector, for instance, probably reflect higher labour costs. A number of my colleagues have expressed concern over future inflation and I must say that I share their concern. The fact that the international upturn in economic activity is taking place after a very brief and moderate decline means that the economic upturn is not expected to be as strong as earlier upturns. For Sweden, this means that exports are increasing, but that growth is primarily expected to come from domestic demand, in particular in the services sector. In my opinion, this increases the risk that domestically-oriented companies with pressurised profit margins will continue to compensate themselves for cost increases by raising prices. This is roughly how the picture looks as the Executive Board of the Riksbank gathers on Monday 18 March to discuss the economic situation and monetary policy. We will also have as a basis for our decision a completely fresh Inflation Report, which will be published on the following day. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and wealth management Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Board of Directors of the National Insurance Fund, Oslo, 14 March 2002.  This address is based on assessments presented at the press conference following the monetary policy meeting of Norges Bank’s Executive Board on 27 February 2002, and on previous addresses. Accompanying charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website (www.norges-bank.no). *      *      * The guidelines for economic policy were revised last year. The expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund is hereafter to be used over the central government budget, and monetary policy is to be oriented towards low and stable inflation. Economic agents can act on the assumption that low and stable inflation will be a constant feature of economic policy. Wide variations in the price level make it more difficult to predict the real content of agreements and budgets. Unexpected fluctuations in the price level may easily lead to fluctuations in the real economy and instability in financial and property markets. High and variable inflation also leads to an arbitrary redistribution of resources and income. Hence price stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make to economic growth, prosperity and appropriate distribution. Low inflation is the objective, and the interest rate is the instrument. Commercial and savings banks have accounts with Norges Bank, and the Executive Board decides the interest rate on these. The deposit rate forms the floor for the shortest money market rates. Transparency about intentions, strategies and the implementation of monetary policy makes it easier for economic agents to assess monetary policy. If monetary policy is predictable, an important source of uncertainty is reduced, and – other things equal – the interest rate required to achieve the inflation target will be lower. If economic agents are to have confidence in monetary policy, transparency regarding the central bank’s response pattern is probably a precondition. The interest rate affects inflation through a number of channels. An increase in the interest rate will normally contribute to reducing inflation by curbing demand for goods and services and by strengthening the krone exchange rate against other currencies. An interest rate reduction has the opposite effect. Monetary policy influences the economy with considerable and variable lags. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target of 2½ per cent. Interest rates are set with a view to achieving an inflation rate of 2½ per cent two years ahead. Norges Bank’s views on the inflation outlook are presented three times a year in the Inflation Report. Our projection for inflation in the period ahead is presented as well as our assessment of the balance of risks surrounding this projection. The Executive Board’s updated assessments are presented in connection with the monetary policy meetings every six weeks. Immediately after each meeting, the Bank issues a press release and holds a press conference. The key interest rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook two years ahead. Our inflation projections and our views on the balance of risks associated with these projections provide a summary of these assessments. Norges Bank’s inflation projection is our assessment of the most probable outcome of the rise in CPI two years ahead. In setting interest rates we also place emphasis on the probability distribution – or the balance of risks – surrounding the projection. Therefore, we also publish our judgement of the risk associated with our own projections. The phasing in of petroleum revenues has to be counteracted by a tighter monetary policy than would otherwise be the case. This may be accomplished through an adjustment of the interest rate, an appreciation of the krone or both. Small countries have experienced fairly wide exchange rate fluctuations. The Swedish krona has depreciated by more than 10 per cent since summer 2000. The Australian dollar has weakened by 
 2 BIS Review 18/2002 over 30 per cent since spring 1997. The UK, Canada and New Zealand have also experienced wide exchange rate fluctuations. The Norwegian krone, on the other hand, has been relatively stable. A monetary policy that is oriented towards low and stable inflation will contribute to stabilising aggregate demand and output. As a result, the central government budget will not normally have to be used actively to stabilise the economy. An increase in unemployment that is due to a higher rate of increase in labour costs than implied by productivity growth cannot be offset by low interest rates or higher public spending and tax cuts, but requires changes in the functioning of the labour market. The planned use of petroleum revenues implies that the sheltered sector will lay claim to a larger share of the labour force. This will probably cause a decline in manufacturing employment. The ensuing deterioration in competitiveness may lead to restructuring. In the long run, monetary policy cannot influence overall employment or its distribution across industries. Norway’s terms of trade flucture widely. This is largely attributable to variations in the oil price. However, a substantial portion of petroleum revenues is invested in foreign equities and bonds through the Government Petroleum Fund. Changes in the oil price influence the size of the Fund, but have little effect on the domestic use of petroleum revenues. The Petroleum Fund acts as a buffer against fluctuations in the oil price, which stabilises the krone exchange rate. The Norwegian economy may nevertheless be exposed to disturbances of a type that cannot be absorbed by the Petroleum Fund. We have to be prepared for fluctuations in the value of our currency that are more in line with the fluctuations observed in other countries. The exchange rate will vary. This means that economic agents cannot assume that the krone will be stable against the euro, the US dollar or a weighted average of foreign currencies. It is the inflation target that is the economy’s nominal anchor. The future size of the Petroleum Fund depends on oil price developments. The fiscal guideline ensures that we only use the return on wealth that has already been accumulated. This makes policy robust to changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in the future. The government invests petroleum wealth in foreign securities through the Petroleum Fund. Government wealth is thereby more diversified. These investments have no impact on the Norwegian capital market. The Norwegian government’s most important assets are the Government Petroleum Fund, assets in the National Insurance Fund and government direct ownership interests in enterprises. The Petroleum Fund’s equity investments are distributed across many countries, and all equity holdings are less than one per cent of a company’s total value. The National Insurance Fund's investments are mainly confined to Norway. As a result, changes in the value of the Fund's equity portfolio primarily reflect developments in Norwegian business and industry. The Fund has larger ownership interests in individual companies than the Petroleum Fund, and wider fluctuations in value. The government has substantial direct holdings in individual enterprises. In general, concentrated ownership requires a more strategic ownership approach and gives rise to higher risk than diversified ownership. The capital market serves as an intermediary between the government as investor and enterprises seeking capital. This market makes it possible to separate the government's choices from companies' choices. The distribution of the government's financial investments and the choice of corporate funding structure should not be based on the notion that we are living in a barter economy. The government can choose the composition, required rate of return and risk profile for its financial investments without regard for the funding requirements of Norwegian enterprises. By the same token, Norwegian companies can choose their debt and equity structure independently of the government's financial investments. Both mainland private saving and business fixed investment have been high in recent years. Thus a possible weak capital market has not been reflected in a low level of investment and saving. As a result of developments in the late 1990s, equities and funds make up an increasing share of households’ total assets. The equity ratio of enterprises1 strengthened in the 1990s, with a rise in new equity capital from the markets in particular.                                                       1  Norwegian limited companies excluding petroleum companies, financial undertakings and government activities, and groups and holding companies. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 3 The Norwegian loan and capital market probably has weaknesses nevertheless, with thin securities markets and little breadth in investor and owner environments compared with some other countries. The reasons, and hence the solutions, can probably be found in the structure of the taxation of dwellings, property and financial assets, in a high level of government ownership of enterprises and in the organisation of pension saving in Norway. Investing even more government capital in Norway would reduce the return on investments in the Norwegian business sector and prompt other investors to invest elsewhere. Using even more capital in the Norwegian economy would probably also lead to a rapid relocation of jobs to other countries, as the krone would tend to appreciate. 
 BIS Review 17/2002 1 Tony Latter: Why blame the peg? Speech by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at a luncheon of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, 12 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction When things aren't going too well, it's natural to look for scapegoats. In the case of the Hong Kong economy, the pegged exchange rate certainly gets its fair share of that treatment. What is the basis for complaints about the peg, and how far are they justified? Before examining some of the complaints, however, let us review the monetary policy background. Monetary policy It is widely accepted that the duty of monetary policy - and that embraces exchange rate policy - is to provide that monetary environment which is most conducive to long-term growth and prosperity of the economy. This is seen to imply a desire for stable monetary conditions, but there is scope for judgement as to how this stability should be defined. The majority of regimes focus on internal purchasing power and thus aim for low and stable domestic inflation. Thus, the practice of inflation targeting has now become quite widespread and well understood. This requires an active monetary policy, necessarily impacting on domestic interest rates and money market liquidity; and, at least in the strictest form of targeting, it inevitably involves some exchange rate flexibility, even if not an entirely free float. A minority of regimes, of which Hong Kong is one, focus on a stable external value of the currency - in Hong Kong's case through the particular mechanism and discipline of the currency board. The more externally oriented an economy is, the greater is the weight which may need to be attached to exchange rate stability within the overall concept of monetary stability. There are various pros and cons of each approach. Inflation targeting is less precise, in that it is necessarily based on forward projections, and verifiable indicators of success are only available after a timelag. It also requires a reasonably accurate forecasting process, which may be simpler to realise in a relatively closed than in a highly open economy. Nevertheless, experience of several countries shows that inflation targeting is capable of delivering good results. An obvious advantage of a fixed-rate regime is that compliance can be monitored very directly and unambiguously in real time; and, in the currency board version, the regime operates by automatic mechanisms rather than by the discretion of a central bank. It may, however, result in a less stable inflation rate, although, assuming that monetary policy in the country of the anchor currency is conducted responsibly, extremes of hyper-inflation or deflation will be avoided. Both regimes may be prone to fluctuations in interest rates in response to shocks, but with inflation targeting, which requires a flexible exchange rate even if managed to a degree, the central bank has a measure of discretion in the magnitude and timing of its response, whereas, with a fixed rate, defensive reactions must be more immediate and may hence be potentially sharper. Hong Kong context Recent criticisms of Hong Kong's currency board have focused mainly on two aspects - the implications for the competitiveness of Hong Kong vis-a-vis other economies and the problems of living with falling price levels. The remainder of this paper is directed mostly at these issues. Competitiveness Changes in competitiveness are typically measured by comparing movements in some appropriate measure of costs or prices at home and abroad, and adjusting for shifts in exchange rates. The 
 2 BIS Review 17/2002 measure of competitiveness thus produced is commonly referred to as the real exchange rate.1 A stronger real rate means higher relative prices and therefore implies weaker competitiveness.2 I detect two common misconceptions about the real exchange rate. Influencing the real rate The first is the belief that the real rate is amenable to control by the central bank or government and that the chosen regime for the nominal exchange rate is therefore an important determinant of the real rate. Let me explain what I believe to be some flaws in this view. Even if the central bank could, through intervention in the foreign exchange market or actions to influence domestic interest rates, fix the nominal exchange rate at some particular level, and even if it succeeded in fixing not simply the bilateral rate but the trade-weighted rate, this would only determine the real rate for the short term. This is because any monetary policy actions, such as exchange market intervention or changes in interest rates, in due course have a feedback effect on domestic inflation. More specifically for example, depreciation tends to raise prices. In a market-based economy the central bank, if it already uses monetary policy to set the nominal exchange rate, cannot separately control inflation. Eventually any initial gain in competitiveness from depreciation is offset by the inflationary feedback, most obviously so in highly import-dependent economies such as Hong Kong. Empirical studies do not reject the hypothesis that this feedback is eventually 100%, although the full offset may occur only after a considerable lapse of time. Meanwhile the real rate is also affected by movements in price levels in other economies, which lie beyond the home central bank's influence. In sum, the central bank cannot, except perhaps for the short term, dictate the real exchange rate. Equilibrium of the real rate The second misconception about the real exchange rate is that a weak rate (if it could somehow be arranged) would necessarily be a good thing, because of the benefit which an improvement in competitiveness, thus measured, would bring to the economy. History tells a rather different story. Successful economies have typically experienced appreciating exchange rates during periods of their most rapid development; and the wealthiest economies tend to be those which appear to be the most expensive in terms of overall price comparisons. It is not so much the real exchange rate which determines prosperity, as it is the fundamental characteristics of the economy, such as underlying productivity, which determine the real exchange rate. An economy which can successfully sell high value-added goods and services on world markets and as a result enjoy at the same time relatively cheap imports is better off than one which balances its accounts by selling a higher quantity of cheaper output and buying a lower quantity of dearer imports. There remains a question of whether there might nevertheless be advantage in a short burst of competitive advantage - as might be delivered by an engineered depreciation before the inflationary feedback negated the competitive gains - not just as a means of boosting the economy in the short term but also hopefully as a means of building a better foundation for longer-term growth. Experience suggests, however, that this sort of procedure is a bit like a drug to which the patient too readily becomes addicted. If people come to expect continuing doses of devaluation, then inflation and inflationary expectations may harden and, perhaps more significantly, businesses are spared the discipline of searching for greater efficiency or the incentive to move up-market. The dosage of the drug may be increased as dependency rises, but eventually a fairly severe anti-dote of austerity may need to be administered to break the growing addiction. It may reasonably be argued, however, that, even if the underlying path of the real exchange rate is determined essentially by structural forces within the economy, monetary policy should be utilised so                                                       1 In fact it is necessary to take into account all one's trading partners and thus arrive at the real trade-weighted or "effective" exchange rate - the REER. For ease of exposition, however, only the term "real exchange rate" is used in this paper. 2  The precise interpretation depends crucially on the set of prices or costs which is used in the calculation, but this aspect is not addressed here. 
 BIS Review 17/2002 3 far as possible to prevent excessive divergences from trend which may prove damaging to the economy. For example, if a currency is artificially strong for a prolonged period, a particular sector of the economy may become so damaged that it is incapable of recovering when the exchange rate eventually returns to equilibrium. In practice, however, it is extremely difficult to determine, at the time, whether a particular movement in the real rate represents a divergence from the equilibrium path or a fundamental shift in the path itself. At various moments over the past 20-30 years there may have been calls for a weaker HK dollar in order to preserve the local manufacturing sector. But few would doubt in retrospect that the shift away from manufacturing to a higher value-added service-based economy has been beneficial and that it would anyway have been inevitable eventually. There would have been little advantage in trying to slow the process through actions of monetary or exchange rate policy. In other words, the long-term equilibrium path of the real rate is not necessarily flat. The trend path may, at any particular moment, be up, down or flat, while the actual rate constantly diverges from its equilibrium path because of random events such as unforeseen movements in nominal exchange rates or in cost and price levels at home or abroad, or because of the failure of market adjustment processes to work quickly enough. All of this can be quite aptly illustrated by looking at the path of the Hong Kong dollar's real rate since it was first pegged. The natural trend appeared to be upward, though not smoothly so, for the middle period of about ten years, but there is nothing here which tells us what will, or should, be the path from hereon. Against this background, monetary policy may not be expected to achieve much for competitiveness. But policy makers nevertheless have to choose. Should a fixed or floating rate be preferred? Fix or float? In theory, an advantage of floating is that it may allow for the nominal exchange rate to adjust continuously and precisely so as to keep the real rate at equilibrium - an ideal situation if achievable. However, the historical experience, even of the world's major currencies - US dollar, Japanese yen or the currencies now merged into the euro, for example - is that a floating regime provides no assurance of a stable real rate. In practice, the market does not steer the rate in a continuously rational manner. There is also a tendency, even if the authorities are prepared to conduct some intervention, for floating rates to overshoot occasionally, especially when at the mercy of potentially massive international capital flows and herding behaviour in financial markets. Indeed, in certain circumstances floating may magnify rather than reduce short-run volatility in competitiveness, thereby unsettling the environment for making judgements about costs and prices, and hence for business planning. 
 4 BIS Review 17/2002 The advantage of a fixed rate is that, if credible (and I take Hong Kong's 18-year track record as a leading example of that), it provides an unambiguous and highly transparent real-time indicator of whether monetary policy is on track or not, as well as a solid anchor for planning purposes. But, as with floating, it provides no assurance of a stable real rate. And the disadvantage is that the entire burden of relative cost-price adjustment falls on domestic costs and prices. Inflation is likely to be more volatile than under, say, inflation targeting accompanied by floating. Moreover, notably, the fixed regime may require downward flexibility of costs and prices if the nominal exchange rate becomes too strong for whatever reason. It is this aspect which has become the focal point of recent attention for Hong Kong. Hong Kong's flexibility In fact, Hong Kong exhibits very considerable flexibility of the sort required. This is not a characteristic shared to such a degree by many other economies. Comparisons have often been drawn with Argentina because of, until recently, its currency peg. The charts below compare various indicators for Hong Kong and Argentina. The timescales are set to align the sudden loss of competitiveness by Hong Kong in late 1997 because of the Asian crisis, with the sudden loss of competitiveness by Argentina in early 1999 as a result of the Brazilian crisis and devaluation of the real. Attention is drawn in particular to the comparison of developments over the subsequent months (to the right of the vertical divide). The first chart shows the levels of consumer prices. Hong Kong experienced much more significant price deflation, with the absolute price level falling almost 10% from its peak in the first two years after the shock, while in Argentina prices fell only 3-4%, even looking at a somewhat longer period. A more appropriate measure of internal costs and prices is the GDP deflator. This fell by some 10% for Hong Kong but was roughly static in Argentina.   
 BIS Review 17/2002 5  Largely as a result of these differences in the response of internal costs, Hong Kong managed to recoup all of the lost competitiveness (as measured by the real exchange rate), which had amounted to about 15%, but Argentina failed to achieve any lasting recovery; indeed, loss of competitiveness resumed, long before lost ground had been recovered.   In view of this evident flexibility in Hong Kong, to what extent is it therefore correct to talk of the peg imposing some sort of rigidity on the economy? In the strict sense of the word, there is of course some rigidity, because, even with speedy and flexible adjustments of domestic costs, the correction of these which may be needed to offset a shock to the nominal exchange rate cannot be instantaneous. But if this rigidity is judged against how other economies might or do fare under fixed rates, Hong Kong emerges rather favourably. And, when compared with the alternative of floating, it is by no mean 
 6 BIS Review 17/2002 obvious that the peg delivers an inferior result for Hong Kong, given the possibility of volatility or over-shooting under floating, especially for a small and highly exposed economy. Indeed, although it is always difficult to predict events in hypothetical circumstances, there is a concern that a more flexible regime would, rather than liberating monetary policy, actually pose more problems - especially in the short term as confidence would have to be re-established and might remain more brittle. This might involve higher rather than lower interest rates because of a risk premium, plus greater uncertainty. Before moving on from the subject of competitiveness, let me leave you with a couple of thoughts. If Hong Kong has, in some underlying sense, been suffering from severe uncompetitiveness, how does one explain the continuing strength of the trade and current account performance...   … and the fact that the pace of recession in Hong Kong over the last two years has not been significantly different from that in a number of other economies in the region?   
 BIS Review 17/2002 7 I am drawn to conclude that the criticisms of the peg on competitiveness grounds do not stand up too well under scrutiny. Even if the foregoing analysis and discussion does not prove unequivocally that fixing is superior to floating, it does challenge the contention that perceived problems of competitiveness would dissipate if only we had a floating exchange rate. Living with deflation Let me turn now to the other focus of criticism of the monetary regime that I mentioned earlier, namely deflation. There are four main factors which have been contributing to falling prices in Hong Kong. First, there is the state of the global economy. A combination of recession and remarkable success in taming inflation in recent years have left policy makers in several countries facing the unusual situation of deflation. Hong Kong has not been alone, although the process has perhaps been more prolonged here than in many other places. The second factor is the process of integration of the economies of Hong Kong and southern China. This is something which is generally welcomed in the broader context, but it may put downward pressure on Hong Kong prices in certain sectors. The third is the peg which, against the global background mentioned above, has been forcing some downward adjustment of our costs and prices. The fourth factor is peculiar to the property market, namely the excesses of the property market cycle which drove prices to such peaks some five years ago, from which it was almost inevitable that there would be some correction. Attitudes to falling prices are, understandably, ambivalent. Other things being equal, consumers, especially those on fixed incomes, generally prefer falling to rising prices. Even some people who have had to suffer small cuts in pay may still be better off than previously; after all, the prices which they face, as measured by Hong Kong's consumer price index, are currently some 14% below their peak. Meanwhile, those involved in marketing Hong Kong as a business location are eager to publicise the lower costs. And prospective first-time entrants to the property market are happy. But for producers who see continuing declines in the likely prices at which they can sell their output, for wholesalers and retailers whose margins are being squeezed, for home-owners sitting on negative equity, or for financial institutions worried about the solvency of customers as a result of any of these developments, the process of deflation is not particularly welcome. From the monetary policy perspective, the prospect of persistent deflation presents the possible concern that, even with near-zero interest rates, people may prefer to sit on money balances rather than to spend, and that this may hinder recovery in real activity. To a certain extent the problem may only be illusory. Behaviour should be no different when interest rates are zero and inflation (or, strictly speaking, projected inflation) minus 2%, than when interest rates are 5% and inflation plus 3%; the real rate is the same in each case. But deflation does prevent real interest rates from going negative. It is a matter for debate as to how much of an impediment to recovery this limitation could be. Possibly it would only become significant if the expected pace of deflation was rather sharper than it has been. In assessing the causes and impact of deflation, and the possible remedies, it is appropriate to distinguish between the price level for goods and services on the one hand, and that for assets - whether financial or real estate - on the other. For goods and services, the consensus view is probably that a low, stable positive rate of inflation is preferable to a negative one. Nevertheless, both the economy and society may be able to cope for a certain period with modest deflation - in the range of, say, 0-2% pa - without too much difficulty. Asset prices, on the other hand, display much greater volatility, and the collapse of property prices has created problems for some homeowners and financial institutions, despite presenting opportunities for others. Plainly, stability is preferable to volatility. But the plunge in prices has much more to do with the earlier exuberance, plus structural influences, such as growing cross-border integration, than with the exchange rate. Although the current deflation may undoubtedly be painful to some, before we rush to argue that deflation could be avoided if only we had a floating exchange rate, let's pause to reflect on the Japanese experience. At times, Japan experienced deflation accompanied by upward pressure on the yen, which only served to exacerbate the deflation. It may not be appropriate to draw too close an 
 8 BIS Review 17/2002 analogy, given the contrasting economic circumstances between the two economies, but it is worth noting that, with a fixed exchange rate, deflation, if it continues, eventually restores any lost competitiveness and will then bottom out (assuming no significant continuing deflation overseas). In other words, in the Hong Kong context the peg in effect sets upper and lower bounds to the inflation rate relative to the rate in the United States. In sum, the peg has certainly not been the only contributor to deflation, and such contribution as it has made, has probably not been severe. The presence of deflation does not itself make a compelling case for altering the exchange rate regime. Summing up Back in 1983 when the peg was installed, I recall being asked whether it was the government's intention that the arrangement should be permanent, or in what circumstances a change would be contemplated. I said then simply that the peg was for the time being the most appropriate monetary anchor for Hong Kong. I would give very much the same answer today. Our peg is not a fixed rate that is supported by or dependent on discretionary intervention. It is a rule-based currency board system which imposes a particular discipline of adjustment through interest rate channels and domestic prices. It enjoys widespread support from international observers both in official circles and more widely. This is not just people being nice to us and choosing not to say anything which might rock the boat, although there may be one or two of them. Rather it reflects an appreciation of the unique features of a currency board structure and the benefits which it has brought over 18 years, as well as an appreciation of the distinctive characteristics of the Hong Kong economy. The main distinctive characteristics to which I allude are the following: the flexibility in costs and prices, as discussed earlier; the extreme openness of the economy in terms of both trade and capital flows; the constitutional commitment, through the Basic Law, to support the free movement of capital and not to operate exchange controls; and the soundness of the banking sector. Taken together, these factors help explain why a peg may be feasible and sensible for Hong Kong while it might not be so for others. This does not mean that Hong Kong would be incapable of operating or continuing to prosper under an alternative regime. Indeed, we possess the necessary infrastructure to conduct discretionary monetary policy (although that was not the case back in 1983), and I am confident that my colleagues would be quite capable of meeting the challenge of any new, more activist regime. However, although there may be moments when one thinks "If only we had a floating rate, things wouldn't be so bad right now", one cannot chop and change between regimes to suit short-term expedience. We acknowledge that no system is perfect, but I have suggested that much criticism of the peg may be exaggerated, or even unfounded. We would need to be well satisfied that an alternative would be unequivocally superior, before ditching something which has been the cornerstone of internal financial stability and external confidence for over 18 years. 
 BIS Review 17/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: The US economy Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Independent Community Bankers of America, Honolulu, Hawaii (via satellite) 13 March 2002.  *      *      * I am pleased to appear once again before the Independent Community Bankers of America. There can be little doubt that the business environment in which you have operated over the past year has been challenging.  Today I would like to review some of the principal forces likely to operate on the economy in coming months. But I would also like to focus on the emerging longer-term challenges, particularly on the need to augment our domestic saving rate to facilitate the financing of the investment that will almost surely be required as the baby boomers retire. As bankers, you will play a central part in meeting that challenge by channeling today’s saving into the capital that will be essential in providing for tomorrow’s income.  As I have noted in recent testimony, in the past several months, we have seen increasing signs that some of the forces restraining the economy over the past year are starting to diminish and that activity is beginning to firm.  One key force in the economy is the movement of inventories. Stocks in many industries have been drawn down to levels at which firms will soon need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if they have not already done so. With production running well below sales, the lift to income and spending from the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation could be significant.  But that impetus to the growth of activity will be short-lived unless sustained increases in final demand kick in before the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation dissipate. In recent days, encouraging signs of strengthening underlying trends in final demand have emerged, although the dimensions of the pickup remain uncertain.  Most recoveries in the post-World War II period received a boost from a rebound in demand for consumer durables and housing from recession-depressed levels as well as an abatement of inventory liquidation. Through much of last year's slowdown, however, spending by the household sector held up well and proved to be a major stabilizing force. As a consequence, although household spending should continue to trend up, the potential for significant acceleration in activity in this sector is likely to be more limited than in past cycles.  Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after September 11 and the unemployment rate rose sharply. However, layoffs diminished noticeably in January, and employment turned up last month. Moreover, initial claims for unemployment insurance have decreased markedly, on balance, providing further evidence of an improvement in labor market conditions.  The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But the broad contours of the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and capital investment.  The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year and a half was central to the sharp slowing we experienced in overall activity. On balance, the recovery in spending on business fixed investment is likely to be only gradual; in particular, its growth will doubtless be less frenetic than in 1999 and early 2000--a period during which outlays were boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of equity capital available to many firms. Nonetheless, if the recent more-favorable economic developments gather momentum, uncertainties will diminish, risk premiums will fall, and the pace of capital investment embodying new technologies will increase.  Even a subdued recovery would constitute a truly remarkable performance for the American economy in the face of so severe a decline in equity asset values and an unprecedented blow from terrorists to the foundations of our market systems. For if the tentative indications that the contraction phase of this business cycle has drawn to a close are ultimately confirmed, we will have experienced a significantly milder downturn than the long history of business cycles would have led us to expect.  
 2 BIS Review 17/2002 Although there are ample reasons to be cautious about the economic outlook, the recuperative powers of the U.S. economy in the recent past have been encouraging. One important ingredient in that resilience has been the performance of productivity. Even discounting somewhat the phenomenal strength of the growth of output per hour of late, one cannot help but be impressed with how well productivity has held up in the face of the abrupt slowing of the economy in late 2000 and in 2001.  That performance has been encouraging because the nation’s fortunes, to a very great degree, will depend on the evolution of the growth of productivity. In particular, productivity will play a central role in determining the nature of the economy’s response to the aging of the population soon upon us.  Most economic forecasts are subject to significant uncertainty. At least by comparison, one judgment looks to be a reasonably sure proposition: The ratio of retirees to those still working will rise precipitously starting at the end of this decade and will continue to climb through the first third of this century and remain high thereafter. In part, this projected development owes to the retirement of the baby boomers. But the phenomenon is broader than that and reflects the aging of our society. Importantly, according to the social security trustees, the demographic challenge will not go away with the passing of the baby-boom generation.  This ever-larger retired population will have to be fed, clothed, housed, and serviced by a workforce growing far less rapidly. The retirees may have accumulated a large stock of retirement savings, but the goods and services needed to redeem those savings must be produced by an active workforce assisted by a stock of plant and equipment sufficiently productive to meet the needs both of retirees and of a workforce expecting an ever-increasing standard of living.  Though from an individual household’s point of view, saving reflects financial claims adequate to meet future needs, the focus for the economy as a whole, of necessity, must be on producing the real resources needed to redeem the financial assets.  The role of finance is to channel saving into investment in the physical capital assets that assist in the production of the gross domestic product, which, in turn, serves both retirees and active workers. Clearly, an efficient system of finance can more effectively deploy a given stock of capital and thus maximize its contribution to supporting the population.  Any analysis of the amount and type of saving required to finance the bulge in retirements that is just over the horizon clearly needs to project (1) the number of retirees, (2) the size of our workforce, and (3) the productivity of that workforce. Of the three, productivity is most directly affected by the level of investment, which, of course, is financed by saving.  The size of the future workforce, excluding immigrants, and the size of the future retired population are relatively simple to project from today's age distribution. The level of immigration, both legal and illegal, will be dominated by public policy decisions and by economic forces, both in the United States and in the countries from which our immigrants are drawn. This forecast is more problematic, and its level matters: Over the past decade, for example, immigration accounted for approximately one-third of the increase in our workforce. The larger our workforce in 2010 and beyond, the easier producing goods and services for both retirees and active workers will be. Immigration policy will, therefore, be a key component of baby-boom retirement policy.  The rate of saving--for retirement and other purposes--may not directly affect either the number of retirees or the size of the workforce. But it surely affects capital investment, which it finances, and the productivity that it engenders.  Besides the total amount of saving and investment, changes in the allocation of those funds among different types of capital also appear to influence the growth of labor productivity. A dollar of new saving flows through financial markets to firms that allocate it among different types of capital investment. Clearly, firms' choices about the types of investments to make matter crucially for how much labor productivity ultimately is boosted.  In the late 1990s, for example, businesses allocated much more of their investment dollars toward high-tech, higher-return capital than they did in earlier years. Businesses made this shift and are continuing to move further in that direction in response to the extremely rapid decline in the prices of high-tech assets and the new opportunities that these assets have afforded. According to one set of calculations, of the roughly 2-1/2 percent annual rate of increase in output per hour, or labor productivity, between 1995 and 2001, perhaps a quarter of that growth could be attributed to on-going shifts in the composition, as distinct from the dollar level, of capital.  
 BIS Review 17/2002 3 Improvements in the quantity and quality of our workforce’s education enhance workers' skills and contribute importantly to the growth of labor productivity. But far more important over the past six years have been the gains in output attributable to technological innovation, especially information technology and improved managerial organization, and, as I noted in testimony last week, the greater flexibility and resilience of our economy stemming from deregulation, primarily in finance.  Notwithstanding these more-intangible contributions, the level of saving remains a key ingredient of economic growth. But we need also to know whether the source of that saving is sustainable and, beyond that, whether the type of financial assets in which our saving overall is accumulated affects our productivity.  During the past six years, about 40 percent of the total increase in our capital stock in effect has been financed, on net, by saving from abroad. This situation is reflected in our ongoing current account deficit, which, by definition, is a measure of our net investment in domestic plant and equipment financed with foreign funds, both debt and equity. But this deficit is also a measure of the increase in the level of net claims, primarily debt claims, that foreigners have on our assets. As the stock of such claims grows, an ever-larger flow of interest payments must be provided to the foreign suppliers of this capital. Countries that have gone down this path invariably have run into trouble, and so would we. Eventually, the current account deficit will have to be restrained. The nation's economic potential will be brighter if that comes about through an increase in domestic saving rather than a reduction in domestic investment.  A more contentious issue is whether the mix of domestic private and government saving affects the rate of productivity growth. Another is whether the form of private saving--for example in stocks or debt instruments including bank deposits--affects productivity growth.  Ultimately, the composition of real investment in our economy will reflect, among other influences, the attitudes toward risk of those who own the financial claims against the capital stock. The nation’s savers, daily in the marketplace, exhibit an obvious sensitivity to the association between expected return and risk. Few, if any, individuals would be willing to accept greater risk without the potential for greater reward. Similarly, a nation as a whole would not be willing to invest in riskier assets without a commensurately greater overall economic growth potential. That same tradeoff is reflected in the willingness of many investors to forgo the higher rates of return on equity for the greater tranquility of the lesser stress and risk associated with most debt instruments. Reflecting that differential in risk, returns on common stocks over rolling twenty-year periods have almost always outpaced the returns on less-risky securities.  Should relative preferences of savers in the aggregate shift toward debt instruments and away from equity, interest rates will be driven lower and equity-price ratios higher. These shifts in asset valuation will induce business enterprises to alter their choice of capital projects. Specifically, firms will find that only projects with lower average rates of return will meet the requirement of providing the more certain, more stable income stream desired by savers. The physical counterpart to this choice by businesses of projects with lower expected financial returns is a slower growth of productivity, on average, across the economy.  Conversely, if savers become more risk-tolerant, financial risk premiums will decline. In response to these reduced penalties on risk, firms will be induced to adjust the mix of their endeavors toward more-speculative projects--but, importantly, presumably ones that also offer higher prospective rates of return on average, which more often than not, translate into higher long-term average economic growth.  Thus, the answer to whether government or private saving does more to foster productivity growth arguably comes down to the propensity of U.S. savers to take risks.  Government saving is reflected largely in a retirement of debt. Having chosen to hold at least a portion of their savings in riskless securities, holders of government debt when confronted with debt retirement presumably would chose less-risky private debt securities over common stocks to rebalance their portfolios. Thus an increased share of saving from the government is a markedly more conservative financial strategy than if the saving were undertaken in the private sector.  Obviously, the federal government could invest in higher-risk assets, such as equities. But for reasons that I have expressed many times, I do not believe that, other than in defined-contribution plans, such investment can be accomplished free of political pressures that would distort the efficient use of capital.  
 4 BIS Review 17/2002 Presumably, most of those who maintain that greater risk-taking would likely produce faster long-term growth would acknowledge that increased competition and economic growth would also bring greater volatility and social stress. Because of the near certainty of a major rise in the retiree-to-worker ratio in the next few decades, we now face the pressing need to set policies for the enhanced productivity growth that will be necessary if we are to successfully meet the pending demographic challenge.  How much personal stress--and, some argue, increased inequality, which may be a byproduct of a highly competitive, high-octane economy--have we as a nation chosen? Is the amount compatible with the level of domestic saving and possibly the risk-taking that is consonant with the elevated level of productivity growth necessary to meet the needs of an aging population? A national consensus on these questions is clearly missing. This is doubtless an area for useful debate.  Regardless of the outcome of that debate, there can be little disagreement that an efficient banking system and sound financial markets will be critical in directing our scarce national saving into the productive investments that will provide the wherewithal to meet our future needs. Each of you can contribute to a process that will lift the standards of living enjoyed by our fellow citizens  
 BIS Review 16/2002 1 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Outlook for 2002 and the road ahead Speech by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, to the Foreign Banks Association, Bangkok, 6 March 2002.  *      *      * Mr Weerasinghe, distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  Let me begin by thanking the Foreign Banks Association for hosting this enjoyable event and for inviting me to speak. I am honored to be here and would like to extend once again my congratulations to Mr. Weerasinghe on his presidency of the FBA. The formal meeting we had in late January offered an opportunity for me to exchange many useful views and ideas with you. I consider that fruitful and I also appreciate the opportunity given to me this evening. I hope my talk tonight will enhance communication and our mutual understanding even further.  I wish to use my time tonight to share with you our view on the current state of the Thai economy as well as what we see now as the outlook for 2002. It is my intention to discuss with you our assessment of the nature of the incipient recovery process that is now taking place, and to identify the risks and challenges we may face in the near future.  Ladies and gentlemen, permit me to go straight to the crux of the matter. We enter the year 2002 with more confidence. The Thai economy had most assuredly bottomed out last year. The latest released January economic figures point to more strength in the fourth quarter of 2001 than we had anticipated, given the event on September 11.  And, with the current more supportive fiscal and monetary policy stance as well as the expectation of a rebound in the US, the overall environment this year is more conducive to growth than last year. From this vantage point, we are of the view that the economy could grow by 2-3 per cent this year while inflationary pressure would be virtually absent. A continuing expansion in domestic demand and a rebound in exports in the latter half of the year would be the key drivers of this year’s growth. The outlook for inflation remains tame, with core inflation expected to hover around 1-1.5 per cent, well within the target corridor of 0-3.5 per cent.  Last year, notwithstanding the slowdown in the global markets, the Thai economy exhibited a noted degree of resiliency. While the world economy was in a slump, Thailand’s exports did not fall to the extent observed in many countries in the region. And, even as export fell by about 7 per cent, output growth remained positive in every quarter. In terms of macroeconomic stability, we saw an improvement both on the domestic and external fronts. In fact, Thailand external position strengthened significantly over 2001. The current account registered a large surplus and external debt continued to fall sharply in 2001. Our reserve position remains strong.  I am convinced that a flexible mix between monetary and fiscal policies, plus the diversified structure of production and exports, did allow the economy to avoid contraction and build on greater external stability. With the improved environment for growth that I have just noted, I am more comfortable today than last year to talk about an economic recovery. My optimism, however, remains guarded. Because on this road to recovery, there are still many risks. Such risks, if not managed well, could undermine the sustainability of the recovery process. Let me first talk about the macroeconomy and our view for 2002. Then I will describe the challenges ahead as well as our thoughts on how to manage them. First, the economic recovery.  What do the recent economic numbers tell us? In January, the economy showed signs of continued expansion despite the sluggish global conditions, thanks largely to the momentum in domestic demand. A number of indicators suggested that the economic conditions had improved somewhat from the recent months. For instance, – Consumption and investment continued to improve in January. In particular, the Private Investment Index (PII) continued to increase. A significant expansion was seen in construction, following the spur in housing demand and construction activities. 
 2 BIS Review 16/2002 – It looks like this good news on the domestic demand front warrants a significant increase in the January Business Sentiment Index (BSI) and the index looking 3 months ahead.  – Export quantities continued to improve with the year-on-year growth rate in a high positive. This represents both the pick-up in our trading partners' purchasing power and our staying ability to compete.  Another factor that continued to firm up the recovery process came from the fiscal front.  – During the first four months of fiscal year 2002, the budget disbursement rate accelerated compared to same period last year. This front-loaded fiscal stance will surely contribute to a sooner recovery. I must note here, however, that the jury is still out on what these early signs may portend. I believe the impassioned judgment on the speed of the recovery must await more data.  Ladies and gentlemen, It is rather unfortunate that while economists are busy debating whether these early signs point to a tangible recovery, the recent strong boom in the stock market seemed to have overwhelmed that debate.  On this point, let me say that we need to distinguish between the recent asset price performance and the economic fundamentals. It is true that the performance of the listed SET firms has improved. The improvement was led in part by better-than-expected profitability of listed companies. Corporate profits in general were also on the rise in 2001, compared to 2000. With this improvement, we are now more able to segregate the winners - that is, the strong performers -- from those lagging behind. This presents a stark contrast to the previous pictures in which almost all sectors were judged to have performed poorly. Another factor that contributed to the strong performance in the stock market is that the Thai market had a relatively low P/E ratio compared to other markets, regional and extra-regional, and the positive price correction might have been at large.  But, whether the inflows that have been driving the market up will stay for long will depend on the underlying fundamentals.This is to say that in order to attract long-term investors that they need, Thai companies must persevere with business restructuring and continue to reform their operations. But more importantly at the macro level, the economic recovery process must continue firmly, and be supported by the right policy mix and by further progress on the unfinished reforms. I would like to turn your attention now to what we see as the risks in the process of recovery.  The speed and robustness of the recovery will depend in large part on the turnaround of the global economy. On this front, the Bank of Thailand remains cautious in our optimism. Our guarded optimism is based on two reasons. First, the US economy, which absorbs roughly 20 per cent of our exports, is likely to rebound later in the year while Japan, where 15 per cent of our exports go, seems more likely to remain in the mire for the rest of the year. Therefore, the global economy as a whole may not be expanding much.  Second, a US recovery, particularly if led by electronics, may not benefit Thailand as much as it will benefit other regional economies. This is owing to the diversified nature of Thailand's exports. For example, electronics count for only 26 per cent of our total exports while they count for 36 and 60 per cent of Taiwan's and Singapore's exports, respectively. Furthermore, the US takes in more than 40 per cent of Taiwan's electronics exports. So, a US rebound would likely benefit them more than us. Therefore, while we are hopeful that the US economic trend is more upbeat, we harbor a healthy dose of reservation insofar as the immediate gains brought on by the US recovery are concerned. Another risk to growth is in the effectiveness of policy stimulus to meet the growth challenge. In the past few years, various fiscal stimulus packages have been the principal motor driving the economy. Later this year, however, the necessary consolidation will take place to ensure fiscal sustainability, and sound economic management will demand a right mix of policies. Having achieved external stability and price stability, there is room for monetary policy to be more accommodative to growth. On this point, I wish to emphasize that even though our focus today is on economic recovery, the Bank of Thailand's monetary policy objective remains that of maintaining price stability.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 3 It is my belief that an important pre-condition for growth on a sustained basis is a stable macroeconomic environment. However, I doubt that macroeconomic policy alone will be sufficient for long-term economic growth. We, therefore, need to look beyond macroeconomic policy.  To meet the growth challenge, Thailand needs a steady and sincere effort at the micro-level to put our economy back on a more robust growth path. The reforms must aim for good corporate governance, faster debt restructuring, and the efficient and effective banking sector.  Without these actions, the potency of the fiscal and monetary policies will be limited, and whatever gains in output we make will be ephemeral.  The bottom line, Ladies and Gentlemen, is that Thailand will stand ready to reap the full advantage of an upcoming global recovery only if the real sector becomes competitive and the financial sector functions smoothly.  The Bank of Thailand can contribute to the growth process by conducting a responsible monetary policy to ensure price stability, and by prodding the economy along the path of institutional reforms that have been initiated. With a sound policy framework and institutional reforms in place, a more efficient economic structure will have been built and the entrepreneurial energy of the private sector can be unleashed to ensure greater economic well being.  This brings me to the last point I wish to make tonight, that is the need to speed up the structural reforms.  I am convinced that the necessary transition toward more robust and durable growth lies in breaking out of the current constraints imposed on the economy post-1997, the most pressing of which is the debt-overhang problem. To go forward we first need to unshackle ourselves. The crawling pace of debt resolution is tying down the economy. If we could not resolve the debt problem in a timely manner and adopt new work practices, it will be next to impossible to compete successfully in the world market.  The Bank of Thailand and the Government are alert to this challenge. And the Government has already initiated the process of overhaul.  One notable attempt at debt restructuring is the establishment of the Thai Asset Management Corporation (TAMC). The entity was set up to reduce distressed assets in the banking system through centralization of NPLs' management. This should allow banks to resume their normal function and new lending. New lending is needed to provide the working capital to support corporate restructuring as well as business expansion. This way, our energy will be channeled toward more productive enterprises. And, with the authority to liquidate and rehabilitate businesses through swift legal procedures, the TAMC is unique in its unprecedented power. Next, given that a substantial share of distressed assets remains outside the purview of the TAMC, I see the need to expedite the process of corporate debt restructuring which requires a speedy passage of the reformed bankruptcy law. This action will be testimony to the sincere effort that we in the authorities can make for the benefit of our future generations. Insofar as the banking sector is concerned, the Bank of Thailand regards better enforcement of the banking and financial institution regulations as a priority.  This is an area that the Bank of Thailand takes leadership role to strengthen the soundness and efficiency of the financial institutions. Our leadership must lead to an outcome which makes practical sense, measures up to international best practices, and must be market-oriented. On this front, we have been actively involved in the consultation process for the New Basel Capital Accord, which will provide a more comprehensive and sensitive approach to addressing risks through the use of minimum capital requirements, supervisory reviews and market discipline.  The second agenda of the banking sector reform is enhancing our risk management capacity. Toward this end, our Supervision Group has moved from regulation and transaction-testing toward risk-based supervision. We realize that good rules alone do not automatically translate into honorable practices. Therefore, we consider an upright supervisory role as a sine qua non to ensure honest banking practices.  The new supervisory practices can be considered a milestone in this area. Our aim is to nudge Thai banks to change their business practices. Currently, they are working harder than ever to satisfy some of the new rules, notably those that link risk-based classification of debts to provisioning for loan losses. 
 4 BIS Review 16/2002 We are in effect encouraging banks to eschew the old norm of collateral lending and adopt new practices of examining cash-flow projections and other indicators. This reform was implemented hand in hand with the corporate sector reform under the purview of the SEC. This practice will only lead to a more efficient allocation of financial resources. Under the new rules and our strict supervisory practices, we are optimistic that the banking system will play a more meaningful role in the economy in the near future. Ladies and gentlemen,  Much has transpired since 1997. Our economy has been under intense pressure to perform, and I am confident enough to say that we are in a better position today to manage future challenges. Although, the outlook for 2002 is brighter than that of last year, we do remain somewhat cautious. The reform process must continue so that the global pick-up does not pass us by and that our economy can secure the potential gains imbedded in our talented entrepreneurs and workforce.  It has been an honor and thank you for your attention tonight.  
 BIS Review 15/2002 1 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank and Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference, held in Frankfurt, 7 March 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB.  First of all, we were pleased to see that the euro cash changeover went so smoothly – more smoothly in fact than we could have hoped. The European public very quickly became familiar with the new banknotes and coins, as is shown by the fact that national banknotes were largely withdrawn well before the final deadline of their ceasing to be legal tender. The Governing Council wishes to express its gratitude once more to all those who helped to make the euro cash changeover such a success. As usual, at today's meeting we examined recent monetary, financial and economic developments. The Governing Council concluded that the information which had become available in recent weeks confirmed that the current level of key ECB interest rates remains appropriate for the maintenance of price stability over the medium term. Against this background, the Governing Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged.  Starting with the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 stood at 8.0% in the period from November 2001 to January 2002, compared with 7.8% in the period from October to December 2001. The high level of the annual growth rates of M3 is very much related to portfolio shifts to liquid positions, most of which occurred in the autumn of 2001 in an economic and financial environment characterised by high uncertainty. While many investors still seemed to be "parking" some of their assets in M3 in early 2002, some moderation in the short-term dynamics of M3 could be observed around the turn of the year.  The Governing Council continues to hold the view that the information from the first pillar thus far does not indicate risks to price stability, as the portfolio reallocations which drove M3 growth in 2001 should remain temporary. In addition, the slowdown in the rate of growth of loans to the private sector has been continuing over the past few months. However, we will need to analyse monetary developments closely in the coming months. As regards the second pillar, there are further signs that the trough in economic activity may have been reached at the end of last year. Coincident and forward-looking indicators increasingly point to improvements in economic conditions. A similar picture is reflected in financial market expectations, especially those embedded in bond yields.  The economic fundamentals of the euro area are sound and there are no major imbalances that would require a lengthy process of adjustment. The expectation of a recovery in the euro area in 2002 is furthermore supported by favourable financing conditions and by real disposable income benefiting from past and expected future declines in inflation. There is also increasing confirmation that economic activity outside the euro area is picking up, which should lead to a gradual strengthening of the external demand for euro area products and services. While the strength of the recovery remains uncertain, there are good reasons to expect a return of economic growth to levels in line with potential towards the end of the year. Turning to short-term price developments, annual consumer price inflation picked up substantially in January. Part of this increase was expected, as it related to base effects stemming from falling energy prices in early 2001 and to higher indirect taxes in some euro area countries. Furthermore, the increase reflected a considerable rise in unprocessed food prices due to adverse weather conditions in parts of Europe. Part of the latter effect seems to have been reversed in the meantime, as preliminary data for February indicate. Some increases have also been observed in oil prices and in the rate of growth of services prices in January. While there might have been an impact on specific service categories in January, overall there is no evidence that the euro cash changeover has had a significant upward effect on the average price level in the euro area or that the declining trend in annual inflation rates has been affected recently. 
 2 BIS Review 15/2002 In the coming months, the effects of past increases in energy and food prices should gradually subside and annual inflation rates should fall to below 2%. The recent behaviour of producer prices also points in this direction. Beyond that horizon, we expect little upward pressure on prices from aggregate demand and, barring unforeseen developments, inflation rates to be in line with price stability.  However, the current favourable outlook for inflation fundamentally rests on the assumption of a continuation of wage moderation. As I already noted last month, there is some cause for concern with regard to ongoing wage negotiations. A continuation of wage moderation in the euro area is crucial not only to foster employment growth but also to support monetary policy in its task to maintain price stability. With regard to fiscal policy in the euro area, the Governing Council welcomes the reaffirmed commitments of the governments of euro area countries with fiscal imbalances to adhere to the objective of achieving balanced budgets by 2003-2004. The confirmation of the political will to continue along the path of fiscal consolidation is most appropriate. The Governing Council supports the actions taken by the European Commission in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact and the subsequent outcome of the ECOFIN Council meeting last month. It is now necessary to remain vigilant in order to ensure strict adherence to the medium-term plans and rigorous implementation of the procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact. In order to further improve the fundamentals of the euro area and to put the expected recovery on a broad and sustainable basis, euro area countries must strengthen their efforts to implement comprehensive structural reforms. Over the past few years progress has been made with regard to enhancing the flexibility of euro area product and capital markets. Euro area countries have also made some headway in terms of improving the way their labour markets operate. These reforms, together with moderate wage developments, have contributed to the strong employment growth and the considerable reduction in unemployment witnessed in many euro area countries in the last cyclical upswing. However, it is worth noting that despite the continued high unemployment in the euro area, firms continue to report difficulties in terms of recruiting suitably qualified workers. This suggests that further improvements in the functioning of euro area labour markets and their ability to match labour supply and demand are needed. Evidence gathered in a recent Eurosystem analysis, which will be published shortly, supports this view. In this context I would also like to stress that structural reforms in different markets should not be seen in isolation. The more efficiently euro area product and capital markets function, the greater the success of labour market reforms will be in creating employment opportunities. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
 BIS Review 15/2002 1 Edward M Gramlich: Macroeconomic policy in recessions - and other times Speech by Mr Edward M Gramlich, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Conference on Combating Recessions, Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 7 March 2002.  *      *      * According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, the U.S. economy entered its tenth postwar recession early this year. At this point, and according to the Blue Chip forecasters, the recession seems to have been much milder than most, with the unemployment rate unlikely to go much above 6 percent. But in the early fall there were moments when the risk of a serious downturn was much greater, and even the relatively flat 2001 recession prompted renewed policy discussions about how to deal with recessions. Today, I offer my own views on the subject. For obvious reasons, I will avoid an evaluation of specific actions or pieces of legislation and just discuss a general strategy. My central point is that putting in place a sensible long-term macroeconomic policy strategy, covering both fiscal and monetary policy, is extremely important. The main importance of such a strategy involves the effects of the policy position on trend economic growth, not recessions or expansions. Business-cycle movements obviously have to be dealt with, but for the most part they can be addressed through the existing system of fiscal and monetary shock absorbers. At times, these shock absorbers may have to be augmented with discretionary antirecessionary fiscal actions, but these times are relatively rare. And the discretionary antirecessionary fiscal actions should meet stringent criteria to make sure that they do more good than harm.  Sound long-run policies  The fundamental reason for establishing a sound long-run macroeconomic policy strategy is that the path of trend productivity growth is a nation's most crucial economic variable. It determines the long-run growth of living standards and is a main determinant of the affordability of entitlement spending programs, the level of household wealth, the value of the currency, and other economic magnitudes. Whatever policy does in response to short-term needs, that policy should be formulated in the context of a sound overall long-run strategy. The path of trend productivity growth has many underlying determinants--the vibrancy of technology, the strength of entrepreneurial motives, the flexibility of labor and capital markets, and the effectiveness of regulatory policies, to name a few. But there are also two vital macroeconomic policy determinants. One, involving monetary policy, is a credible commitment to stable prices in the long run. The second, involving fiscal policy, concerns the share of total output devoted to national saving. Output that is not devoted to saving will be consumed, and that's that. Output that is saved, or reserved from consumption, will be devoted to capital investment, which equips workers with new capital, enhances productivity, and raises living standards. In recent years, the United States has been the fortunate beneficiary of a productivity growth spurt. Both monetary and fiscal policy have played an important role. The commitment to and realization of stable prices have surely been a critical background forces, facilitating long-term planning and a more efficient allocation of resources. On the fiscal side, the role of saving and investment has been important as well. Production-function decompositions of this growth spurt suggest that a good 30 to 40 percent of it has been due to so-called capital-deepening productivity change, reflecting increases in the economy's capital-labor ratio.  Fiscal policy is relevant because it helps determine the national saving that finances this capital investment. National saving can be generated privately, by households and business, or by government. Efforts to promote private saving certainly have merit in theory, but the bald empirical fact for the United States is that the government has introduced a number of tax provisions to increase private saving over the past twenty years, and almost all of them have been correlated with a reduction in the overall rate of private saving. These measures could have been effective at the margin, but they have not had a large enough effect to counter the general downward trend in private saving. As an added caution, from a standpoint of national saving, it makes no sense to introduce costly private saving incentives that then reduce government saving more than they raise private saving. 
 2 BIS Review 15/2002 What has seemed to raise national saving is government fiscal policy, the budget surpluses. Government saving, or a surplus, leads to a reduction in outstanding government debt to which wealth-holders, for the most part, seem to respond by devoting the funds to private credit markets. This response, in turn, finances capital investment. Much of this capital investment is likely to be in the United States, directly influencing output and productivity. But even if the saving flows abroad, either through the buying back of foreign-owned capital or the purchase of new capital in foreign countries, the United States gets the returns on this investment, which raise income growth and future consumption. The only instance in which government surpluses do not raise national saving is the so-called Ricardian equivalence scenario. In this scenario, households learn that the government plans to run a surplus, and they reduce their own saving by their proportionate share of this surplus. In general, economists find that if Ricardian offsets exist at all, they are a modest share of the relevant government surpluses. At a more casual level, I have, for many years surveyed my non-economist friends to see how they alter their own consumption behavior in response to national fiscal policy. The usual response is a blank stare: If these non-economists have even imagined there to be a connection between government deficits and their own saving, they have no idea how much to respond and in what direction. Fiscal policy  What, then, is the long-run fiscal policy that leads to a vibrant economy with a high rate of productivity growth? In general, it implies nudging the economy in the direction of raising the overall rate of national saving. It is theoretically possible for an economy to save so much that the long-term path of consumption per capita is actually lowered, but generally economists believe that the U.S. economy is well short of that saturation point. For the present circumstances, I am proceeding on the assumption that more saving is better. I start by decomposing the federal budget into two components, the cash surplus of the trust funds for social security and some other entitlement programs, and the net surplus for all other activities of government, which I will call the general budget surplus. For the general budget surplus, let me repeat a very simple rule, similar to that enunciated by both the Committee for Economic Development and Milton Friedman fifty years ago. The rule is that the general budget surplus should average zero over the long run. This general budget should not be exactly balanced each year, but there should be long-run balance. In the event of a recession, for example, it is natural, and actually healthy, for revenues to fall, spending to rise, and the general budget to move into deficit. This deficit helps prop up the economy in the recession, which is why these budgetary movements are called automatic fiscal stabilizers. But though deficits are excusable in a recession, they are not desirable in general. If the following period sees an expansion, the general budget should move into surplus, and over time the general budget surplus should average zero. Indeed, the long-term value of higher national saving gives an argument for aiming at a positive general budget surplus on average, but I will not push that argument here because it is most likely a political nonstarter. For the surpluses of the entitlement program trust funds, covering social security, Medicare, and the retirement benefits of government employees, one would follow a different rule. These trust funds are set up to finance long-term entitlement expenditures. To illustrate, for social security, the largest of these entitlement programs, revenue from worker payroll taxes go into a trust fund and, along with any earnings on asset holdings, are used to pay retiree benefits. These trust funds should then be evaluated on an actuarial basis--whether present and future anticipated inflows are adequate to pay anticipated present and future program benefits. If not, corrective steps should be taken. Again using social security as an example, inflows currently exceed outflows (a cash surplus), but forecast inflows do not cover forecast outflows (an actuarial deficit). Even though the fund has a cash surplus today, some combination of tax increases or long-term cuts in benefits is needed to maintain these surpluses into the future and to restore actuarial soundness. This situation is not atypical for countries like the United States with an aging population. For a country with an aging population, the combination of a general budget surplus that is zero on average and trust funds in cash surplus will normally lead to surpluses in the overall, or unified, budget. These surpluses can be rationalized as a technique to build up the nation's future capital stock. Since the population is aging, a relatively small cohort of workers will soon have to pay benefits for a relatively large cohort of retirees, and the idea is at least to give this small cohort of workers a 
 BIS Review 15/2002 3 larger capital stock to work with. Having this type of a budget policy accomplishes three objectives simultaneously: • The surpluses provide for capital accumulation. • They do that to a greater extent the more the country's population is aging. • Automatic fiscal stabilizers remain to deal with recessions.  The discussion to this point has been entirely in terms of the federal budget. In principle, state governments could follow the same countercyclical fiscal policy, except for one problem. States typically operate under legislative or constitutional limits on their deficits. The only way states could run deficits in recessions is if they had saved a store of assets in earlier booms. This presaving strategy sounds nice in principle and is a good idea, but very few states actually follow it to a sufficient degree. So, as state budget situations worsen because of the state automatic fiscal stabilizers, the unfortunate but likely result is that states will lack the rainy day resources to run deficits and will need to make budget changes that neutralize their own automatic stabilizers.  Monetary policy  The automatic fiscal stabilizers help in stabilizing the economy over the business cycle, but the main burden of fighting recessions is left to the central bank. Traditionally there have been two reasons for this: • Monetary policy responds to shocks much more quickly than fiscal policy. • It is generally believed that, if an economy is open to foreign trade and capital flows and has flexible exchange rates, monetary policy becomes more effective in fighting cycles whereas fiscal policy becomes less effective.  To be sure, one can raise questions about the second reason--the argument hinges on the fact that the value of the domestic currency is positively correlated with interest rates, which in recent years has often not seemed to be the case for the United States. But despite any qualms about the second reason, the first reason seems solid for just about any known real world economy. For a long time now, central banks have been trying to stabilize economies, in an art form known as "leaning against the wind." John Taylor has developed an equation that provides one statistical description of how this practice might be followed. Under what is known as the Taylor rule, there is a certain equilibrium position for some short-term interest rate. The central bank uses open market operations to raise the short-term rate above this equilibrium in response to threats of inflation and to lower the rate below equilibrium in response to threats of unemployment. I won't go into details, but if the central bank is willing to announce an inflation target, the policy responses implicit in a Taylor rule could be similar to those implicit in forward-looking, flexible inflation targeting, a policy strategy now used successfully in controlling inflation by about ten leading economies around the world (twenty, if one counts the European Central Bank, which practices a form of inflation targeting). Determining how much central banks should raise short-term interest rates in response to inflation, or lower them in response to recession, or even in response to subpar growth, becomes an empirical matter. However much they do, we have another stabilizer for the economy. As demand growth heats up, the central bank will raise short-term rates to try to limit the boom and the resulting inflation. As recessions threaten, the central bank will lower short-term rates to try to limit the downturn. Discretionary fiscal policy?  With this long-run strategy in place, and with at least two shock absorbers--one monetary, one fiscal--we are now ready for the sixty-four dollar question. In the average recession, should there be additional discretionary fiscal actions? For such actions to be effective, they must satisfy three conditions: • They should stimulate spending.  • They should be instituted quickly. • They should be reversed quickly or automatically.  
 4 BIS Review 15/2002 The reason speed and reversibility are important is that most recessions are not very long, averaging about twelve months in the United States. If some expansionary action comes into effect late in a recession, say in the twelfth month, it is likely to add to the vigor of the next expansion and hence increase business-cycle volatility. Reversibility is also important because of the overall budget rule discussed earlier. If the general budget were already in approximate balance, any continuing expansionary fiscal action taken on top of that would generate normal deficits, not normal budget balance. There is a limited set of fiscal actions that satisfy all these conditions. Many of the commonly discussed proposals fall short on at least one ground. By way of illustration, I will discuss a few that have been mentioned in recent debates. Extend unemployment insurance. Unemployment insurance benefits run out after twenty-six weeks in the United States. In general having a time limit to control caseloads is helpful--the basic idea of unemployment insurance is to provide temporary, not permanent, support to unemployed workers. But in recessions, when unemployed workers have much more difficulty in getting new jobs, it may make sense for policy to be more lenient by extending time limits. Such extensions have been enacted in nearly all postwar U.S. recessions. The extensions would provide benefits to unemployed workers who might have trouble maintaining their pre-unemployment standard of living, implying that the extensions should stimulate consumption spending. The extensions, say to thirty-nine weeks, could be made for a defined period, such as a year. Even if the period exceeded a year, most of the budget dollars would be reversed as workers would naturally be better able to get jobs and would not be remaining on the unemployment rolls. This is one action that seems to satisfy all three conditions. Accelerate scheduled cuts in tax rates. If future tax-rate cuts are already enacted into law, putting them into effect sooner than planned could be done quickly. Presumably the relevant political compromises have already been made. As the acceleration would not damage the long-run budget position, the reversibility condition is satisfied. But that property could lessen the effect of the rate cuts. It has been found that consumers spend relatively little out of one-shot increases in their income. They spend much more when tax cuts are viewed as permanent rather than one-time events. Since rational, forward-looking consumers should view accelerated rate cuts as one-shot increases in income, the effect of these cuts on consumption could be limited. On the other hand, if consumers are not forward-looking but wait for their tax cuts before they begin spending, the accelerated rate cuts could stimulate a normal amount of consumer spending. In this case accelerated rate cuts could satisfy all three conditions. If one changed the tax policy expectations, the overall verdict is, if anything, less favorable. Suppose households did not expect proposed future rate cuts to become law. In such cases, moving up rate cuts might have a stronger perceived effect on permanent income and consumption and more clearly satisfy the impact test. But the same action might take the general budget out of long-term balance, at least as far as bond markets are concerned, and would fail the reversibility test. In this latter case, the accelerated tax cuts satisfy only two conditions. Temporary cuts in payroll taxes. One could also respond to recessions by cutting payroll taxes for a limited period. The cuts could be made quickly, satisfying the first requirement. But as with income taxes, if rates are cut only for a short time, the funds will appear to be temporary to consumers, in which case their effect on consumption may not be very large.  Another problem with changing payroll taxes involves the fact that virtually all of them are now devoted to entitlement trust funds such as social security. The social security trust fund is already underfunded in a long-term actuarial sense, and payroll-tax revenues could not be removed from the fund, even for a short period, without raising the long-term actuarial deficit. Moreover, one would not want to start the tradition of using a long-term program to fund short-term needs--soon no long-term program would exist. Thus, if payroll taxes were to be cut, the fiscal flows would have to be kept separate from the social security system. Income taxes would need to be cut by an amount that workers would otherwise have paid into the fund as payroll taxes, without actually taking money from the fund itself. Such logistical complications could be difficult to work out and could lead to delays in enactment or implementation.  Temporary cuts in sales taxes. A fast-acting, short-term measure with a powerful spending impact is a temporary cut in sales taxes. Whereas temporary income-tax cuts can be viewed as making a one-shot change in household disposable income, temporary sales-tax cuts bring about a temporary reduction in the prices of goods that consumers buy. The switch from a temporary income change to a temporary price change makes all the difference. The government is offering a sale on consumption 
 BIS Review 15/2002 5 goods and consumers should respond by raising consumption. The period of reduction should be kept reasonably short, to encourage households to take advantage of the favorable terms. It appears that this measure might satisfy all three tests. The only problem with temporary sales-tax cuts at the federal level is that the federal government does not impose any sales taxes. Most states do. Hence, for this measure to be effective, the federal government must give grants to those state governments that cut their sales taxes, roughly in the amount of the revenue lost to states from the cuts. Other arrangements might need to be made for the few states that do not impose sales taxes. Our supposedly quick program just got a bit more complicated, and one can easily imagine various states arguing about the revenue flows in the bill, holding up passage until the cyclical need has passed. Temporary inducements for investment. Following the same principles, the federal government, which does levy corporate taxes, could offer a sale on investment goods. Until 1986, the normal way of doing this was with a temporary investment credit. But the new tax laws make such a measure much more difficult. What can be done instead is to offer a temporary acceleration of depreciation allowances. As with temporary sales-tax reductions, making the period reasonably short could accelerate investment expenditures to the time when aggregate demand is weakest. A pro and a con are associated with focusing on investment instead of consumption. The advantageous feature is that investment represents capital deepening--the whole goal of keeping the long-run general government budget in balance is to encourage an investment-oriented economy. The con is that investment is already a more volatile spending component than consumption. If the temporary investment inducements are not timed to coincide with the cyclical dip in investment, they could exacerbate investment cycles and instability. But under some circumstances the investment inducements could pass all three tests. Conclusion  The important point is to establish the right long-run policy framework, with general budget fiscal policy aimed at establishing budget balance on average over the cycle and entitlement trust fund policy aimed at making these programs actuarially sound over the long run. Monetary policy should be aimed at long-run price stability, with short-term flexibility in response to demand conditions. The fiscal measures and the monetary commitment to price stability stimulate investment, productivity, and technological change over the long term. The flexible monetary policy and the automatic fiscal stabilizers provide the economy with shock absorbers to smooth out business cycles. The unanswered question then involves the role of discretionary fiscal changes-- are they a valuable addition to this macroeconomic strategy? To be valuable, the measures should stimulate spending, take effect quickly, and be easily reversible. A number of temporary tax changes might do the job, but if they do not stimulate spending, their enactment is delayed, or if they are not easily reversible, they might do little more than to undermine the long-run fiscal strategy. The outcome ultimately depends on the details of the program, the speed of enactment, and the ease of reversibility. 
 BIS Review 15/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Back to the future in managing banking risk Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia, 4 March 2002.  *      *      * Good evening. I wish to start by acknowledging the contributions of H. Parker Willis, a leader in teaching economics and political science and a major contributor to the establishment of the Federal Reserve. I suspect he would be pleased to know that his contributions are remembered and that they have served national and academic interests so well.  In his teachings, Dr. Willis recognized the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy, the role of banking, and their combined effects on economic growth. Recent events have illustrated, once again, the cyclical nature of the U.S. and world economies and the direct effect that economic conditions can have on banks as intermediaries of credit. After nearly a decade of steady improvement, earnings from core bank operations and other measures of financial strength for the U.S. banking system have taken an inevitable turn. While concerns about these indicators of financial health continue to grow, the deterioration is not a source of alarm.  Since the end of 1999, for example, the growth of industry assets has far outpaced the rise in earnings; nonperforming assets, though still relatively low, have expanded more than 70 percent; and the number and the assets of unsatisfactory or problem banks have increased, again still remaining relatively low. Fraud by bank employees has led to losses and even the closure of some banks recently. More broadly, after the failure of Enron, the stock market has reacted as we might expect to the uncertainty created by opaque balance sheets by punishing firms, both banks and nonbanks, whose risk profiles are less easily understood.  To be sure, the U.S. banking system remains strong by virtually any measure and is well positioned to support future economic growth. By historic standards, current profitability figures are robust; and relative to the industry's equity, reserves, or asset size, nonperforming assets are still low.  Banks survive and prosper by accepting risk, which is their crucial economic role and the reason for their existence. Nonetheless, risk must be well managed and at many institutions that task has become much more difficult and complex. Indeed, in my remarks today, I want to discuss the changing nature of risk management in banking and its implications for bankers and bank supervisors. My central message is that the core principles of risk management remain just that--core principles. The improved techniques that the new technologies provide can improve matters only if they remain rooted in these core principles.  In this context, I am reminded of the old back-to-the-future theme in science fiction in which an individual travels back in time and, by his presence, nearly alters history to his or our disadvantage. In dealing with the complex, fast-paced, and highly competitive businesses of today, many institutions may face a similar risk. Institutions have the ability, as a result of available technology and financial innovation, to change their activities and risk profiles quickly, but they may not always employ the controls necessary to prevent unexpected and untoward results.  Many firms have already eliminated lower- and middle- management positions in response to competitive pressures. Though such actions probably improved the cost-efficiency ratios of banks and helped them meet earnings expectations, they also could, if not done carefully, increase the likelihood that new weaknesses will appear. That is to say, institutions must take a sufficiently long-term perspective in their decisionmaking and not pursue purely short-term remedies to high operating costs.  Banking is a highly leveraged and, in many respects, low-margin business. Losses from a single bad loan or a material breakdown in controls can eliminate the gain on many other transactions. The continued ability to identify and manage risks and to maintain the proper internal controls is critical in banking organizations even as they seek to increase profits and profitability.  Indeed, the acceptance and the application of the current innovations in risk-management techniques are going to require expense and some dramatic changes in the way most large banking organizations do business. Many banks, I am afraid, are falling below the curve, perhaps on the basis of short-run cost-benefit analysis. In my view, failure to make these outlays and changes now will put at risk these banks' long-run profitability as financial transactions grow increasingly complex. The thrust of Basel II 
 2 BIS Review 15/2002 and, independently, our supervisory approach will disadvantage entities that do not prepare themselves by adopting these innovative techniques to handle the ever more complex financial transactions. New technologies and techniques must be adopted if financial institutions are to avoid repeating problems and if the banking system is to be as successful in accepting risk in the future as it has been in the past.  Important experiences  Over the past thirty years, the banking industry has faced many challenges. In the 1970s, large banks here and abroad sharply increased their exposures to the emerging economies of Latin America and other regions, as they recycled the deposits of oil-rich nations. Although profit opportunities for the banks looked attractive for a while, the picture had clearly changed by the 1980s, and most lenders incurred sizable losses on their foreign loans as they reduced their exposures.  The industry's problems during the 1980s were more domestic in nature. For many community banks, weak agricultural markets in the last half of the decade created difficulties throughout the Midwest and contributed to the failure of hundreds of small community banks. By the end of the decade, excessive exposure to overbuilt commercial real estate markets had undermined the financial strength of a number of large money-center and regional banks. Those problems forced several of these institutions to fail or otherwise to lose their independence and contributed to a wave of industry consolidation and national reforms in our domestic banking laws and regulations.  In contrast, most of the 1990s can be viewed calmly and with a certain satisfaction; indeed, the industry can be pleased about many things. After the first few years of the past decade, the number and the cost of bank failures dropped sharply, the banking system posted an impressive performance virtually every year, and many investors and former owners of banks liquidated their holdings at nice profits as the industry consolidated.  Recently, a few banks have experienced problems of a less widespread nature than those of the 1970s and 1980s. Last month, for example, a large foreign bank discovered trading losses in its U.S. subsidiary bank that had apparently increased substantially and gone undetected for some time. Also last month, the FDIC seized a $70 million bank in Ohio after examiners uncovered a $40 million embezzlement. Several years earlier, a bank in West Virginia was closed after examiners alleged bank managers hid extensive losses related to complex securitized transactions.  These experiences remind us that even a decade of solid performance does not allow anyone to become complacent. Virtually all these major problems, whether they involved fraud or honest misjudgment of risk, can--almost by definition--be traced to weaknesses in an organization's risk-management and corporate-governance. Judgments are always easier in hindsight, but failure to apply fundamental principles of management is often the root of material business problems.  Managing and controlling risk  Although a few failures are the product of fraud, the key risk in banking remains credit risk--the risk that a borrower will default. If too many customers default, so does the bank itself. Historically, the best tools to manage credit risk included a strong reliance on understanding the business prospects of the borrower and the sources of repayment. Additionally, to manage risk, banks have traditionally applied several limits, including limits on exposures to one counterparty and to entire industry sectors. Recently, as I noted earlier, banks are also using more-sophisticated credit-risk-management tools.  However, credit risk is only one of the many risks that banks must manage. Liquidity risk, traditionally defined as the risk that a bank cannot meet payment obligations in a timely and cost-effective manner, is another. Determining what is adequate liquidity for banking organizations has always been a rather subjective and difficult task, because banks rarely have liquidity problems as long as they are viewed as sound. Although the competition for retail deposits has emerged in the past several years, banks can still relatively easily issue additional insured deposits, given the federal government's guarantee. Most liquidity problems arise when market confidence is lost and the bank cannot attract sufficient levels of uninsured funds. Commercial banks, in particular, may have little room to slip, given their high leverage and slim profit margins. A drop in market confidence can trigger a series of cascading events: a drop in the bank's credit rating, higher funding costs, reduced profitability, less overall competitiveness and access to public markets, and so forth. All of that, in turn, increases the institution's liquidity risk.  
 BIS Review 15/2002 3 Managing liquidity risk requires banks to address market risk, as well, by ensuring that the maturity of their assets and liabilities are reasonably balanced and that they are not overly exposed to changing interest rates, exchange rates, and equity, commodity, and bond prices. Given the evolution of global financial markets, activities commonly associated with market risk, such as trading and investment banking, have become more important to many of our largest financial institutions. This evolution, in turn, and the related financial innovation and widespread use of complex derivative and securitized investment products, have required virtually all banks to know more about the management of market risk. Put somewhat differently, in the past few years, banks have initiated transactions with higher risk and used new financial engineering techniques to lay off or hedge that risk. These beneficial and stabilizing risk-sharing techniques have the prerequisite of very strong management and control procedures. Flaws can quickly result in significant unanticipated losses.  Operating risk, legal risk, and reputational risk round out a conventional list of risks for banks. Operating risk, in particular, has attracted more attention in recent years, partly because improvements in technology and data storage permit institutions to retain and analyze more data and also because the increased volume and complexity of bank transactions have, arguably, increased this risk for many banks. Roughly defined, operating risk refers to the risk arising from inadequate information systems, operational problems, breaches in internal controls, fraud, or unforeseen catastrophes that can result in unexpected losses. The term may also embrace legal risk, because many legal claims arise from operational failures.  The need to manage and control operating risk is particularly great at institutions whose activities involve substantial interbank payments, securities settlements, asset management, or other transactions that are high volume and entail large dollar amounts. These conditions not only expose those particular institutions to substantial risk but also have the potential to disrupt financial markets worldwide. Events of September 11 illustrate that point.  Risk-focused supervision and bank risk management culture  In its supervisory efforts, the Federal Reserve has for much of the past decade emphasized a risk-focused approach, particularly in the case of large institutions. That approach requires examiners to understand an institution's risk profile and to devote resources to areas presenting the greatest risk. It allows examiners greater flexibility in their oversight activities, focuses attention on an institution's internal processes, and contrasts with the more traditional approach that was based on reviewing and evaluating individual transactions. The sheer volume of bank transactions today and the speed with which individual exposures can change have required us to take that approach. We need to be confident that an institution's internal systems, procedures, and controls are sound and that they will remain effective long after our review. Of course, evaluating procedures and controls requires some transactions testing.  Risk-focused supervision and the nature of banking today require successful organizations to maintain sound corporate governance and strong systems of controls. Banks must manage customer and counterparty relationships with an appropriate sensitivity for risk. Lending officers and risk managers must understand the changes in their customers' business plans that might have implications for creditworthiness. They must not be blinded by the reputations of their counterparties but rather use all the fragmented data, both proprietary and market-based, to shed light on their customers' prospects. Finally, exposure limits should be sufficiently robust to consider both capital at risk and cash out the door. Still other practices, such as diversifying risks and not assuming that only the best conditions will continue indefinitely, seem to be common sense. But even they, too, are occasionally overlooked or ignored.  Risk-based supervision requires all of us to recognize the basic nature of human beings and some of the forces that motivate us all: fear, greed, ambition, and the like. All of this, in turn, speaks to the importance of implementing the management principles we learned in college or as management trainees: the importance of segregating certain duties; limiting an individual's span of control; establishing written policies and procedures; and providing accurate and timely information to an organization's senior management and directors and to its creditors and shareholders, as well. The fact that managers can delegate authority--but not responsibility--is another.  Neither bank supervisors nor internal or external auditors can detect or deter all weak practices, particularly when core management principles are not applied. Fraudulent activities are particularly difficult to uncover because they often involve collusion and individuals with authority within the 
 4 BIS Review 15/2002 organization. It is crucial, then, that institutions maintain a culture that values integrity and creates adequate controls. That effort must begin at the top.  Bank capital standards  In an effort to provide large internationally active banks with greater incentives to measure and manage risk well, bank supervisors around the world are developing more-sophisticated and more-risk-sensitive regulatory capital standards, techniques and standards. These grew out of what best-practice banks have talked about doing and some have begun to apply. If this multi-year effort is successful (a goal the Federal Reserve Board hopes for and is trying hard to achieve), it would replace a decade-old capital standard with one that is better able to distinguish among banks based on the economic risks associated with their activities. In addition to other benefits, this should provide more information for both supervisors and market participants to use in evaluating the condition of the largest and most complex banking organizations.  The standard under development will in large part be based on the internal credit ratings that banks assign to their exposures and on other internal measures of risk. It requires institutions to evaluate a borrower's probability of default, the bank's loss given a customer's default, and the bank's likely exposure to the borrower at the time the default occurs. Relevant factors such as the collateral for, and maturity of, the credit and any undrawn loan commitments are to be considered. Leading banking organizations throughout the world are making some progress in measuring credit and other risks, and consulting firms and other private-sector businesses are providing helpful analysis, insights, and techniques. I do not want to downplay the contributions of bank risk managers to the development of these newer concepts and techniques. But the fact is that much of this gain could be attributed, I believe, to the willingness of regulators to revisit capital standards and also to the increased attention they have given to risk measurement during their on-site supervisory reviews. Even further progress will be made as industry analysts, investors, and counterparties ask informed questions about an institution's risk profile and refuse to settle for responses that such questions are inappropriate or that answers are too difficult to provide. Such replies should encourage analysts to dig deeper, as they should for bank supervisors, too. Only by probing for further answers when disclosures are unclear can we expect more meaningful and complete information.  Unfortunately, measuring credit risk is not easy, nor will applying the new techniques be cheap, especially for those institutions that need it the most--the large internationally active banks with their complex structures and operations. If it were easy, the methods would be clear and well accepted by now. If measuring credit risk with these new techniques were cheap, more banks would be applying them. It is, as I said, neither easy nor cheap. These facts are complicating the international process for developing more-risk-sensitive capital standards and reaching an agreement that addresses relevant industry concerns. They are also making the process more time-consuming.  In some areas, the regulators are finding themselves developing solutions and filling holes for which the industry itself has no widely accepted practice. Measuring risk in commercial real estate lending, bank equity investing, and even the effect of a loan's maturity on its underlying risk are some of the issues still actively under debate among supervisors and bank managers. Banking practices and the role of banks generally in the credit-intermediation process also differ among countries and continents, given the different borrowing practices of consumers, the various stages of development of capital markets throughout the world, and the very different legal codes and regulatory philosophies. In the absence of established solutions within the industry across the major industrial economies, regulators are forced to make proposals based largely on concepts and partial applications rather than on a practice common to all industrial economies.  Any regulatory capital standard must, of course, require banks to hold an amount of capital sufficient to get them through, not the worst imaginable, but nevertheless rough times. Competition within the industry and among banking systems of different countries often presses for less. Such pressures must be resisted, as supervisors throughout the world work together to develop a more accurate standard that is sufficiently rigorous and that accomplishes our common goals. We want a capital structure that is risk sensitive; until we have more experience with the new approach, however, prudence argues against a wholesale reduction in aggregate capital levels. Some institutions' capital requirements may fall as the requirements for other institutions rise, in both cases because of their portfolio risks.  
 BIS Review 15/2002 5 An important objective is to spur, not discourage, more analysis and understanding of banking risks, including those areas that have historically not been subject to much quantification, such as operational risk. Requiring banks to quantify their risk assessments should push in that direction. The need for more progress within the industry on that front seems clear. Urging better and more complete public disclosure of risk seems equally beneficial to the risk measurement, credit allocation, and investment processes. All of these efforts should proceed.  For better or worse, there will be a lag before new rules can be developed, agreed upon, and implemented through our various rulemaking processes. The industry will also need time to develop the information and risk-measurement systems that would be required. In the meantime, the regulatory and banking communities will continue to learn from developments in the practice of measuring risk, and supervisory expectations will evolve.  Much work remains in developing a new standard that is sufficiently acceptable to the Federal Reserve and to other parties. The effort presents an opportunity, however, to move industry and regulatory practices further ahead. We are eager to work with other regulators to achieve that purpose.  Conclusion In closing, I emphasize, again, the importance of teaching, learning and applying the fundamental principles of economics and sound management practices, as you are doing here at Washington and Lee. Many of our financial institutions today have become extremely large and complex, in both their operations and their management processes. Fundamental principles still apply, however, and we cannot afford to overlook them. At the same time, new technologies and concepts offer an opportunity to add to these principles a set of techniques that could well change the way banks manage risk.  Regardless of how large, sophisticated, and complex an organization may be, it remains governed by people and subject to the laws of market forces. As educators and students, you should work together to reinforce that lesson for the next generation of leaders of business and commerce. As bankers, bank supervisors, and policymakers, we should not ignore this fact as we make judgments and decisions.  
 BIS Review 14/2002 1 Kristina Persson: The Riksbank, growth and inflation Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at Företagarnas Riksorganisation, Trosa, 28 February 2002. *      *      * Firstly, I would like to thank you for the invitation to come here. It is important to meet with representatives of industry and be able to talk about the role of the Riksbank and its significance for growth.  The role of the Riksbank The objective for monetary policy is clearly stated in the Sveriges Riksbank Act - to maintain price stability. The Riksbank has further defined this in its inflation target, i.e. that CPI inflation shall amount to 2 per cent, with a tolerated deviation interval of plus/minus one percentage point. This means that when we are determining the direction for monetary policy, we must take into account changes in a number of areas that affect price trends directly or indirectly. I intend to comment on one of these in particular, namely the potential growth of the Swedish economy in a long-term perspective. The Sveriges Riksbank Act also establishes that the Riksbank shall be independent, this means that we six members of the Executive Board, who make decisions regarding the instrumental rate, may not request or receive instructions from the government or parliament. The idea is that we are thereby always free to safeguard the value of money and are not tempted, for instance, to contribute to an increase in growth and employment through lower interest rates during an election year. At the beginning of the new monetary policy regime, when the fixed exchange rate was abandoned in 1992, there was a certain amount of criticism of the inflation target; many people feared that the unconditional attachment to an inflation norm would have a negative effect on growth and employment. A monetary policy aimed at price stability could lead to a prolonged period of low growth and, in extreme cases, to declining production. It may appear as though this objective forced the Riksbank to give a lower priority to the development of the real economy, i.e. production and employment. We have only one objective for monetary policy, unlike, for instance, the US central bank that also has the task of taking into consideration the effects of interest rate decisions on growth and employment. However, in actual fact, the difference is probably not so great - indirectly the assessments of the future path of the real economy also play an important role in our decisions. Moreover, we also have the task "without neglecting the price stability objective, of supporting the objectives for general economic policy with the aim of attaining sustainable growth and a high level of employment." This is expressed in the proposal for the Sveriges Riksbank Act from 1999. However, even more importantly, there is no opposition between good growth and price stability, quite the reverse. If we look at developments during the 1990s, growth since 1992 has shown an average rate of 3 per cent a year, despite the fact that inflation was under the target level for several years. At the same time, unemployment has fallen from 9 per cent to approximately 4 per cent. This can be compared with the 1970s and 1980s, when inflation was at around 8 per cent and growth an average of 2 per cent. Price stability and the importance of achieving it are also well established among the general public in Sweden. This is important, as understanding and acceptance of monetary policy is important for inflation expectations and thereby for behaviour on the labour and goods markets. It is you - particularly those of you with your own businesses - who set the prices and who must be able to trust that it will turn out as we say; that inflation will not rise above or fall below the target of 2 per cent for a longer period. This is also the reason why we members of the Executive Board often travel around holding speeches. Communication with the Swedish public and the operators on the various markets is important for monetary policy. As monetary policy operates impact with a certain time lag, the instrumental rate is adjusted so that the total assessment of future inflation, taking into account the risk scenarios, 1 to 2 years ahead is in line with the target. Interest rate decisions are based on forecasts of future prices. There will be deviations from these forecasts, even if they are well founded, partly because the economy is hit by 
 2 BIS Review 14/2002 unforeseen shocks from time to time. If fruit-growers' crops are attacked by insects, the price of apples will rise, if the dams are not filled with water, electricity prices may rise, and if cows in Europe suffer various diseases, the price of meat and certain other foodstuffs rises. If the Riksbank tried to make corrections for this type of temporary price disturbance, it would probably lead to large swings in monetary policy and unnecessary fluctuations in demand. It would therefore be wrong to give the impression that inflation will always lie at 2 per cent. On the other hand, it is important that the Riksbank constantly adapts the instrumental rate to ensure that the inflation forecast 1-2 years ahead is in line with the inflation target. This means that households and firms can rely on temporary deviations above or below this level being just temporary. One factor that could seriously undermine the credibility of the inflation target is if a higher rate of price increase led to large-scale demands for wage compensation. If wages and prices begin to chase one another upwards, as happened in the 1980s, everyone will lose out in the end. The importance of monetary policy for growth and vice versa The importance of monetary policy for growth is primarily connected to the need for stability in trade and industry and the labour market. When you businessmen and women have to make a decision on investment, you can now usually avoid having to worry that sudden fluctuations in the inflation rate will overturn your calculations. In most cases, temporary, minor deviations from the target should not change the final results of the calculations. The stability in planning that this creates should lead to more and better quality investments, which in turn should stimulate growth. This is reflected, for instance, in the fact that total factor productivity in the Swedish economy increased strongly once macroeconomic stability was established in the 1990s. Other countries around the world have had the same experience. Macroeconomic stability promotes growth and productivity. What may be given less attention in the public debate is the importance of growth for our capacity to meet the inflation target - despite the fact that this really is a key issue. It is the demand in the economy in relation to production capacity that is the decisive factor as to whether inflationary bottlenecks arise or not. Or, if we instead under-utilise production potential and therefore need to try to increase capacity utilisation. What determines whether there is a risk of overheating is the Swedish economy's capacity utilisation in relation to its potential. I believe that one can say there is a type of inbuilt speed limit for the economy. It is difficult, as a rule, to know where this goes; moreover it changes over time. External events, the dynamics in industry and in particular economic policy can change the potential growth rate of the economy. In other words, it is possible to both raise and lower the speed limit, depending on what is happening in the economy. However, at a given point in time there is a limit that cannot be exceeded or gone below without damaging consequences. If growth exceeds the limit for a longer period, overheating and inflationary pressure will arise. If growth is too low, the opposite will apply, resulting in higher unemployment and poorer welfare than necessary. Let us compare the Swedish economy with driving a car. The Riksbank's job is made easier if the car and the road allow some speed, without accidents occurring. The work done in other political areas to promote growth in trade and industry is therefore very important in enabling the Riksbank to maintain a low interest rate. The Riksbank cannot affect potential growth; our role is to create good conditions for other private and public operators. It is their work on structural reforms, better infrastructure, education, research, entrepreneurship, innovations, etc. that improves the economy's long-term capacity to create growth and thereby welfare in the long term. The decisive factor for monetary policy is the speed limit over a longer period of time. If we have low capacity utilisation from the start, we can temporarily have higher growth, i.e. accelerate until we have achieved the economy's cruising speed. One complication is the lack of clear signs stating the speed limit - in other words; there is always uncertainty over where the capacity ceiling lies - or how high the Swedish economy's potential growth rate is. At the Riksbank we have previously estimated this to be approximately 2-2.5 per cent. Today, when we conclude that the inflation tendencies in the Swedish economy appear to have been higher than we had previously realised, one of the possible explanations is that we may have over-estimated the Swedish economy's production capacity. The Inflation Report to be published in March, which will form the basis for our decision on the interest rate 
 BIS Review 14/2002 3 at our next monetary policy meeting, will provide an overall assessment of resource utilisation and inflation. Economic progress in the 1990s In the seam between the 1980s and 1990s, we had a clear overheating of the Swedish economy, despite the fact that growth had been a modest 2 per cent a year during the 1980s. Over the past five years, the economy has grown by 3 per cent a year without the corresponding worries. Something has evidently changed for the better. My opinion is that the reason is positive changes particularly in four areas important for growth: the macroeconomy, increased competition, trade and developments in technology. I shall briefly discuss these and then, in conclusion, say a few words about the challenges I see for the Swedish economy at present. Economic policy has changed in different stages during the 1990s. Monetary policy has been aimed at maintaining price stability, which has given us lower interest rates and an increased stability and predictability, which is beneficial for the willingness to invest. Fiscal policy has also contributed through a consolidation of central government finances and the new budget system, which also gives us increased predictability. Sweden's membership of the EU's common market and deregulation also mean that several markets that were previously monopolies and screened off from competition, have now been opened up to competition. These include financial services, transport, telecommunications and energy. The pressure on companies to use their resources efficiently has thereby increased. The stiffer competitive pressure is both a result of increased internationalisation and of deregulation of various sub-sectors. The new competition act introduced in 1993 should also have contributed. However, despite the fact that it is several years since the new competition legislation was introduced, the development towards increased competition appears to be moving very slowly. One indication of this is that price levels in Sweden are higher than in many other countries, without this being completely explained by differences in VAT and wage levels. This applies, for instance, to foodstuffs and to the construction materials sector, areas characterised by a high company concentration, significant entry barriers for new companies and weak competition from imports. Some of the limitation in import competition is due to norms, standards and regulations that are specific to Sweden. The Swedish market is too small for companies from other countries to find it profitable to manufacture products especially for us. There may therefore be reason to consider how competition legislation may have greater effects in practice. Increased competition benefits the economy in two ways: by initially contributing indirectly to lower inflation and by stimulating efficiency and new ways of thinking. I believe that one of the problems with the competition legislation may be that the incentives to follow the law are too weak. It is always individuals (company managers, owners) who prepare and make decisions on limiting competition against the provisions of the law, but there is little personal responsibility in the current legislation. Merely sentencing the companies to fines risks creating a situation where it is ultimately the consumers that have to pay a second time; first the cartels' higher prices and then the cost of the cartels' fines. In the USA, it is the responsible decision-makers that are penalised when breaches of the law come to light. The Swedish Competition Authority expresses the opinion in its response to the report by the committee on combating cartels (SOU 2001:74) that the possibility of personal penal responsibility should be considered in Sweden. It makes comparisons with other economic crimes that lead to prison sentences. Increased mobility for ideas, goods, services, work and capital during the 1990s, partly through our membership of the EU, has probably also had a positive effect on growth. Internationalisation and increased competition are particularly valuable for growth in a small country like Sweden, as they involve resources that would otherwise be used inefficiently instead being moved towards more efficient use in other sectors or companies. Some years ago, there was a widespread hope in Sweden and in other countries that the "new economy" following the breakthrough of information technology would lead to a sustainable higher growth rate. It is possible that this still remains, in the USA there are calculations indicating that growth 
 4 BIS Review 14/2002 has been one percentage point higher because of IT than it would otherwise have been during the 1990s.1 The setbacks experienced by telecommunications and IT recently should probably be seen mainly as an unavoidable sobering process for a sector that was too heavily inflated by expectations. The fact that the bubble burst does not change the situation that IT developments have in many ways lastingly changed the conditions for growth, particularly through more efficient flows of information, decentralised production in networks, etc. In Sweden we have seen how total factor productivity, the part of productivity considered to reflect progress in technology and organisation, has risen more strongly than before, and much more strongly than in many other countries, during the 1990s. The high productivity figures in Sweden were partly connected to the rise in the telecommunications products industry, but a rise in total factor productivity has also been seen in other parts of Swedish trade and industry, mainly in the engineering and pharmaceuticals industries. Despite the fact that the importance of IT is now being played down, the extensive use of computers, networks and the Internet in Sweden will make a positive contribution to productivity. Efficiency gains should arise, for instance, when tax authorities, social insurance systems, municipal services, etc. move over to Internet-based self-service. The connection between IT use and internationalisation of trade and industry appears particularly strong, with increasingly advanced networks of specialised sub-contractors. It appears that the countries which had good productivity growth during 1995-2000, such as the USA, Finland, Australia and Sweden, all had trade and industry that opened up to international exchange more quickly than other OECD countries, parallel with an increase in IT use. Challenges The question is whether these improved conditions are enough to provide Sweden with stable, good growth over the next five to ten years. Can we trust that the problems of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s are definitely over? Or are there other institutional or structural changes which the economy need to undergo? Some of the growth during the 1990s was probably a temporary effect of the economy making a recovery after having been so hard pressed at the beginning of the 1990s. This effect should have faded now, and it is therefore up to the labour force, technology and renewal to do the job of raising potential growth in the long term. There are two main methods of increasing growth: firstly, that more people work or more people work more, secondly that productivity is improved. When, for instance, new technology or new organisations are introduced, production can be rationalised and productivity increases. If the content of production changes through a renewal in the direction of products and services that demand a higher value on the global market, the value of production rises. When this occurs without a corresponding increase in the number of hours worked, it leads to higher productivity. During the 1970s and 1980s and a little way into the 1990s, Sweden lost considerable ground in terms of real growth compared with other countries in the OECD region. According to an SNS paper produced last year, if Sweden had a growth rate of one whole percentage point over the average among the richest countries, it would take 17 years for us to regain our place among the ten richest countries in the world.2 If growth is going to increase through more people working, part of the large percentage of the adult population that is absent from working life for various reasons would have to work. Today approximately 800,000 full-time workers disappear from working life as a result of ill health3. At the end of 2001, it was estimated that the number of persons who had been on sick leave for longer than one year amounted to 120,000, which is almost three times the figure for 1997. The number of those on sick leave shorter than one year is also continuing to rise.4 The problems are accentuated by the fact                                                       1  According to Stephen Oliner and Daniel Sichel at the Federal Reserve in Washington, the productivity trend has increased by one percentage point during the second half of the 1990s. Half of this increase is a result of investments in IT.  2 Economics council report 2001: kluster.se. Sweden in the new geographical economy 2001. 3 800 000 full-time posts is calculated on approximately 400 000 early retirements plus total sick leave, including the qualification days and absence during the sick-pay period which when translated becomes approximately 400 000 full-time posts (Source: SOU 2002:5, An action plan for increased ill-health at work.) 4 Source: SOU 2002:5, An action plan for increased ill health at work. 
 BIS Review 14/2002 5 that the pensioner support ratio, which expresses the number of professionally active in relation to those retired due to ill-health or old age, is moving up from 2.1 in 2000 to 1.4 in 2030, according to Statistics Sweden's population forecasts.5  This means that if potential growth is to be sustained through more people working, more need to participate in working life in the higher age groups. Another method of raising potential growth would be to invest so heavily that the productivity of the labour force increased sufficiently to allow one worker to support one pensioner in the future. Capacity for renewal To summarise, much has changed recently in the Swedish economy. The external framework is currently characterised by a substantial fiscal policy and monetary policy stability, which facilitates planning and decision-making for both households and companies. These fundamental conditions, together with a marked increase in openness to the world around us, give reason to believe in a continued favourable development in productivity. At the same time, one should remember that many markets in Sweden still show clear signs of poor competition. This involves considerable costs. I believe that the Swedish economy has considerable unutilised potential for stronger development if we concentrate on this, i.e. how we shall increase the "speed limit" in the economy. It is not enough to have good macroeconomic conditions; a policy for growth is concerned more with microeconomics than macroeconomics. It is a question of creating good incentives for individuals and people to behave in a rational social manner in their roles as economic agents. What is profitable and attractive behaviour for the individual should also be profitable for the whole. This takes me into the field of politics, which is not part of the Riksbank's responsibilities. However, this is a field where I have been very involved in my previous career roles. I would therefore like to very briefly round off by saying something about what I personally believe could increase the long-term growth potential in Sweden. I believe that the stimulance for increased growth capacity in the Swedish economy can be found in three main arease, which concern, firstly, efforts to promote entrepreneurship, i.e. more people choosing to start up companies and companies growing. The entrepreneurs' share of the work force in Sweden is low. Compared with other OECD countries, Sweden was ranked no. 19 in 2000.6 Secondly, we should invest  more in knowledge and education, at all levels and for everyone. Research belongs here too, as does the link between research and new products - innovations. Education promotes both economic growth and individual welfare. The third area can be called the renewal of working life. A good, rich society must make use of the productive force that all people have. To make this possible probably requires new thinking in many areas. So, how about access to capital, this is surely decisive for growth? Certainly, but capital seeks to go where it will obtain the best return. Attractiveness, an ability to attract and retain investments, is created by entrepreneurs, research & development and competence. In an increasingly globalised market, regions and places compete with one another for investments. The most important factor in attracting investments is tied to people's capacity. The key to growth is human capacity and will. This reasoning can be applied to small places such as Trosa municipality, but also to regions and countries such as Europe or Sweden. The EU competes with the USA; recently the USA has often been superior with regard to productivity, growth and inflow of capital. An important question for Europe is whether the common market, single currency and co-operation can achieve the same degree of dynamism as in the USA. And how to pursue a European welfare policy without losing competitiveness. Excessively deep social chasms, extensive crime and social maladjustment could become an internal threat to growth.                                                       5 Source: The National Social Insurance Board analyses 2002:3 "Older people's exit from the labour force - now and in the future." 6 OECD, DSTI/IND(2002)11: "Benchmarking: Fostering firm creation and entrepreneurship". 
 6 BIS Review 14/2002 Even with good microeconomic conditions and a well-tended macropolicy, we will not be able to avoid fluctuations in economic activity; this is built into the way the economy functions. However, we can subdue the fluctuations through stability and predictability and above all, we can have a different development in welfare than we have had since the 1970s. Thank you for listening! 
 BIS Review 14/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: A review of economic developments in 2001 and the economic outlook Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Canton Forum Speaker Series, Canton, Ohio, 27 February 2002.  *      *      * I am pleased to address the Canton Forum today. As always, the views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee.  Review of 2001 A confluence of factors shaped economic developments last year, and I would first like to review these factors, to provide a backdrop for assessing our economic prospects in 2002.  A year ago, signs of the recession that eventually unfolded were just beginning to materialize. After several years of booming growth, economic indicators started sending mixed signals. Although consumer sentiment had dropped around the end of 2000, consumers were still spending at a healthy clip. Though consumption growth had decelerated somewhat over the previous year, the modest slowing was consistent with the deceleration of aggregate demand necessary to better align supply and demand.  Businesses, however, appeared to be struggling. As data for the end of 2000 became available, it became clear that businesses--amid disappointing sales and earnings--had abruptly curtailed the record-setting expansion of investment spending. Of course, some reduction of investment usually accompanies the recognition of a downshift in the economy, as firms bring their capital stocks in line with a revised outlook for sales. But the severity of the adjustment last year appeared to reflect more than the usual reaction. Businesses seemed to be reassessing the profitability of additional fixed capital in a more fundamental way. New capital, especially capital that embodies new technologies, continues to promise efficiency gains, but expectations seemed to have gotten ahead of even the more favorable reality, resulting in an unsustainable buildup of capital and run-up of equity market values. Capital expenditures on high-tech equipment were especially hard hit. Moreover, the sudden drop-off in business demand, coupled with some slowing in the consumer sector, apparently caught producers off guard. And despite rapid cuts in production, inventories were uncomfortably high relative to sales. Early last year, manufacturers took steps to address the unwanted stocks and began liquidating inventories in earnest by slashing production of all types of goods.  Against this backdrop, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the target for the federal funds rate sharply last January to contain the weakness and head off a more serious slackening. This was to be just the first installment of a series of policy easings to counter the weakness in the economy that emerged over the first half of last year.  In the business sector, a serious retrenchment in spending and production was under way. In addition to the initial causes of the pullback, the abruptness of the slowing seemed to jar business confidence, leading firms to postpone spending while they reassessed their situations. In this way, the investment downturn became self-reinforcing. At the same time, financial developments, including a stronger dollar, sharply lower equity prices, and tighter lending standards at banks and in security markets, tended to offset some of the influence of the lower federal funds rate. By midyear, investment--and high-tech investment in particular--was posting some of the largest decline in decades. The weaker job market and lower stock prices also began to weigh on consumers, though to a much lesser extent. With overall sales sagging, inventories remained excessive in many sectors.  As the weakness in the economy intensified, policymakers responded. In June, President Bush signed the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 into law. The first installment of the reduction in personal income tax rates went into effect in July. In addition, the act provided tax rebates of $300 to $600 per household that were paid directly to taxpayers.  As for monetary policy, between March and June, the FOMC voted to ease monetary policy four more times, bringing the cumulative reduction in the federal funds rate to 275 basis points in the first six months of the year--the most rapid reduction in the funds rate since the early 1980s. Despite both 
 2 BIS Review 14/2002 fiscal and monetary efforts to bolster sagging aggregate activity, by late summer only a few hard signs had surfaced that recovery was at hand.  The terrorist attacks on September 11--whose worst effects were felt by those people and their families directly touched by the tragedies--were a blow to our already weakened economy. In the weeks immediately following those events, most forecasters expected the damage to the economy to be extensive. The initial effects on the airlines and the travel industry were severe. Also, a rapid deterioration of business and consumer confidence seemed highly probable. In addition to immediate crisis-related injections of liquidity, the Federal Reserve moved to address the perceived shock to the macroeconomy by lowering the federal funds rate 50 basis points on September 17 and an additional 75 basis points by the end of the year.  Over the past few months, we have all been watching closely to see how aggregate activity would unfold in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. No doubt a great deal of pain has been inflicted on the economy. But, given the magnitude of the shock, the economy has proved more resilient than initially anticipated. Though several industries have been hit very hard, the worst-case scenarios spun in late September have not materialized. In particular, households' views of the economy have remained relatively stable, all things considered. In fact, in one of the most recent readings, consumer confidence was not much lower than it had been in August. While spending has surely been buttressed by some temporary factors such as aggressive discounting on motor vehicles and other retail goods, the effect of terrorism on consumer spending has not been as severe as most had feared in late September.  To be sure, 2001 was a rough year for the economy--one of the roughest we have faced in a long time. The weak economic outcome despite sizable reductions in the federal funds rate has led some to question the effectiveness of monetary policy. But I believe that monetary policy substantially cushioned the negative forces weighing on the economy. Residential construction has been visibly buoyed by policy easing. Housing activity remained at a high level all year, as lower mortgage rates apparently offset the restraint from declines in employment, smaller gains in income, and lower levels of wealth. Also, although delinquency rates have risen, few restrictions have emerged on the availability of credit to consumers. Indeed, low interest rates have made it attractive to refinance mortgages to reduce mortgage payments, extract some home equity buildup, and pay down more expensive forms of consumer credit. Even businesses, which have been feeling the pinch of lower corporate profits, have benefited from lower interest rates; aggregate interest expense has remained fairly low relative to cash flow, and businesses have moved aggressively to bolster their financial stability by locking in more-certain, longer-term sources of funds. Automakers in particular have been able to offer inexpensive financing to customers because their own funding costs have fallen.  In many ways, the mechanism that propagated the weakness last year was quite traditional: A negative demand shock led to unwanted inventories and to an adjustment of production. That, in turn, idled workers and fed back into even weaker demand. But even before the shock of the terrorist attacks, two aspects of last year's slowdown were atypical. First, the main source of the negative hit to demand was a large shock to capital expenditures. In the past fifty years, investment spending has nearly always begun its decline one to four quarters after the peak of the economic cycle, not before it. What started out as a very gradual cooling of an overheated economy became much more serious because of the severe shakeout that hit the high-tech sector. Second, consumer spending on goods and services--which represents about two-thirds of the gross domestic product--held up remarkably well last year. In the past, consumption spending has almost always declined as a recession started. But last year, despite a sharp drop in consumer confidence and a decline in wealth from lower equity values, households kept buying.  At this point, it is still too early to classify this recession as mild or severe. In general, economic fluctuations in the past fifteen to twenty years have been tamer than their counterparts in earlier eras. Economists have conjectured that this is so because improved technologies allow businesses to monitor their demand more closely and manage their inventories better. Recent developments ought to give us more evidence on this subject. One thing is certain: Because of the unusual, investment-led nature of this recession, we cannot put too much weight on the shape and profile of past recoveries in trying to predict this one.  
 BIS Review 14/2002 3 Current situation and near-term outlook That said, the data we have received in recent weeks have been encouraging and suggest that economic activity is in the process of turning up. Although payroll employment continued to fall in January, the pace of that decline was slower than in the fourth quarter of last year. Initial claims for unemployment insurance have moved lower over the past two months--another hopeful sign of recovery. Industrial production fell in January, but here, too, the rate of decline was well below the pace in preceding months.  As we obtain more information on spending patterns since September, the behavior of households is increasingly proving to be the key stabilizing force on economic activity. Sales of cars and light trucks--though down from the extraordinary rates of the fourth quarter--have continued at quite healthy rates. In addition, retail sales outside motor vehicles were very strong in both December and January. Housing construction, too, has been robust, bolstered in part by favorable weather and low mortgage rates.  In the business sector, the very rapid pace at which companies liquidated inventories in the fourth quarter contributed to the weakness in manufacturing output. However, the downward adjustment of stocks to more desired levels now seems well along in most industries, and this drag on production may be diminishing.  Business fixed investment has not as yet shown consistent and sustained evidence of a turnaround, although there have been some positive indicators. After a year of dealing with an overhang of capital goods, many firms are being cautious in their capital spending. With corporate profits under pressure and capacity utilization rates near past cyclical lows, many businesses report that their expansion plans remain on hold. However, capital investments that allow businesses to reduce cost might be more attractive. Spending indicators have been more positive in the past few months, particularly with respect to computer equipment. Developments in this sector will importantly influence the strength of our economy in the months ahead, and will therefore warrant careful monitoring.  As you know, Chairman Alan Greenspan presented the Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress this morning. As he indicated, the central tendency of the forecasts of the members of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Bank Presidents for real GDP growth this year was between 2-1/2 and 3 percent. I am comfortable with that range of forecasts. As I just noted, recent data indicate that household spending has been reasonably well maintained. In addition, there are some signs that capital spending may be improving, but the strength and durability of that improvement are still uncertain. Until there is a clearer perspective with regard to business investment, I believe that there is still reason for some reservations regarding the contours of the recovery.  The longer-run outlook One of the main forces that will lead to the recovery from this temporary slowdown is the confidence of businesses and households that, in the long run, the outlook for the U.S. economy is still bright. Despite our current problems, the fundamentals of this economy are strong. Our workforce is well educated and adaptable. Our banking system is healthy, and our capital markets, which are flexible and multifaceted, are well equipped to handle shocks.  Perhaps the most notable feature of our economy in recent years, however, has been the acceleration in productivity. In the second half of the 1990s, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased at an annual rate of almost 3 percent per year, well above the pace earlier in the decade. These efficiency gains allowed real GDP to rise 4 percent a year, on average, over the period. With these rapid increases in productivity, business costs were well contained, and the rate of price inflation was stable, despite a fall in the unemployment rate to below 4 percent.  Productivity growth continued over the four quarters of 2001. That it increased is impressive, given the historical tendency of productivity growth to turn negative when the economy enters recession. This performance provides additional evidence that the improvements in productivity growth that we have witnessed since the mid-1990s have been largely structural and will persist for a time.  But the fundamental factor leading me to be cautiously optimistic that much of the improvement is likely to be sustained is my outlook for the state of technological advancement in the United States. As Fed economists Dan Sichel and Steve Oliner have shown, one major source of the gains in output per hour were the high and rising levels of business investment, which increased the amount of capital per worker, thereby boosting productivity. Booming investment in the 1990s was due importantly to steep 
 4 BIS Review 14/2002 declines in prices of high-tech equipment, which largely reflected rapid technical progress. About ½ percentage point of the increase in productivity growth in the 1995-99 period can be attributed to this so-called capital deepening. Although the extraordinary pace of investment spending in those boom years was not sustainable, I believe that technological progress will continue to drive down the cost of information technology in the coming years, inducing still robust growth of the capital stock. Moreover, businesses have reaffirmed their intentions to improve productivity by substituting cost-saving high-tech capital for labor.  Though there are certainly risks to the view that improvements in productivity growth will persist, I do not believe the terrorism of last fall is going to permanently harm increases in output per hour (and thus the health of the economy). Most assuredly, in the aftermath of these attacks, many businesses have been forced to redirect resources from efficiency-enhancing investment to meet greater demands for security. Businesses may also have been compelled to increase redundancy to cope with the greater potential for supply disruption. However, these effects will be mainly a one-time hit to the level of productivity. They are not likely to change the trend growth rate of output per hour. Moreover, their effects will be ameliorated as businesses use new technologies and find creative ways to hold down the cost of enhancing security and providing for contingencies.  Conclusion Obviously, 2001 was a challenging year. But the American people once again proved to be up to the challenge, and signs of economic recovery are increasing. At the Federal Reserve, we stand ready to do what is necessary to maintain financial stability, as we did on September 11, and to maintain a monetary policy stance that will foster price stability and promote maximum sustainable growth in output.  
 BIS Review 13/2002 1 Eva Srejber: Monetary policy and inflation expectations in Sweden Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to Föreningssparbanken in Karlstad, 25 February 2002. *      *      * I should like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here. Today I intend to talk about what guides the Executive Board when we make decisions on monetary policy and what role predictability in the central bank’s actions plays for maintaining price stability. Then I shall take a brief look back at the economic situation immediately following the tragic events of 11 September and summarise the economic situation today. Finally, I should like to explain my views on monetary policy and why I entered a reservation against the decision to leave the repo rate unchanged at the last Executive Board monetary policy meeting. Monetary policy strategy I shall begin with a reminder of what guides us when we make decisions on monetary policy; i.e. how monetary policy strategy has been formulated. The Riksbank has been assigned by law the task of maintaining price stability. We also have the task of promoting a safe and efficient payment system. The banks play a central role in both of these tasks. The monetary policy objective has been defined by the Riksbank as a target for CPI inflation of 2 per cent with a tolerated deviation interval of +/- 1 percentage point. The steering interest rate is the instrument at the Riksbank’s disposal for maintaining price stability. It is also possible to use other methods, e.g. foreign exchange interventions, as we did in the summer, as a means of achieving our objective. However, the repo rate is the monetary policy instrument normally used.  Our monetary policy strategy can be described, somewhat simplified, with the rule of thumb that when inflation one to two years ahead is estimated, taking into account the risk scenario, to deviate from the inflation target, the steering interest rate is adjusted. The Riksbank’s assessment of the future inflation rate is communicated, for instance, in the Inflation Reports presented four times a year. The Riksbank has chosen to set its inflation target in a medium-term perspective. This is because monetary policy influences inflation with some time lag. An ambition to try to ensure that inflation also developed in line with the target in the short term would probably require significant changes in the steering interest rates and thereby contribute to unnecessarily large fluctuations in demand. The fact that the inflation target is expressed in terms of a medium-term perspective also plays down the importance of temporary price changes. Consumer prices are sometimes affected by various disturbances that have temporary effects on inflation. Political decisions, for instance, on tariffs and indirect taxes, can also have a temporary effect on the rate of price increase. It may also be useful here to describe briefly how monetary policy affects inflation. A change in the interest rate has effects on the rate of price increase via a number of different channels. For instance, the interest rate influences the general public’s decisions regarding investment and consumption. A higher interest rate normally means that growth in demand is slightly subdued, which is assumed to entail that the amount of free resources in the economy increases slightly in the long term. The effects on demand often come after a few quarters and thus also subdue price increases at an even later stage. A change in the interest rate also affects the exchange rate. An increase means that the return on assets in the home country’s currency is slightly higher. This also means that expectations of growth and inflation are subdued somewhat relative to developments in the rest of the world, which according to the textbook can contribute to a slightly stronger exchange rate. If the krona appreciates, it becomes slightly cheaper to import to Sweden, which can be assumed to lead to import prices on input and consumer goods increasing at a slower rate. A stronger krona also subdues global demand for Swedish export goods, which helps subdue growth in demand. On the other hand, if there is little confidence in the country’s economic policy, an increase in the interest rate risks resulting in a weaker exchange rate rather than the reverse, because confidence in growth is low. Monetary policy can also affect price developments via households’ and companies’ expectations of future inflation. In this context it is important to point out that there are a number of different measures 
 2 BIS Review 13/2002 of inflation expectations. The Inflation Reports contain different measures of how households and companies expect the rate of price increase to develop. Pricing on the financial markets can also provide some information here. A further type of inflation expectation is reflected in the various forecasters’ assessments of developments. The Riksbank bases its estimations on a total assessment of these different measures of inflation expectations. Stable and low inflation expectations affect both companies’ pricing behaviour and wage formation, as well as having a beneficial effect, as far as monetary policy is concerned, on how consumers react to price changes. Companies’ pricing behaviour is based partly on the development of marginal costs, the competitive situation, demand and inflation expectations. If a company has confidence in the Riksbank’s monetary policy, its prices will not be affected as much by temporary changes in, for instance, supply, demand or the exchange rate. In this situation, the company can assume that inflation will return to the long-term trend once the effects of the disturbance subside. A credible inflation target can thus contribute to maintaining the monetary policy target at lower cost in terms of fluctuations in demand and interest rates. One means of inspiring confidence is to show a high degree of openness and clarity with regard to how monetary policy is conducted. The fact that the Riksbank describes the considerations regarding economic prospects that form the basis for the interest rate decisions makes it easier for external analysts to understand and predict monetary policy. Moreover, the fact that the considerations are reported openly may help increase confidence in the assessments and conclusions. Consistency in monetary policy actions also increases confidence in the price stability target, which in turn should have a stabilising effect on inflation expectations. The role of predictability in monetary policy It is important the Riksbank is clear and explains the bases on which the interest rate decisions are made. As the effect of monetary policy on price developments has a time lag, the interest rate is changed on the basis of forecasts of future price developments. However, it is not always easy to interpret correctly what is happening in the economy. In recent years it has been difficult to find a clear relationship between the demand situation and inflation in Sweden. GDP growth was high from 1997 to the middle of 2000. Since then the growth in demand has been subdued. During 1997 and 1998 inflation fell, but the rate of price increase has tended to accelerate thereafter. At the same time, inflation expectations have remained at a relatively stable level. There are many explanations for this development and the Riksbank’s view has been described, for instance, in various Inflation Reports. Let me here expound some personal reflections on this issue. If the Riksbank’s monetary policy inspires confidence, inflation expectations will be established around the inflation target. This means that resource utilisation in the economy could vary slightly more, without having an immediate impact on inflation. Stable, low inflation expectations based on the assumption that the central bank shall act to control the inflation rate can mean that inflation will not become too high, even if resource utilisation increases above its potential. Conversely, if the confidence is lower, high inflation expectations can mean that prices do not fall, even if resource utilisation declines. There are also a number of studies indicating the relationship between inflation and growth is not stable, but is due to the degree of resource utilisation and to what the general public thinks of the central bank’s actions. A central bank that has a high level of credibility as safeguarder of price stability can allow demand to be higher in relation to potential growth than a central bank with the opposite reputation. The fact that both wage setting and price setting behaviour are affected by inflation expectations means that it takes some time before a reduction in resource utilisation has an impact in terms of falling prices and lower wage hikes. In the same way as it takes time to change inflation expectations and pricing behaviour downwards, it is difficult to change them upwards. As I mentioned above, this is partly because the general public expects certain behaviour from central banks, and partly because raising prices involves costs for the companies. These are both purely administrative costs and also reputation costs. Reputation costs in the sense that it is more damaging to good will to be among the first to raise prices, than to be one of many during a wave of price increases. This means that once some companies have started raising prices, many others soon follow. For this reason, if the central bank misunderstands the situation and allows a positive inflationary pressure to prevail as long as the 
 BIS Review 13/2002 3 inflation rate remains low, the general public’s image of the central bank’s behaviour will change. This in turn will affect pricing behaviour and once the increases have started, more will follow in the shadow of the first. This is why inflation often comes at a late stage during an economic upturn and it can mean that inflation remains too high during a period when economic activity is declining, despite falling demand and production. It is something of a paradox that a credible central bank can have greater difficulty seeing the signs of price pressure in time. In my opinion, there is a risk that Swedish inflation has been held down through deregulation and increased competition in such a way that we have been lulled into thinking that the inflationary tendencies in the economy are lower than they actually are. When companies’ scope to reduce their prices as a result of, for instance, deregulation and increased competition, begins to be exhausted and demand pressure is finally expressed in rising prices, there is a risk that the price increases will be both greater and introduced more rapidly than expected by us analysts. Monetary policy must be based on forecasts of inflation and resource utilisation. If monetary policy is based on an overly optimistic assessment of the interplay between growth and inflation, it can lead to monetary policy becoming overly expansive. If inflation expectations have become more slow moving, it could mean that there is time for considerable imbalances to build up before policy has an impact in the form of higher inflation. Examples of this are Japan in the 1980s, the USA in 1927-29 and again in the 1990s. The example from Japan indicates that even if inflation does not rise during the forecast period with which monetary works, it is important to take a broader outlook both throughout the entire economy and further forward in time, and to envisage the risks that could exist with regard to financial stability. In Japan the cost of borrowing was very low during a long period of time to borrow money to invest in shares and property. As the productivity of the economy increased, confidence in the future grew and this made both investors and credit institutions more willing to take risks. The result was that asset prices were pushed up. A raise in the interest rate in this type of situation, where over-optimism was rife and both inflation and interest rates were low, could have meant that investors, property buyers and credit institutions would have acted rather more cautiously than if the interest rate had remained unchanged at a low rate and thus at least subdued the price bubble somewhat. The costs to society of waiting too long to change the direction for monetary policy can be high if imbalances are allowed to grow and the fall in production can be drastic when the imbalances are corrected. It is therefore important that monetary policy should act in a preventive manner and that great vigilance is exercised with regard to the temperature of the entire economy, both the real and the financial parts. Let us return, after this outlook, to our own, calmer circumstances. Low, stable inflation expectations cannot be used in all situations as an argument in favour of retaining monetary policy unchanged. It could be possible that the expectations are based on the general public assuming that the Riksbank will act if and when required. The fact that inflation expectations remain stable could then reflect expectations of future monetary policy. If these expectations are not fulfilled, then inflation expectations, and later on the rate of price increase, will rise. The example from Japan also shows that it is not certain that inflationary pressure will be visible in CPI inflation; sometimes price pressure is first seen in other prices than consumer prices. If the Riksbank waits to adjust the repo rate until inflation expectations and inflation have already increased, there is a risk that the delay will be too great. In this type of situation larger interest rate adjustments may be required than if the Riksbank had acted at an earlier stage. This brings me to the current economic situation. However, first I would like to take a brief look back at the events that occurred in connection with the acts of terrorism in September. The Riksbank’s actions following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 After the terrorist attacks in the USA, the entire world was shocked to realise that something so dreadful could happen. The Executive Board made an assessment that the uncertainty caused by the acts of terrorism risked further subduing demand internationally, mainly through the effects on companies’ and households’ confidence in the future, which could result in a more profound and prolonged economic downturn. This was why the Riksbank lowered its interest rate, together with the central banks in the USA, the rest of Europe and several other countries. 
 4 BIS Review 13/2002 Prior to the terrorist attacks in the USA on 11 September, new statistics indicated that the global economic downturn could reach its lowest level at the end of 2001. However the picture was not clear-cut. As a result of the terrorist attacks, uncertainty increased even further regarding the time scale for a recovery. If the consumers’ confidence with regard to the future were to decline, together with rising unemployment and a weak development in the stock markets, there was a great risk that activity in the US economy would be subdued. Companies often react to uncertainty with a “wait and see” policy, which means that they postpone investments. In addition, there was uncertainty as to whether the financial system could cope with the problems arising as a result of the devastation in New York. On top of this, certain sectors in the global economy would be hit directly, for instance, insurance companies, airlines, tourism, etc. All of this risked worsening the economic downturn both in the USA and in other countries. The role of a central bank in this type of situation is to contribute to creating confidence and promoting financial stability. It is then important to act quickly and resolutely. This may be considered to contradict the claim that it is important for the Riksbank to act predictably. However, for those who have observed the central banks’ actions on other occasions when problems in the financial system have arisen and confidence in the future has declined, such as in 1987 and 1998, it should be no surprise that central banks act to support the economy with a lower interest rate and greater supply of liquidity. This is to counteract a downward spiral in the global economy as the result of a decrease in the willingness to take risks. Interest rate reductions around the world can be seen to be an insurance against a really poor outcome. It is important to remember that Sweden already had a very expansive economic policy on 11 September, with a low interest rate, weak krona and expansive fiscal policy. Given this, it is natural to withdraw the ‘insurance’ interest rate reduction when confidence and expectations have stabilised and the risks of a severe negative spiral have declined. The current economic situation So, can we say that confidence has returned or stabilised? To answer that question, I would like to describe how we see the current economic situation. The fact that willingness to take risks has increased can be seen in Standard & Poor’s credit spreads, which have returned to the same levels as prior to the terrorist attacks. In the USA, swap spreads had fallen since mid-September as no financial crisis occurred, however they have increased slightly since the start of the year, probably because of the Enron scandal. In Europe and Sweden, on the other hand, swap spreads have continued to fall to lower levels than prior to 11 September. Much of the statistics received since the beginning of December support the picture of international developments painted in the December Inflation Report. The signals that the subduing effect on demand is declining and that the level of activity is stabilising in the US economy have become clearer. Restraining factors, such as destocking and an adjustment in investments, appear to be gradually abating in strength. On the other hand, the uncertainty over developments in the labour market, lasting imbalances in savings and volatile stock market developments comprise a continued risk factor in the forecast. There are also signs that the industrial sectors in many other OECD countries are entering a phase of recovery. One particular risk factor in the developments is, in my opinion, that equity prices have been pushed up in the USA, given the economic situation. At the same time, the degree of indebtedness in the private sector remains relatively low. The low real interest rate entails risks for future developments in asset prices, particularly for the stock market. These risks need not be impending in the current situation, but the problems could become tangible in a couple of years’ time. This means that there is a risk that economic policy, which is very expansive in order to avoid a strong downward spiral, would postpone the adjustment of imbalances in the economy. Some parallels can be drawn with the events that took place after the crisis in 1987, when a financial bubble recurred. A further example of an asset bubble way back in time is what happened in the USA in 1927. At that time, the US central bank pursued an expansive monetary policy in order to stabilise the gold standard. This contributed to an over-valuation of assets and later to the crash in 1929. If the financial imbalances in the USA are not corrected slowly in the near future, there is a risk that the economic upturn will be more short-lived and the downturn more powerful when the correction is finally made. 
 BIS Review 13/2002 5 On the other hand, the continued developments in the USA will depend on whether domestic demand picks up and is maintained. If the growth in productivity has really reached a bottom level at around 1.5 per cent in an economic downturn, this could be a sign that the long-term sustainable growth rate in the USA has moved upwards and that a recovery will not merely be temporary. Looking at Sweden, it was assessed in the December Inflation Report that the GDP had shown weak growth during 2001 and that it would then rise during 2002 and 2003. The main features of the picture we pained in the Inflation Report still stand. However, according to the National Accounts for the first three quarters of last year, the development in private consumption was weaker than had been assumed. There are other statistics that indicate that the GDP may have been stronger during 2001 than shown in the National Accounts, for instance, credit growth, money supply, tax payments and developments in employment. Regardless of what is correct, we appear to have had a relatively moderate slowdown during 2001. Industrial activity has been very weak, but this has been balanced by the expansive economic policy contributing to other sectors in the Swedish economy developing well. The question is how much of the slowdown in the industrial activity will have time to spread to other parts of the economy before there is an upturn in industrial activity. For the future we see a very good development in disposable income, some recovery in household wealth and continuing low oil prices, which should provide a stronger growth in consumption both this year and next year. The situation on the labour market gives mixed signals. Open unemployment rose somewhat between December 2001 and January this year. Employment levelled off during the second half of last year, but the increase was still 80,000 persons, between 2000 and 2001. Wage rises were slightly higher than expected last year, despite weaker economic activity. However, developments on the labour market are divided in two parts. Employment in the manufacturing industry has fallen since the beginning of last year, while it is only now possible to detect a slowdown in the services sectors. Similarly, the number of redundancy notices has been highest in the manufacturing industry. In the public sector, healthcare and welfare, there have been no notices of redundancy and the number of new vacancies registered has increased. The fact that the weak growth in the manufacturing industry has not spread to the private and public services sectors is probably due to the expansive economic policy. Forward-looking economic indicators, such as confidence indicators for households and companies, imply that the downturn in activity is abating and that developments are beginning to stabilise. With regard to prices, inflation increased slightly more than expected in 2001. This can be partly explained by unexpected price increases on, for instance, fruit and vegetables; the price of these product groups will probably continue to increase slightly more than expected in the short term. Imported inflation has increased more than expected in both the producer and consumer areas, which could be due to the exchange rate’s effect on prices being slightly higher than assumed. However, price increases have also been broader and higher than expected for other goods and services. My view of the current situation So how do I assess the situation in which we find ourselves today? Firstly, I feel that confidence in the future and willingness to take risks appear to have recovered from the shock of 11 September. But what will happen to inflation? There are three reasons why inflation should fall this year. The first is that growth in demand and utilisation of resources were both lower than expected last year, which subdues price pressure for the near future. The second is that inflation expectations are disposed towards a decline in inflation, according to recent surveys. And the third is that the krona has appreciated slightly, which means a lower risk of imported inflation. On top of this, the effects of last year’s price rises on certain goods and services, including food and energy, will gradually abate. However, there is also a risk that the price rises will not abate on their own. I can see, unfortunately, a couple of reasons why inflation may remain higher than we have hoped and why the price increases might continue to spread. Firstly, only half of the increase in the inflation rate could be explained by temporary effects. Many prices have risen more than expected. This is probably due to resource utilisation in the economy being relatively high as demand was sufficiently high to enable implementation of price increases. The fact that competition is weak in certain sectors probably reinforces this, which facilitates passing on the costs to the consumers. A further sign is that the increase in employment has been good. There has been an adjustment downwards in working hours rather than in the number of jobs. The division on the labour market, with increases in employment in sectors less exposed to competition has meant that wages have risen more than expected. Thanks to expansive fiscal and monetary policy, 
 6 BIS Review 13/2002 unemployment is expected to rise only marginally. As economic activity appears to be increasing during 2002, it is difficult to imagine that the pressure on the labour market will decline significantly. Secondly, my personal opinion is that it is possible that inflation expectations, reflected as an acceptance of price rises, may have increased. I believe that the temporary price rises that have occurred have clouded our view and it has been possible to undertake more price rises under cover of these. There have been reports in the media, for instance, on importers who can no longer withstand the cost increases caused by the weak exchange rate. Mad cow disease and foot and mouth disease have made us get used to the idea of higher meat prices. Poor harvests, worm-eaten apples, etc. have meant that the resistance to higher fruit and vegetable prices is weak. The fact that certain trade union representatives are also saying in the media that they may have to break wage agreements if inflation remains high, indicates that they do not fully rely on price stability being maintained. The implicit inflation expectations, which can be seen in the pricing in the interest rate market, also show that inflation expectations two years ahead are rather high. It is, of course, worrying that inflation is higher than expected. The lowering of the repo rate by 0.5 percentage points in September was partly to contribute to reducing uncertainty and raising confidence in the future in an unusually uncertain situation. However, the future prospects are no longer as uncertain and the economic slowdown appears to be in its final stages. There is therefore no longer a need for a large insurance against a severe decline. It is important to react quickly with interest rate policy when there are downside risks, but it is equally important to react quickly to upside risks. As can be seen in the minutes of the Executive Board meeting on 7 February 2002, I entered a reservation against the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged. I would rather have seen an increase in the interest rate of 0.25 percentage points, which is not any severe tightening of policy, but should rather be seen as not stepping so hard on the gas. 
 BIS Review 13/2002 1 Jean-Pierre Roth: The challenges of an international financial centre: the Swiss case Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, to the British-Swiss Chamber of Commerce, London, 26 February 2002. *      *      * It gives me great pleasure to have the opportunity to address your distinguished assembly today. Like all the Swiss I know, I always enjoy coming to London. Even though there are considerable differences between our two countries, we have many things in common. We are both proud of our history and of our colourful traditions, we cherish our freedom and our independence. What’s more, in both our countries, the financial industry has been a pillar of our economic strength in recent times. But these days, the most striking parallelism between the United Kingdom and Switzerland can be seen in monetary affairs. Both countries are “outs”: they do not belong to the Euro-zone. In Britain, the currency is still the pound sterling and, in Switzerland, we still have a preference for our franc. We thus both face the same challenge: living next to a large currency area which absorbs most of our foreign trade. This situation is new for both of us. It is of course not up to the Swiss central bank governor to speculate how long this situation will last in the United Kingdom. But as far as I can tell, there is a good chance that Switzerland will remain an island in the middle of the Euro-ocean for years to come! Experience shows, however, that the monetary regime itself is not a central issue for the existence and the development of a financial centre. Neither in the UK, nor in Switzerland is European monetary integration considered to be a necessary or a sufficient condition for a successful financial centre. In today’s global and very competitive markets, success relies more than ever on fundamental strengths and skills. Switzerland as a financial centre Since the early 1990s, international financial markets, along with the entire banking sector, have been undergoing profound changes. The driving force behind this world-wide trend is threefold: first, the advances made in the processing and the transmission of information; second, the trend towards the liberalisation of financial markets; and, third, the growing and increasingly diversified demand for financial services. These developments have led to a widening of horizons, to a proliferation of financial products, and to increasing international competition. Switzerland - thanks to its long tradition of openness to the world - was well prepared to face the challenges of global markets. But globalisation and world-wide competition did not leave our financial centre untouched. Consolidation has significantly altered the structure of the Swiss banking industry. During the 90s, domestic mergers and acquisitions have reduced the number of banks by about 40 percent. Nevertheless, despite a clear tendency towards financial market concentration, Switzerland remains a country with a wide network of small banks. Beside the two big banks, Credit Suisse Group and UBS AG, Switzerland counts over 100 regional and savings banks, 24 cantonal banks, 17 private banks and over 140 subsidiaries and branches of foreign banks. Our banking sector is extremely dense with a strong presence in all parts of the country. The insurance sector is the second traditional leg of our financial centre. Our insurance companies have strongly expanded abroad. Here also, open markets and intense competition have led to consolidation and large units. More than 10 years of global de-regulation have left deep and lasting marks not only on the structure of the financial sector, but also on the range of its activities. Reacting to the changing market environment and stiffer international competition, many banks have placed more emphasis on their international business and shifted their activity from balance-sheet to off-balance-sheet transactions. This is true in Switzerland as well. Investment banking and asset management have gained in importance, whereas less lucrative areas, such as domestically-oriented retail banking, have lost part of their attractiveness. In our case, the expansion of the investment banking activities has taken the form of a number of acquisitions in foreign countries, tightening the ties between Switzerland and other financial centres. 
 2 BIS Review 13/2002 The expansion of asset management has been much more domestically generated. Asset management is an area in which Switzerland has been traditionally strong. According to unofficial statistics, Swiss banks are entrusted with about one third of the totality of the world’s assets managed by banks in other countries than those where their clients are domiciled (so-called offshore wealth management), which places them well ahead of their competitors. Indeed, asset management and private banking are the strongest segments of Swiss banking, not only in terms of market shares, but also measured by revenues. For many observers, the success of our banks in asset management and private banking can only be explained by the existence of Switzerland’s banking secrecy. I think they misunderstand the meaning of this feature. In any case, it would be short-sighted to believe that a financial centre could insure its long-term development on a single factor. A successful strategy requires strong fundamentals: a competent and dedicated workforce, reliable services and products, and efficient infrastructures. I have no doubt that you share this view with me. Necessary characteristics of a successful financial centre How can we explain the long-lasting development of the finance industry in Switzerland? It is not the result of some public strategy or industrial policy. Instead it is the combined outcome of a number of factors which all point in the same direction. a) An open-minded economy Firstly, Switzerland, as a traditionally very open economy, was well placed to benefit from trade liberalisation and financial deregulation. We are used to see our economic performance being constantly challenged and directly dependent on our ability to adjust to a changing world environment. What has been true for Nestlé, Novartis or Swatch - to name just a few - is also valid for the banks: in today’s competitive marketplace, only the fittest will survive, some of them even becoming global players in the process. b) Professional skills Secondly, our finance industry has access to a pool of well-educated, highly-skilled, multilingual, and service-oriented workers who are very familiar with international financial markets. Private banking has a long tradition in Switzerland, and financial advisory services to foreign clients have been a part of the Swiss banking business for generations, literally. c) Efficient financial infrastructure Thirdly, besides the availability of a highly professional staff, there is the outstanding efficiency of Switzerland’s financial infrastructure. I am referring here to the so-called “Swiss value chain” which comprises a full set of settlement and payment systems, with their individual parts harmonised in an optimum way. The entire facility consists of a trading platform, a payment-against-delivery system, and a central payment system. A fourth component, a central counterparty, is currently being developed. It might be due to their long tradition of watchmaking that the Swiss have developed a skill to build and interconnect sophisticated settlements systems. In 1987, the Swiss National Bank launched the Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC), the first RTGS system and precursor of many payment systems around the globe. Shortly after, the Swiss Exchange moved from a traditional “à la criée” procedure to an electronic platform including the automatic transfer of securities. With virt-x, here in London, it has now gone one ambitious step further, creating the first international fully integrated electronic exchange. d) Stable domestic environment Fourthly, Switzerland, with a stable political environment, also offers the legal protection that, together with trust, is so crucial in the banking business. Furthermore, the healthy social climate and peaceful labour relations also contribute to a successful banking system. Among the elements which contribute to a favourable environment - and indeed very high on the list - I obviously also include financial stability and the strength of our currency. Switzerland enjoys traditionally a very strong current account position. Contrary to a popular belief, it is not a net capital 
 BIS Review 13/2002 3 importer, but a massive exporter of funds. With an excess of savings over investment, we transfer capital to the rest of the world. Our external surplus gives to our banks an important role in channelling funds and it strengthens their international position. For the long-term oriented investor, moreover, knowing that the Swiss franc will keep its purchasing power and maintain its external value is, of course, of great importance, and it reflects positively onto the entire Swiss financial industry. In situations of crises, security-conscious investors too, even those with shorter time horizons, demonstrate through their actions that the Swiss franc has special merits. The fact that the Swiss franc is a safe haven currency certainly does not make the work of the Swiss National Bank any easier. We nevertheless view the continued existence of our own independent currency, which can be freely traded on world markets, as an important asset for Switzerland in general, and for its financial sector in particular. e) Efficient supervision To be sure, no financial centre can survive without credible guarantees as to its soundness and robustness. As we know, financial institutions are different from other firms. Due to the complex ties that exist between them, and given that the very institution of money is built on trust, fragile elements can destabilise the entire industry. They can have devastating effects on the other players, including on fundamentally healthy institutions. A prerequisite for a successful financial centre is therefore a strong banking supervisory authority. f) Integrity All the ingredients mentioned so far are important building blocks of a flourishing financial centre. One should not forget, however, that the most significant factor for a successful banking system is the assurance that the public, and the bank customers in particular, be honestly and fairly treated. In short, without trust there can be no lasting successful financial centre. This is more than wishful thinking on the part of a central banker. It is obvious that it is in the self-interest of any financial centre, of its lawmakers, its supervisory authorities and of its private agents and their associations to set and implement rules and codes of conduct that match the highest standards. With market globalisation and the free flow of capital, there is a real risk that a financial centre will become involved in illegal transactions against its will. I consider reputational risk as the major challenge facing financial centres at the beginning of this century. In Switzerland this has long become conventional wisdom. Know your customer rules have effectively been implemented and constantly adapted to the evolving requirements of the market realities for many years. Swiss anti money laundering rules and regulations are widely recognised as expressions of the state of the art. I shall come back to this thorny topic in a moment. Challenges ahead What are the challenges ahead? a) Market globalisation As I mentioned at the outset, the banking sector has gone through a period of heavy restructuring during the past decade or so. Banking no longer amounts to simply accepting savings and granting loans. Business has become increasingly complex and is dominated by a dwindling number of ever-larger financial conglomerates. The trend toward concentration and the tendency toward onshore international banking can be observed in your country as in mine. The internationalisation of the banking business has led the large banks to establish major business units outside their home country. Our banks create now more jobs outside the country than in Switzerland. Obviously, global business is the first challenge to be faced by the financial centres as well as by the authorities. A close co-operation between supervisors is essential. The trend toward financial conglomeration poses an additional challenge for the banking industry: the tendency towards “all-finance”. More and more providers not only offer banking services, but all types of other financial services as well, notably insurance products. A single supplier offers specific advantages to the customer while providers in turn expect synergies, customer loyalty, and lower 
 4 BIS Review 13/2002 costs. It is not yet clear whether this strategy will be a commercial success, and the question is heavily debated among specialists. What is clear, however, is that financial conglomerates are a challenge for the supervisors as well. Today, banks and insurance companies are often governed by different laws and supervised by different authorities. The absence of consolidated supervision makes it more difficult to assess the combined risk of conglomerates. With the creation of the Financial Services Authority (FSA), the United Kingdom has taken the lead in this respect. The creation of an integrated financial supervisory authority is now also being envisaged in Switzerland and in other major financial centres. A single authority could supervise all banks, securities dealers, investment funds, insurance companies, financial conglomerates and portfolio managers. This integrated supervisory authority would also play a key role in the fight against money laundering. b) Fight against money laundering and financial crime I come naturally to the issue which is of major importance for all financial centres today: the fight against money laundering and criminal money. Any financial system - and the Swiss system is no exception - can be misused in order to transfer or recycle money issued from, or linked to illegal activities, including terrorism, drug trafficking, illicit trades in weapons, modern slavery, and corruption, just to name a few. To be sure, a money laundering risk already existed in the past. As a result of globalisation, however, and of the growing significance of organised crime, the risk has increased considerably in recent years, not just in my country, but in every major financial centre. For this reason, a dense network of legal regulations, controls and self-regulatory mechanisms is necessary in order to make a financial centre as unattractive as possible for criminal funds. Switzerland has been one of the first countries to introduce strict anti-money laundering laws. They cover the activities not only of banks, but also of any other financial intermediary such as insurance companies, funds managers, lawyers and even fiduciaries. Our experience so far has shown that an efficient fight against financial crime requires two specific rules: first, the application of strict due diligence procedures that includes careful identification of the customers, i.e. of the beneficial owners of the assets involved; second, the obligation, imposed to the market intermediaries to inform the authorities in case of any founded suspicion of money laundering. I am fully convinced that an effective fight against money laundering can only be successful if an active co-operation between financial institutions and authorities is promoted. In our view, the responsibility of the banker should prevail over an automatic reporting of transactions exceeding a certain amount. Tracking down criminal money is even more difficult than identifying money laundering operations. The financing of criminal activities does not require large amounts and the ex ante identity of a criminal is not a source of pertinent information. Furthermore, funds used in the financing of terrorism, unlike cases of money laundering, very often are legally acquired. It is therefore crucial that financial intermediaries in both the banking and the non-banking sectors thoroughly verify their client relationships in order to identify suspicious circumstances. In this connection, strict observation of the “know-your-customer” principle is again of key importance. Switzerland does not hesitate to offer international co-operation in judicial matters and to block incriminated assets. Following the decision of the United Nations to apply sanctions against the Taliban regime in 1999 and 2000, we blocked a certain number of Afghan bank accounts and froze the assets belonging to persons listed by the Sanction Committee of the United Nations. To date, 76 accounts are frozen with a total of 42 million Swiss francs. In the United Kingdom and in Switzerland, the authorities and the banks themselves are fully aware of the utmost importance of successfully warding off criminal funds. We all realise that money laundering is not only morally unacceptable, but that it also clearly undermines the public’s confidence in our financial centre. Unfortunately identifying money laundering and criminal money, is not an easy task, for criminal elements are not short of imagination, and continuously invent new schemes to deceive our banks and our authorities. Although Switzerland is at the forefront in the fight against money laundering, the Swiss financial centre has also suffered from a number of mishaps, especially involving politically exposed figures. The same experience has been made elsewhere: the London City as well as other 
 BIS Review 13/2002 5 centres have been misused similarly or even to a greater extent by undesirable clients. These cases stress the need for relentless vigilance. c) Political integration and fiscal harmonisation Let me come now to another issue of great importance to us: the movement toward tax harmonisation in Europe. You can easily imagine that Switzerland, as an island within the EU, has close economic ties with the single market. About 80% of our imports come from the EU, which absorbs more than 60% of our exports. After the United States, Switzerland is the EU’s second largest trading partner and our firms are among the most important investors in the EU (for instance, we are the second largest in the UK). As a non-EU member, we seek co-operation on the basis of bilateral agreements. A first round of agreements will be implemented this spring. A second round of negotiations will begin shortly. It covers one issue which is of major importance for our financial centre: the taxation of savings income. Switzerland is directly affected by the EU’s intention to introduce a system of automatic exchange of information between banks and tax authorities in order to enhance tax revenues on savings income within the European Union. One can of course fear that such a plan might trigger capital transfers to non-EU financial centres for purely fiscal reasons. Our position is known: we do not want the Swiss financial centre to become a privileged haven for funds seeking to avoid EU regulations. We are thus ready to consider a reform of our withholding tax regime along the line of the EU directive. We even consider the possibility of handing over to the EU part of the tax on interest earnings of EU residents. We have already 50 years of positive experiences with a withholding tax: it is a convenient and efficient way to collect resources without income declaration. We have never considered introducing any system of automatic exchange of fiscal information for our own citizens, and we are not ready to consider such a scheme for foreign depositors. We feel that our current system secures an appropriate balance between protection of the private sphere and safeguarding the interest of the State. There are many misunderstandings between Switzerland and the UK about this fiscal issue. Let me recall a few points: – First, it is wrong to say that foreigners can invest their funds tax-free in Swiss banks. We have a 35% withholding tax imposed on all interest and dividend payments made in favour of residents and non-residents. – Second, to avoid any loophole basically due to an international failure to apply the debtor principle in withholding taxation, we are ready to reshape our system in line with the EU directive, i.e. to apply the payment agents principle in withholding taxation whenever a client of a Swiss bank is fiscally domiciled in the EU. – Third, and this must not be forgotten, Switzerland grants full judicial co-operation to fight tax fraud. Thus, our position is fair. With these measures - which are fiscally equivalent to the exchange of information - Switzerland cannot be accused to be a fiscal paradise attracting foreign money like an offshore centre. With capital being extremely mobile internationally, it is evident that co-ordinated taxation policy makes sense only if it covers all the main financial centres. The EU regulation will not have to be only implemented in the member countries, but also in their many dependent and associated territories. Furthermore, it is crucial for Europe that similar measures are taken on a world-wide basis. Without a fully watertight solution, offshore centres around the globe will expand their business at the expense of Europe and this with an increasing lack of transparency and with higher global risks. One last point about fiscal harmonisation. I live in a country that counts nearly three thousand different tax regimes. In Switzerland, every town, every canton and, of course, the federal government, all have the authority to levy taxes and to set the rates. It is part of the functioning of our internal democracy and of our decentralised political system. We firmly believe in the benefits of tax competition, which manages to keep tax rates relatively low. We regret that at the international level, any mention of “tax competition” is almost always preceded by the term “harmful”. This clearly reveals preconceptions and a biased judgement. 
 6 BIS Review 13/2002 d) Financial privacy With tax harmonisation, banking secrecy is once more at the centre of the discussion. Allow me to add a few words on this subject. Earlier on, I did not mention banking secrecy - or perhaps should we call it financial privacy - as one of the necessary features of a successful financial centre, because I believe that, per se, it is not. What is important, though, as I emphasised earlier, is trust and professionalism. Banking secrecy is the prohibition for bankers and their staff to divulge any privileged information regarding their clients or third parties. The beneficiary of banking secrecy is the client, not the bank. Financial privacy is part of the Swiss legal structure. In my country, like here, individual freedom and protection of the private sphere are highly valued and deeply respected. In Switzerland, privacy rules are not limited to the banking sector, but they apply with equal vigour to professions such as doctors, lawyers, solicitors and the clergy. The respect of one’s private sphere has a long tradition. Like yours, our country is based on a high value attributed to the individual and on democracy. Our state is a bottom up - rather than a top down - construction. We trust our citizens - who are often called to vote on important matters, including on those relating to taxes. We trust them when they keep their army rifle, with a full round of ammunition, at home. We trust citizens when they file their tax forms, and we trust them when they undertake financial transactions. Sure, there are occasional abuses, and these are prosecuted with determination to the full extent of the law. We do not believe, however, that these cases can be used to justify switching over to a system where big brother breathes down our neck. Swiss people would not comprehend - and indeed they would not support - any initiative aimed at throwing out financial privacy principles simply because some dishonest people have taken advantage of them, any more than they would accept giving up medical secrecy because of a few cases of health insurance fraud. Nor could the Swiss understand - or accept - that the foreign clients of our banks be treated any differently, i.e. without the same amount of due trust and respect. But - and this is important - banking secrecy is not absolute. It is simply not true that Swiss banks maintain secret numbered accounts whose holders are not known to anyone. Swiss banks do hold so-called numbered accounts, but a restricted circle of persons within the bank must - by law - know the name of the person(s), i.e. the beneficial owner(s) behind every account. In this regard, the “know your customer rule” is once again essential. Banking secrecy is routinely lifted in the case of criminal investigations and the Swiss judicial authorities have earned high marks for the extent of their co-operation in international criminal affairs, including those involving politically exposed persons. These facts do not mean that our country is especially attractive for criminal money. They rather show that bank secrecy rules are not an obstacle to an efficient and determined action against criminal activities. Let us be frank: the fact that some financial centres only rarely or even never register cases of suspicious transactions is certainly not a proof of integrity but rather of a lack of it. Conclusion Today, we find many financial centres around the globe. They all benefit from easier communication and high capital mobility. Some have a long history of banking activities, others have recently expanded, often by giving foreign investors special legal or fiscal treatment. With its customers from all over the world, Switzerland is as much an offshore centre as London or any other significant financial centre. We do not provide special advantages to foreign investors. Our financial centre has been built on a wide range of comparative advantages: a financially sound country, a stable political and monetary framework, a long tradition of banking and an internationally oriented economy. All these points are also valid for the United Kingdom. There is a major difference in terms of specialization, however: the City is “the” market place for investment banking and a number of other financial activities in Europe, whereas Switzerland plays a dominant role in asset management. Despite different realities and market positions, Switzerland and the United Kingdom share many common values vis-à-vis their financial centre: – both countries believe that financial activity requires professionalism, high standards and efficient supervision; 
 BIS Review 13/2002 7 – both countries consider money laundering and the financing of criminal activity as major threats for the long term development of their financial system and act decisively against them; – both countries favour market competition in general and have a liberal attitude toward tax competition in particular; – both countries are reluctant to accept over-regulation and see in the mushrooming of offshore centres a source of risk for the global financial system. I come therefore to the conclusion that there are more converging interests than rivalries between our financial centres. Some diverging views are due to misunderstandings. With its traditions and its experience in asset management, Switzerland attaches great value to financial privacy. But, as I showed you, the protection of financial privacy is not an obstacle to an efficient fight against money laundering or the financing of terrorism, nor does it hamper fair tax competition with our neighbours if a withholding tax is implemented along the line of the EU directive. Both the disclosure of certain informations relating to bank clients and the protection of privacy in the financial sphere arise from fundamental ethical convictions that are worth protecting. I am confident that with a frank dialogue and mutual effort to understand each other’s position, the common values of the Swiss and British financial centres will again come to the forefront. In particular, it is our predominant joint interest to see the very demanding standards that we have set for our own financial industry become the world-wide accepted rules. The long history of our financial centres and the large experience of our banking industry should give us a natural leadership role in this respect. 
   1Edward M Gramlich: Consumption and the wealth effect: The United States and the United Kingdom Speech by Mr Edward M. Gramlich, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the International Bond Congress, London, U.K., 20 February 2002. *      *      * Besides sharing a common history, language, and legal structure, the United States and the United Kingdom have something else in common. In the past few years, both countries have experienced a significant wealth effect--so significant that understanding the wealth effect has become an important aspect of conducting monetary policy. In the United States, the average ratio of household wealth to disposable income was about 4.5 from 1970 to 1995. Over the next five years, fueled by a modest boom in real estate values and a huge boom in equity values, the wealth-income ratio shot up to more than 6, the highest recorded value in the fifty years for which wealth data are available. Since 2000, equity prices have moderated, but the wealth-income ratio is still above 5. Perhaps because of that, consumption remained strong throughout the downturn of 2001. The experience has been remarkably similar in the United Kingdom. Here the wealth-income ratio has averaged about 4.75 for the past thirty years, and a moderate boom in housing prices and a huge boom in equity values in the late 1990s took the ratio to 6.5 by mid-2000. Again, the wealth-income ratio has fallen off since that time, but consumption spending was strong throughout 2000-01. With numbers like this, it makes sense to probe into the wealth effect more deeply. I begin by summarizing the empirical evidence on the wealth effect, in both the United States and the United Kingdom, and then I move on to some theoretical quandaries. Getting into theoretical quandaries sounds like a bad idea for a wrap-up speech, but I will try to persuade you that these quandaries are indeed puzzling--and also fundamental. Empirical Evidence on Household Wealth and Spending  At the aggregate level, the effect of wealth on consumption has been a mainstay of large-scale econometric models for at least thirty years. The econometric model of the U.S. economy used by the Federal Reserve has included a wealth effect for all this time, one that suggests that an additional dollar of household wealth leads, over time, to a permanent rise in household consumption of about three to five cents.  A basic question is whether households' net worth summarizes all the information about their balance sheets that is useful in predicting their spending. Does a decomposition of net worth into various asset and liability categories improve forecasts of household spending? For a variety of reasons, this question has proved difficult to answer: Some researchers have found that separating liabilities from assets helps to explain variations in consumption over time; others have not. The current version of the Fed's model uses two categories of wealth: equity wealth and all other wealth, with the latter encompassing housing wealth and also the value of noncorporate businesses and other net financial assets. The estimated marginal propensities to consume out of these two wealth aggregates are virtually indistinguishable. But that has not always been the case. As the model has evolved, the estimated marginal propensity to consume out of non-stock-market wealth has varied substantially relative to the marginal propensity to consume out of stock market wealth. The Bank of England's model for consumption expenditures also incorporates significant effects of household wealth. According to the Bank's model, a 10 percent increase in real net financial wealth boosts consumer spending 0.7 percent in the long run, and a similar rise in real gross housing wealth boosts spending 0.5 percent in the long run. Converting these to pence and pounds at present levels, the effective net worth coefficient on consumption is about 1.5 pence per pound of net worth increase for housing and about 2 pence per pound for financial wealth. 
  Unfortunately, relatively little is known about the household behavior underlying the time-series relationships in the aggregate data. Until recently, economists have been able to marshal little formal evidence that the observed relationship between aggregate spending and aggregate wealth could be traced to changes in spending by those households that actually experienced wealth gains. But that gap in our understanding is now being filled, at least for equity wealth in the United States. Several recent papers--including some by economists at the Federal Reserve Board--have documented a microeconomic relationship corresponding to the relationship that we have long observed in aggregate data.  For example, one study that analyzed the response of individual households to changes in stock market wealth found that, over 1983-99, the spending of U.S. households that owned stocks responded to movements in the stock market, whereas the spending of non-holders of stocks had no apparent link to stock prices.1 A second study estimated that, in the second half of the 1990s, U.S. households in the top income quintile and households that had attained some college education showed larger consumption increases than other households, and also disproportionate increases in consumption compared to disposable income. This is consistent with the fact that these households owned most of the stocks and experienced the largest gains in wealth.2 But as yet, microeconomic evidence on the link between housing wealth and consumption is much more limited.  The predicted effect of wealth on consumption has been put to the test in the United States during the past half-decade, and it has passed that test easily. Between early 1995 and early 2000, the Wilshire 5000 stock-price index (a broad measure of equity prices in the United States) tripled, and nearly $12 trillion was added to the wealth of the U.S. households. Over that same period, saving dropped from 6-1/2 percent of disposable income to roughly 1 percent. The magnitude of this decline is consistent with the run-up in equity prices and the marginal propensity to consume out of equity wealth built into the Fed's model. Since the peak in equity values, the Wilshire 5000 has dropped about one-third, corresponding to a loss in wealth of roughly $6 trillion. The personal saving rate has not yet turned up substantially, but I would not read much into that fact: Previous stock-market gains probably were still supporting spending through the end of 2000, and the low saving rate could be rationalized by the recession and a surge in motor vehicle sales spurred by generous financing offers.  The U.S. experience in the past few years has not provided an equivalent test of the effect of housing wealth on consumption, because movements in house prices have been more limited than the striking swings in equity prices. Between early 1995 and late last year, the value of residential real estate in the United States increased about 65 percent--a substantial rise. But the gain in house prices was fairly steady, making isolating its effect on household spending difficult. In the first quarter of 1995, housing wealth was equal to roughly 1.4 times after-tax income, and by the third quarter of 2001 that ratio increased to about 1.6 without ever moving outside that fairly narrow range. In contrast, the ratio of equity wealth to after-tax income soared from 1.1 in early 1995 to 2.6 in early 2000 before subsiding to 1.5 in the third quarter of last year.  Developments in the United Kingdom over this same period are consistent with the U.S. experience. British households' equity wealth increased more than ¢G880 billion (thousand million) between 1995 and 2000--a gain in excess of 50 percent--while their housing wealth rose by more than ¢G650 billion. At the same time, household saving fell from 10 percent of income in 1995 to around 4 percent in early 2000. As in the United States, equity prices in the United Kingdom have fallen sharply since 2000. The FTSE 350 index now stands almost 25 percent below its peak in September 2000, and the techMARK 100 index has fallen around 75 percent since its peak. The saving rate appears not to have increased much over this period, in part because house prices have continued to rise at double-digit annual rates and in part because of lagged effects of past wealth increases. These explanations, if correct, could be similar to those for the United States.                                                       1  Karen E. Dynan and Dean M. Maki, "Does Stock Market Wealth Matter for Consumption?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2001-23 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2001). 2  Dean M. Maki and Michael G. Palumbo, "Disentangling the Wealth Effect: A Cohort Analysis of Household Saving in the 1990s," Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2001-21 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 2001). 
   3To be sure, not every analysis of the link between household wealth and spending comes to the same conclusions as in the studies I mentioned. On balance, however, the link between aggregate household wealth and spending has remained one of the sturdier empirical relationships in macroeconomics. The Link between Stock-Market Wealth and Consumption Given the sturdiness of the empirical relationship, it may be bad form to question its theoretical basis; but let me do so anyway. First, on the equity side, the value of equities can change for two reasons: because market participants adopt a new view of future profits or because market participants apply a different set of discount factors to those expected profits, where the discount factors incorporate both risk-free interest rates and equity premiums. Barry Bosworth, Robert Hall, and others have pointed out that, from a theoretical standpoint, stock-price movements should have different effects on household spending depending on whether they derive from changes in expected profits or from changes in discount rates. Suppose, for example, that stock prices increase because of a rise in expected profits, say from a spurt in productivity. An individual household that owns stocks will have higher wealth and will want to consume more, just as predicted by the wealth effect. For the economy as a whole, the story is more complicated because the additional aggregate demand is likely to push up interest rates and limit the rise in stock prices. Both the productivity spurt itself and the induced rise in interest rates will then affect desired investment, international capital flows, and the trade balance. Suppose, instead, that stock prices increase because households are applying a lower discount rate to future profits. Whether an individual household will want to consume more is unclear in this case. Intuitively, households are simply discounting the same stream of profits at a different rate; so it is not obvious that they are truly better off and should increase their consumption. At a more technical level, the increase in wealth might--taken alone--encourage greater consumption, but household spending will also be influenced by the familiar income and substitution effects induced by the change in the discount rate. This second case is far more complicated than the first when one considers the evolution of the economy as a whole. The discount rate for profits--the sum of the risk-free interest rate and the equity premium--depends on other features of the economy. Hence, if the discount rate has changed, some other aspect of the economy must have changed as well--and that change may have effects on consumption separate from the effect of the change in stock prices. Among the myriad of possibilities in this area, I will mention just two. One is that households and investors may have reassessed the riskiness of future profits. Another is that taxes may have been altered, and the move to a different fiscal policy would have changed the risk-free interest rate. Implementing these complicated theoretical relationships in an empirical model is challenging. Because the interaction of stock-market wealth and consumption depends on many other features of the economy, we would need to model not only the household sector but all the rest of the economy as well. In addition, households' expectations of future income, profits, and rates of return play critical roles in this analysis, and modeling those expectations is especially difficult. To summarize the results for equities, there are three main lessons:  At least in theory, changes in stock prices can have very different effects on consumption depending on their origin.  Changes in expected profits and changes in discount rates generally do not occur independently of each other for the economy as a whole although, of course, they may do so for individual firms. Thus, thinking about profits and discount rates as separate influences on stock prices may be misleading when one considers economywide changes.  Capturing the true complexity of the relationship between stock-market wealth and consumption is extremely difficult with existing data and empirical techniques. As in many areas of empirical economics, we currently must be satisfied by models that capture broad patterns in the data.  The Link between Housing Wealth and Consumption The task gets no easier when we turn to the relationship between housing wealth and consumption. Because houses are assets similar to corporate capital, much of the previous discussion of stock market wealth applies to housing wealth as well. Thus, changes in house prices that occur for different 
  reasons may also have different effects on consumption. Nonetheless, it makes sense to think about housing specifically. Suppose that house prices increase relative to the prices of other goods and services because individuals become more patient and reduce the discount rate for future housing services. Those who intend to live in their houses forever would have higher wealth, but they would have no additional resources for increasing their consumption of real housing services or other goods and services. Yet, as I noted earlier, most studies based on aggregate time-series data find that changes in housing wealth do affect real consumption. So what is missing from this simple story? One factor is that houses sometimes appreciate because the expected housing services from those houses rise. For example, population growth or immigration may push up the value of land close to major cities. We can interpret this increase in housing wealth as reflecting the greater housing services offered by proximity to more populous urban areas. In this scenario, homeowners would truly be better off, and those who live in their houses forever would consume additional real housing services. However, these households would still have no resources to increase their consumption of other goods, unless they could sell their houses or borrow against their housing equity. This simple example becomes more complicated when we consider that most homeowners do not intend to live in their current houses forever. Instead, many homeowners expect to move to smaller houses, condominiums, or retirement communities as they get older. These so-called "downsizers" are clearly better off when house prices increase relative to other prices, and we can expect them to increase their consumption of nonhousing goods and services. At the same time, however, many individuals who do not currently own homes plan to purchase homes, or many who own small homes plan to trade up to larger homes in the future. These so-called upsizers may respond to an increase in house prices by reducing their consumption of other goods and services. To evaluate the effect of housing wealth on aggregate consumption, one must then determine the relative magnitude of these opposing responses. Economic theory suggests that downsizers may generally have higher marginal propensities to consume out of housing and other forms of wealth than upsizers, which would give consumption a positive impetus from house-price increases. For example, downsizers tend to be older than upsizers, so they will distribute any change in lifetime consumption across fewer years. Moreover, upsizers may be liquidity constrained. If they would like to consume more but cannot because unsecured borrowing is difficult, then at least modest increases in house prices should not reduce their consumption. At the same time, upsizers who are saving for a downpayment may have a relatively short planning horizon. In the end, determining the relative consumption responses of housing upsizers and downsizers becomes an empirical question. A third factor linking housing wealth and consumption is the effect of realized capital gains, accrued either by selling one's house or by borrowing through a home equity loan. As Chairman Greenspan has noted, accumulated home equity is not itself a liquid asset. In addition, its value is somewhat uncertain, although general trends in real estate prices can be easily observed. Selling a house, or getting one's house appraised and taking out a home equity loan, converts this illiquid home equity of uncertain value into liquid funds with known value. This conversion could also induce added consumption, especially if consumers are liquidity constrained. Conclusion There is little empirical doubt that stock-market wealth and housing wealth influence consumption and the macroeconomy. Nevertheless, our understanding of the empirical relationships and of the theoretical underpinnings of those relationships remains incomplete. Substantial progress has been made, but we should hope that future research will help to untangle the remaining puzzles. This research agenda is important for the advancement of economic understanding and the conduct of monetary policy. As you know, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have long-run goals of price stability and sustainable growth. To achieve these goals, these central banks take an active interest in all the factors that affect economic performance, including business and consumer confidence, economic growth abroad, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, fiscal policy, and so on. The experience of the past few years--in the United States and the United Kingdom--has emphasized that the effect of wealth on consumption has an important place on that list.  
 BIS Review 21/2002 1 Tan Sri Dato' Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Economic and monetary developments in Malaysia for 2001 Statement by Tan Sri Dato' Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the BNM 2001 Annual Report Press Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 20 March 2002. *      *      * In the tradition of Bank Negara Malaysia, I have the pleasure to officially release the Bank Negara Malaysia Annual Report for the year 2001. The report releases the Bank's Annual Accounts for the year 2001, and provides an analysis of the economic and monetary developments in 2001, and gives the forecast for the Malaysian economy for year 2002.  The country's economic performance in 2001 was significantly influenced by the unprecedented external developments during the year that had widespread implications on the global economy. Being a highly open economy, Malaysia was affected by the weak external economic environment. The impact was compounded by the effects of September 11. Malaysia's strong economic fundamentals and the promotion of domestic sources of growth have however, reduced the impact of the external developments on the domestic economy. The strengthened macroeconomic fundamentals have also increased policy flexibility to implement pro-growth policies without creating imbalances in the domestic economy. With adequate domestic resources, stability in domestic financial markets and prompt pre-emptive actions, Malaysia has been able to weather this global economic slowdown to record a positive growth for the year at 0.4% and to contain unemployment at below 4%. This growth was sustained with a strengthened balance of payments position.  Macroeconomic policies during the year were focused on supporting domestic activities as the main driver of economic growth. Private consumption remained resilient despite the lower export earnings. National savings remained high at about 35% of GNP. Public sector investment increased by 15.5%, while consumption expenditure increased by 11.9%, mitigating the impact of the contraction in domestic private investment. The more diversified economic structure of the Malaysian economy also moderated the impact of the decline in external demand faced by the export-oriented industries. The weaker growth in the export-oriented manufacturing sector which contracted by -10.2% was mitigated by positive growth in all other sectors. Stronger growth in the domestic-oriented industries, which increased by 7.4% compensated for the shortfall from declining external demand. The agriculture and the mining sectors, which expanded by 2.5% and 0.2% respectively, accounted for 15.5% of GDP. Domestic-oriented industries in the manufacturing sector now accounts for more than one-quarter of total output. Domestic content in the services sector is now higher, at about 80%. The construction sector, which has high local content and multiplier effects, also performed better during the year. The pro-growth policies to stimulate domestic activities benefited in particular the services sector which sustained a growth of 4.9% in 2001. The expansion was broad-based, with strong increases recorded for intermediate services, particularly finance and insurance as well as communication sub-sectors. Strong expansion was also recorded in the final services group, particularly government services and utilities sub-sectors.  While the overall growth had moderated during the year, the overall balance of payments turned around to a surplus position of RM3.7 billion in 2001. While the current account surplus narrowed in 2001, the surplus remained large at RM27.4 billion or equivalent to 8.9% of GNP. This reflected a moderate decline in the trade account and an improvement in the income and services accounts.  As at end-2001, BNM's international reserves was higher at US$30.8 billion. Subsequently, reserves have increased further to US$32.6 billion as at 14 March 2002, sufficient to cover 5.5 months of retained imports and cover 5.3 times the short-term external debt. While the external debt increased during the year, the outstanding amount has remained low at 55.4% of GNP. The debt profile also remained sound with short-term debt accounting for only 13.7% of total debt.  In 2001, Malaysia's macroeconomic fundamentals continued to strengthen. Inflation moderated to 1.4%; international reserves continued its increasing trend, driven by sustained inflows of trade surplus and long-term capital flows; the overall fiscal position of the Federal Government improved; domestic savings remained high and the financial system strengthened significantly. These stronger fundamentals have increased the economy's resilience in the face of a more difficult external environment. The pegged exchange rate regime continued to be well supported by the fundamentals and facilitate international trade and investments during the year. The stability in the exchange rate 
 2 BIS Review 21/2002 also allowed for the effective implementation of pro-growth policies and the accelerated pace of banking and corporate restructuring.  The Malaysian banking sector strengthened further and remained resilient to perform its intermediation function efficiently and effectively throughout 2001. The capital position of the banking system improved with the risk-weighted capital ratio increasing to 12.5% as at end-January 2002. Although non-performing loans had increased in 2002, it has remained at manageable levels. The net NPL ratio of the banking system stood at 8.4% as at end-January 2002, cushioned with a loan loss provision of 58.7% on the NPL amount or 146.5% if collateral are taken into consideration. The banking system continued to record profits in 2001 amounting to RM7.5 billion, which will further strengthen the capital position of the banking sector. In terms of potential risk to the banking sector, total outstanding loans in arrears have stabilised and continued to remain at manageable levels. Significant progress has been achieved in the financial restructuring undertaken by Danaharta and Danamodal. Progress in corporate debt and non-debt operational restructuring under the arrangement of the CDRC progressed at a more rapid pace in 2001 with the implementation of the new framework introduced in August. As part of debt restructuring, a number of large corporations have undertaken rigorous restructuring exercises in terms of management and ownership structure, and the disposal of non-core businesses and assets. The satisfactory progress of corporate debt restructuring under the new CDRC framework is expected to have a positive impact on the NPLs in the banking sector. The successful resolution of the larger CDRC cases has contributed towards reducing the NPL in the banking system. With the completion of the debt restructuring process under CDRC envisaged by July 2002, the asset quality of banking institutions can be expected to improve by approximately 3 percentage points.  The consolidation programme for the domestic banking institutions represents a major structural enhancement of the banking system. The successful completion of the consolidation and integration of the banking groups in 2001 has benefited the industry and the banking public. The merged banking groups are now more well capitalised to meet future calls for capital expenditure as well as undertake a wider scope of business activities. The operational business integration process and rationalisation exercise have been an important part of the merger to reduce duplication of resources and to attain higher levels of economies of scale and efficiency in the banking institutions.  The year 2001 marked a significant period for the Islamic banking industry. In terms of performance, the industry registered encouraging growth during the year. Total assets of the Islamic banking increased by 25.2%, amounting to RM58.9 billion as at end-2001 representing 8.2% of the overall banking system. In terms of profitability, significant growth was recorded with an increase in pre-tax profits by 69.9% to RM905.9 million during the year. Among the measures implemented in 2001 to further develop and strengthen the regulatory framework of the Islamic banking industry were the adoption of Risk Weighted Capital Ratio (RWCR) framework; the implementation of Rate of Return (ROR) framework; and the implementation of training and awareness programmes. In the area of research and training in Islamic banking and finance, an industry-owned institute named Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) was established. IBFIM will become a one-stop centre for the purposes of education, training and research.  On the international front, significant progress was achieved on two initiatives, namely, the International Islamic Finance Market (IIFM) and the international standard-setting body. BNM participated actively in both initiatives. The standard-setting body, to be located in Malaysia, will focus on developing international best practices and prudential standards governing the supervision and regulation of Islamic financial institutions. These encouraging developments will contribute further to the overall development of the global Islamic financial system.  The insurance industry maintained a positive growth trend in premium income for the third consecutive year since the Asian crisis. Premium income grew by 12.4% in 2001 while the capitalisation of insurers strengthened further to RM4.9 billion as at the end of 2001. The increase in the minimum capital requirement to RM100 million, with effect from 30 September 2001, has been instrumental in advancing the consolidation of the industry. Since 1999, a total of eight mergers and acquisitions were completed. Seven other M&As involving 13 insurers are currently at various stages of implementation.  In 2001, macroeconomic policy was focused on managing the downside risks arising from the slowdown in the major economies. Macroeconomic policies were targeted at creating a positive and enabling environment for domestic demand to support growth. The strengthened economic fundamentals provided Malaysia the policy flexibility to implement pro-growth policies without creating imbalances in the economy.  
 BIS Review 21/2002 3 Fiscal policy was expansionary to stimulate domestic economic activity. As the external environment became more adverse, the Government implemented a series of fiscal stimulus programmes in March, and again in September 2001. The fiscal deficit has, however, been kept at manageable levels to ensure long-term fiscal sustainability. Revenue performance was strong in 2001 resulting in a lower fiscal deficit at 5.5% of GDP, compared with earlier estimates of 6.5% of GDP.  While the 3-month Intervention Rate was maintained at 5.5% for the first nine months of the year, the low interest rates ensured that monetary conditions were conducive to reinforce other counter-cyclical measures to promote domestic activity. Following the events of September 11 and the heightened risks towards further weakness in the domestic economy, BNM reduced the Intervention Rate by 50 basis points to 5% on 20 September. Low and stable interest rates, ample liquidity and the low inflation rate contributed towards providing a positive domestic environment. In the low interest rate environment during the year, bank lending and financing via the bond market increased. Total financing through loans extended by the banking system and PDS issued by the private sector increased by RM33.5 billion or 6% in 2001. At the same time, financing to the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) was sustained.  The significant progress that was achieved in financial sector reform and restructuring in 2001 has enabled BNM to shift its focus from managing banking sector problems to the medium and longer-term issues of developing a more competitive and resilient banking sector. The Financial Sector Masterplan that was launched in March 2001 aims to provide the blueprint for the development of (cid:31)financial sector over the next ten years. To date, 9 out of the 119 recommendations under the FSMP have been fully implemented. In addition, 22 recommendations are being implemented on an on-going basis.  Outlook and Prospects for the Malaysian Economy in 2002  As we enter the year 2002, indications are that world trade is expected to recover to about 2.5% in 2002. Growth in the major industrial countries as a group is expected to stabilise at 1.1%, reflecting a stronger growth of 1.4% in the US economy.  Malaysia is well positioned to benefit from the emerging recovery in the global economy. Real GDP growth in the Malaysian economy is projected to recover to 3.5% in 2002. The projection is based on stronger growth in private consumption, a modest recovery in private investment, sustained public sector expenditure and moderate growth in exports.  Current domestic indicators suggest that the Malaysian economy is in the early stages of recovery. The index of leading indicators has shown positive growth for six consecutive months. Both the decline in exports and manufacturing production have also begun to moderate. While inflation is expected to edge up slightly, it is forecast to remain below the 2% level. On the domestic front, resilient domestic demand and the recovery in external demand is expected to result in a more broad-based and diversified growth. All sectors of the economy are forecast to show positive growth in 2002. More encouraging is that private investment is expected to recover in 2002 to register a positive growth of 1.2%. Specifically, capital investment in the manufacturing sector is expected to increase following a more strengthened global recovery in the second half of 2002. Foreign direct investment (FDI) is expected to show stronger growth in the year.  In 2002, the current account surplus is forecast to remain large at 7.9% of GNP. The financial account is expected to be supported by sustained inflows of long-term capital, including higher inflows of FDI. In view of the improved global economic conditions, FDI inflows are expected to be higher due to the projected inflows of equity from strategic alliances as well as inflows for expansion and new investment, in the manufacturing, services and oil and gas sectors.  In recent years, FDI has become more broad-based with higher investment in the services sector. In addition, foreign investments are not only through equity, but also at the management level, especially in sectors such as information and communication technology, telecommunications, ports and financial services sectors. Factors supporting higher inflows in 2002 include the further liberalisation of domestic regulations especially in the services and construction sectors; open and liberal trade regime; low cost of doing business; overall macroeconomic stability; high quality physical infrastructure; and efficient financial system. The Government emphasis on customizing incentives to meet the specific needs of industries and investors has also provided added stimulus.  
 4 BIS Review 21/2002 Economic, Monetary and Financial Management in 2002  The immediate policy concern in 2002 is to ensure that recovery of the Malaysian economy gathers momentum and that any downside risks are minimised. Given Malaysia's strengthened fundamentals, Malaysia is well positioned to tap the emerging global recovery.  Macroeconomic measures have provided a positive environment that contributes to improving the enabling environment for businesses. Malaysia macroeconomic policies are essentially already in place. The focus of policy is therefore on supply side measures to enhance Malaysia's competitive advantage. Emphasis is therefore on policies to accelerate further structural adjustments.  Supply side measures aim to address the issues of enhancing efficiency and productivity to reduce the cost of business operations in Malaysia. Improving efficiency requires strengthening institutional infrastructure as well as more specific measures that contribute to increasing efficiency of public services, lowering cost of inputs to be in line with international prices, raising education and skill levels and enhancing use of information technology to widen technical capacities. These measures would essentially reduce operational costs and improve the nation's competitiveness.  In this more uncertain environment a stable exchange rate is a major competitive advantage. For an open trade-dependent economy, stability in the exchange rates accords significant advantage in enhancing trade and investment opportunities. By eliminating wide swings in the exchange rates, the pegged exchange rate regime has provided a stable environment for businesses to plan their investments and to undertake their operations. At the same time, stability of the exchange rate also provides an environment that facilitates continuous structural reform to improve Malaysia's competitive position. It is through long-term structural adjustments rather than frequent adjustments in the exchange rate that a country can build a strong business foundation, improve efficiency and create the enabling environment that encourage competition and innovation.  As a small open economy, Malaysia does not have influence over the external factors that affect the economy. However, by working on strengthening domestic economic fundamentals, Malaysia will be in a stronger position to manage and mitigate the impact of the volatility in the external sector. Three elements are important in ensuring that an exchange rate regime continues to operate effectively. First, it needs to be well supported by the domestic fundamentals. Second, there must be flexibility in domestic markets to enable the economy to adjust and absorb the impact from external volatility. Third, increased competitiveness is achieved through efficiency and productivity gains rather than relying on currency depreciation.  In respect to the conditions prevailing in Malaysia, Malaysia's strong economic fundamentals, with low rate of inflation, strong external balance, low level of foreign debt, strong reserves levels and strengthened banking sector have provided strong support for the pegged exchange rate regime. Malaysia also has sufficient flexibility to undertake adjustments on all sectors of the economy to remain competitive. The diversified economic structure, the enhanced mobility of capital and labour has also provided Malaysia with increased resilience to weather external shocks. Malaysia also had the flexibility of policy to respond to the circumstances. In all cases, when an exchange rate regime has failed, it was not due to the regime itself, but due to the weaknesses in the economy and the financial system.  Having undergone significant transformation and emerging with a much strengthened set of fundamentals, the Malaysian and regional economies are better able to absorb the volatility in the exchange rates. Countries are also more cognizant of the costs of currency depreciation, particularly on confidence.  As an example, comparing the response of regional currencies during the two episodes of yen depreciation, one in the early part of 2001 and the other towards the end of 2001 and early 2002, it is clear that the response of regional exchange rates was significantly more muted during the most recent episode. The experience has shown that periods during which many of the countries in the region had experienced significant declines in their exchange rates, it was difficult to find clear evidence of a relationship between the degree of depreciation of the exchange rate and the growth in exports. The exchange rate has not been a dominant influence in determining export performance. More important, it is the overall competitiveness of the economy that will ensure sustained export performance. Current conditions favour monetary policy in 2002 to remain accommodative, reinforcing the continuing counter-cyclical policies. Monetary policy will build on the gains from the cumulative monetary easing initiated since 1998, to ensure that the economic recovery process becomes well entrenched. Emphasis will be placed on creating an environment of stability and predictability to 
 BIS Review 21/2002 5 facilitate investment decisions. With low inflation and stronger economic fundamentals, Malaysia has the ability to exercise greater policy flexibility to preserve longer-term sustainability and stability.  In strengthening the resilience and competitive position of banking institutions, BNM will continue to further strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework. The objective is to provide a conducive environment for banking institutions to be more efficient through innovation and competition amongst players in the financial market. The challenge is to manage the trade-offs between encouraging innovation in the financial system and preserving overall financial stability. Towards this end, a total of 14 recommendations under the FSMP, involving 36 projects, are targeted to be fully implemented in 2002. These projects relate to building the capacity and enhancing the efficiency of financial institutions as well as the development of consumer education and protection.  Policy measures for the insurance industry in 2002 will continue to focus on promoting incentives for improved performance, encouraging the adoption of best practices and strengthening consumer protection. Towards this end, 10 recommendations under the FSMP involving 13 projects are targeted to be fully implemented in 2002. The recommendations include the introduction of independent financial advisers (IFAs) and the adoption of 'best advice' practices in the sale of life insurance products that will enable Malaysian consumers to obtain professional independent advice on their financial options. Given the right strategic focus, there is tremendous potential for future growth in the life insurance sector, particularly in products and services that provide for retirement needs, capital accumulation and long-term care. Given the right strategic focus, there is tremendous potential for future growth in the life insurance sector, particularly in products and services that provide for retirement needs, capital accumulation and long-term care.  To achieve sustainable growth, there is a need for insurers to intensify research and development efforts to provide consumers with a broader range of innovative and competitively-priced products. Furthermore, there is a need to establish and continuously strengthen minimum underwriting standards and controls, particularly in new lines of business. This is to ensure that business is underwritten on sound and prudent insurance principles. Finally, insurers need to adopt prudent pricing policies and investment strategies that are properly matched with insurers' long-term financial commitments as illustrated to policyholders. Malaysia remains committed to strengthening the domestic corporate and financial infrastructure. The corporate sector is expected to continue to restructure to enhance competitiveness, to be in a stronger and better position to support economic growth. At the same time, while a number of large corporations have undertaken rigorous restructuring exercises, focus will also be channelled on SME development in 2002. The SMEs are important in providing the linkages between the various subsectors within the economy and represent a potential source of dynamism and driving force. SMEs also represent indigenous enterprises with potential to grow and evolve into larger and listed companies, with the potential to become regional or global players. For the SMEs, the focus of its development will be placed in creating an enabling business environment that is not confined only to providing access to financing to the SMEs, but also to efforts towards enhancing their technological capabilities, provide training and access to advisory services, as well as channels to market their products and services. The formulation of a comprehensive framework for the development of SMEs will be based on a survey of SMEs conducted by BNM through the banking system.  As part of the effort to strengthen the economy's institutional structure further, a new legislation, the Development Financial Institutions Act 2002 (DFI Act), has been enacted and came into force in February 2002. The new Act empowers BNM to enforce the various provisions of the Act and to date 6 DFIs have been placed under the purview of the Act. DFIs, as a component of the financial sector will continue to play an important role in the socio-economic development of the country, in particular, in providing financing facilities to certain targeted sectors of the economy. Strategies are, therefore, formulated to promote the development of efficient and effective DFIs. The ultimate objective for the DFIs is to achieve their mandated functions at minimum cost to the Government. Moving forward, the focus will be on strengthening the overall financial and structural capacity as well as improving the operational efficiency of the DFIs.  Bank Negara Malaysia's financial position in 2001, has been examined and certified by the Auditor General. Total assets of BNM rose to RM149.7 billion as at end 2001 (RM148.9 billion at end-2000). The major increase in assets is attributed to an increase in international reserves. BNM's international reserves increased to RM117.2 billion (US$30.8 billion) as at end-2001. BNM registered a net profit of RM0.7 billion in 2001 for the financial year ended 31 December 2001. BNM declared a dividend of RM0.5 billion to the Government for the year 2001.  
 BIS Review 21/2002 1 Y V Reddy: Evolving role of gold – recent trends and future direction Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a conference organised by World Gold Council, New Delhi, 21 March 2002. Dr Reddy is thankful to Mr P R Ravi Mohan, Dr A Prasad and Mr S Durganand Swamy for their assistance. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, Mr. Tarapore, Distinguished visitors and friends, I am thankful to the World Gold Council (WGC) for inviting me to participate in this meeting on the future direction of the gold market. This is the third conference of WGC, with which I am being associated and I do notice that all of these are held in New Delhi. It shows that though Mumbai is the financial capital and a major centre for gold market in India, the directions of gold policy have been and will continue to be rightly decided by Government of India (GOI) from New Delhi in close consultation with Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Though my association with such conferences can be traced to the WGC conference in 1996, my association with gold policy in India and management of gold reserves with RBI goes back to 1991. In some capacity or other, I happened to participate in almost all the legislative, policy and procedural changes relating to gold policy from the Ministry of Finance and from the RBI for over a decade. In the recent years, I have had the benefit of excellent advice from the Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals in RBI which has participation from Ministries of Finance and Commerce of GOI.  I find in this gathering, outstanding experience on world gold markets, and hence my initial narration of recent global developments would be brief with focus on the official sector. However, I will recall in detail, recent developments in regard to gold markets and gold policy in India in the second part. The third part will capture some aspects viz., consideration of risk and return on investments in gold in India; results of recent research on gold markets and consideration of some proposals relating to gold. The fourth part will review India’s experience with gold policy and help set some parameters for medium-term gold policy. The concluding part will briefly explore future directions of gold policy and markets in India. Recent global developments: focus on official sector According to the available data in public domain, the events during the last decade in the international bullion market were dominated by the official sector mainly by central banks, especially through sales and leasing, with consequential impact on gold prices. On the supply side, mine production during the first 5 years was almost flat, while in the latter half of the decade, it gradually went up. Official sector sales recorded substantial increases and amounted to about 450 to 500 tonnes in the year 2000. Addition to supply from hedging ranged from a low of 100 to a high of 500 tonnes each year. Mining, official sector sales and leasing together have provided reasonable liquidity to the market. As regards demand, data indicates that up to 1995, annual demand on account of jewellery fabrication was of the order of 2,600 tonnes which zoomed by about 30 per cent in 1997, and in the last 3 years, it averaged 3,150 tonnes. The most important factor on both the supply and demand sides was that mine production and demand for jewellery fabrication remained flat during 1988-2000 on an average at 2,550 and 3,250 tonnes, respectively. Yet, there has been abundant liquidity.  Flat demand and declining prices in addition to institutional developments, may have had much to do with the changed attitude of central bankers, particularly in Europe. The official sector sales, which amounted to 130 tonnes in 1994, progressively went up and recorded 470 tonnes in 2,000. More importantly, the official sector leasing, which was just below 1,000 tonnes in 1991 went up to about 4,800 tonnes, adding to liquidity in more than ample measure with some impact on the prices. Low inflation and soft interest rates in the recent years have brought about a greater sensitivity among central banks regarding returns on their portfolios.  The steady decline in gold prices in recent years against the background of low inflation raised doubts in some quarters, on the importance of gold as a safe haven investment and hedge against inflation. Some central banks have resorted to off loading substantial quantities of gold, which they held as reserves. Another significant development of the 1990s was the spurt in central bank lending of the precious metal. Central banks are lending their idle stocks with a view to enhancing returns on 
 2 BIS Review 21/2002 reserves, which is bringing in good liquidity to the market to bridge the gap between supply and demand. A notable development in this regard is the signing of the Washington Agreement by some central banks in September 1999, which has placed an effective cap on such operations of central banks.  As a result of the clear trend that emerged in recent years of increased amount of central banks’ sales as well as lending, the official sector’s holdings as a percentage of total above-ground stocks fell from about 30 per cent in 1996 to 23 per cent in 2000. The central banks across the world were holding about 33,000 tonnes as at the end of 2000 as compared to about 36,000 tonnes at the beginning of 1991, which reflects substantial sale by many European central banks. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) holds 357.75 tonnes of gold forming about 6 per cent of the current value of its total forex exchange reserves. Our reserves management as regards gold can be termed as passive and conservative as RBI does not sell gold or trade in gold. Recent developments in India WGC has estimated that the annual Indian demand for the precious metal in recent years has been in excess of 800 tonnes. Most of it appears to be meant for jewellery fabrication, and the rest, estimated at 10 to 15 percent, is possibly meant to meet demand on account of investment and industrial processes. A major step in the development of gold markets in India was the authorization in July 1997 by the RBI to commercial banks to import gold for sale or loan to jewellers and exporters. Initially, 7 banks were selected for this purpose on the basis of certain specified criteria like minimum capital adequacy, profitability, risk management expertise, previous experience in this area, etc. The number of banks later went upto 18. On a review, since five banks had not evinced adequate interest in this business in terms of activity, the RBI did not find it appropriate to renew their licences for this purpose. At present, 13 banks are active in the import of gold. The quantum of gold imported through these banks has been in the range of 500 tonnes per year.  Import of gold by banks authorised by the RBI has succeeded to a large extent in curbing illegal operations in gold and in foreign exchange markets. It has also resulted in reducing the disparity between international and domestic prices of gold from 57 per cent during 1986 to 1991 to 8.5 per cent in 2001.  The import duty on gold, which was Rs.220 per ten grams upto January 1999, was increased to Rs.400 per ten grams, and with effect from April 2001 has been reduced to Rs.250 per ten grams. The estimates of duty realised from gold imports indicate an annual amount varying from about Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 2,000 crore per annum since 1997.  Even though the country consumes more than 800 tonnes of the metal every year, the system of assaying and hallmarking has not gained the desired importance. The low quality of gold jewellery being sold in the country and the resultant losses being incurred by the consumers are being recognized now. Recent surveys conducted by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) jointly with Central Consumer Protection Council in 5 major cities reveal that more than 80 per cent of the jewellery being sold in the market was of lower purity than claimed and charged for. In some cases, the gold articles sold were 38.6 per cent short in purity in monetary terms. The low purity results in a loss of around 16 per cent to gold jewellery. In the recent past, RBI has been actively pursuing the issue of upgrading the quality of trade and products through a system of assaying and hallmarking with Government of India and BIS. The major objectives of introducing a proper assaying and hallmarking system in the country are enabling consumer protection, developing export competitiveness of the gold jewellery industry, introducing gold based financial products, which will help in mopping up the vast dormant gold resources with the domestic sector and developing India into a leading gold market centre in the world. Ministry of Commerce had held meetings with the trade representatives in 1997. Based on the views emerging out of these consultations, BIS formulated a scheme of hall marking in 1998, as a Voluntary Certification Scheme, with a combination of quality certification and BIS Laboratory recognition schemes. The BIS-recognised laboratories would affix/stamp/hall mark jewellery manufactured by BIS certified jewellers and BIS in turn would maintain the required surveillance.  As a culmination of further efforts by all concerned, BIS launched the scheme of hallmarking in April 2000 under the BIS Act, 1986. Under the Scheme, 12 firms of jewellers have been certified as 
 BIS Review 21/2002 3 assaying and hallmarking centres so far. Consumer awareness campaign highlighting the advantages of going in for hallmarking jewellery is being conducted by BIS. The Government of India announced the Gold Deposit Scheme in 1999 and RBI issued guidelines to the banks intending to launch the scheme in October 1999. Five banks have launched their schemes under the guidelines and the quantum of gold mobilised so far has been about 7 tonnes. Unfortunately, the scheme has not evoked the expected response. A number of reasons can be cited for the low response, prominent among them being depositors’ losing the making charges spent on jewellery (as the banks would convert them into primary form before accepting as deposits), the low caratage of jewellery, low rate of return on deposit (as seen by the depositors) and the absence of any amnesty.  Some aspects of gold market in India Risk and Return on Gold Investments The return from investments in gold may be compared with the return on investment in Government bonds in the Indian markets. Illustratively, if gold had been purchased at end-February 1996 and sold at end-February 2002 at the prevailing rates in the local bullion market, the average annualised return would work out to be negative. On the contrary, investment in a liquid risk-free Government security on the same date would have fetched a comfortable positive return, and in case capital gains through marked to market is also taken into account, the annualised average return could be as high as 15 per cent.  Recent Research in Gold Markets A DRG study (Gold Mobilisation Instrument as an External Adjustment) prepared in the RBI in 1992, tested five factors for their influence on demand for gold: they are, generation of large market surplus in rural areas as a result of all round increase in agricultural production, unaccounted income/wealth generated mainly in the service sector, comparative rate of return available on alternative financial assets like bank deposits, units of UTI, small saving schemes etc., price variation in gold and price of other commodities. The study led to the conclusion that the first two factors i.e. rural surplus and unaccounted income in the service sector have far more influence on gold demand than the other factors. In another analysis made by Shri Vaidyanathan in 1999, (Economic and Political Weekly, February 20, 1999) the factors determining the demand for gold were studied. The parameters taken into account were GDP, ratio of household financial savings to national product, domestic price of gold, GDP deflator, index of ordinary share prices and the difference between domestic and foreign price of gold as percentage of international prices. The study established that gold imports tend to be higher when domestic gold prices rise relative to those of ordinary shares and international gold prices; but, the effect of these two variables was pronounced during 1991-96 as compared to 1970-90.  Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri (Financial Express, November 26, 2001) made an analysis of the possible choices for a saver between interest bearing financial instruments and gold. He advocates that in Indian conditions, a return of less than 6 per cent for a saving instrument would induce the saver to invest in gold. Mr. N.A. Mazumdar, in many of his articles, has been holding the view that a capital starved country like India cannot afford to utilize foreign exchange on a commodity like gold. He holds the opinion that the consequences of the gold liberalization policy could be alarming, especially in view of the fact that such imports of gold are unrelated to India’s exports of jewellery. Some Proposals Relating to Gold A proposal was made for setting up a Gold Index Fund by mobilising gold through collection centres in major cities, swapping the gold for US dollars and investing the US dollar funds in corporate debt and high yielding off-shore investments. The average return envisaged was 20 per cent for the depositors. RBI’s view was that the off-shore high yielding investments as contemplated would be too risky for the institution mobilising gold and there is a risk that it may not be able to service the gold deposited by 
 4 BIS Review 21/2002 the customers without a loss to itself. It was also felt that a financial institution without adequate branch network may not succeed in mobilisation of adequate quantities of gold. Proposal from certain banks for launching Gold Accumulation Plan Certificate was considered by the Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals. However, it has not been pursued further in view of the poor response to Gold Deposit Scheme.  Another proposal related to issue of gold bonds with a 5-year tenure and liquidity provided by an international investment company. This scheme was designed to enable higher yield pick-up on the country’s gold reserves. The proposal was not pursued since it may not be appropriate to lock up gold for a long tenor of 5 years, and such bonds were being issued for the first time by the institution. Yet another proposal for substituting the gold imports by borrowing gold on lease on long-term basis was also posed and it was decided that the proposal is not practical as huge quantities of gold will not be available for lease on a long term basis, apart from the fact that such lease will only amount to borrowing in gold with attendant foreign currency risk as well as gold price risk. Proposals for location swap of the gold stock in RBI’s reserves with bullion banks and institutional swap (swapping our gold with gold imported by authorized banks) have also been made as means of enhancing the quality of gold to internationally acceptable standards, but these are not pursued in view of passive approach to the policy. Gold Policy: Review of Experience  Our experience with various policy measures may be reviewed in terms of gold control, prohibition of gold imports, gold sales, gold mobilisation and liberalised gold policy. The evolution of the gold control policy since independence was centered around some major objectives, viz., weaning away people from gold, regulating the supply of gold, reducing the domestic demand and prices and curbing smuggling. In the wake of the Chinese war, it was felt in some circles that it would be feasible to make a frontal attack on demand for gold in India. Accordingly, the Gold Control Order 1962 was issued, banning the making and selling of jewellery above 14 carats, making it compulsory for gold smiths to be licensed and submit accounts of all gold received and utilised by them etc., The measures met with lot of resistance and criticism. This coupled with administrative complexities resulted in the failure of the Gold Control order.  Bullion imports and exports were also banned but restrictions on import of gold into the country resulted in the flourishing of smuggling and unofficial transactions in foreign exchange. Official imports to discourage smuggling was first mooted in 1977 but viewed against the forex reserves available then, it was thought as an impossible proposition. The Government decided to sell confiscated gold in small quantities through the RBI. However, it did not have any major impact on smuggling.  Various schemes for mobilisation of idle gold holdings have been implemented by the Government and RBI in the past, but with little success. The 15-year Gold Bonds at 6 1/2 per cent (November 1962) could mobilise only 16.70 tonnes. A second attempt to garner gold was made through the 7 per cent Gold Bond 1980 Scheme (March 1965) which could mobilise only 6.1 tonnes. The third series designated as National Defence Gold Bonds 1980 (1965) garnered 13.7 tonnes and the Gold Bond Scheme 1993 garnered 41 tonnes of gold. Even after two years of launching the scheme under the recent Gold Deposit Scheme (1997) the mobilization is around seven tonnes only. Thus, attempts to mobilise gold under various schemes have not evoked the desired response.  Currently, gold import is permitted through three official channels viz., special import licences, non-resident Indians and authorized banks and institutions. Import of gold through Special Import Licence (SIL) has been negligible after gold import through banks was permitted. It is but natural that NRI route had become less attractive after the banks have been permitted to import gold. The liberalized gold policy has certainly brought to the official sector what originally was an unofficial sector. Without doubt, it has eliminated illegal transactions and profiteers out of such illegal transactions with attendant socio-economic impact of such large scale and high value market involving cross-border operations. At the level of managing external sector and forex markets, the elimination of large unofficial market in forex has improved the policy effectiveness. It may also be noted that the Indian consumer of gold has been spared of huge transaction costs amounting to thousands of crores of rupees on account of the existence of the unofficial sector in the past. Further, duty realization is significant at a time when realization through customs duty on other commodities is coming down. 
 BIS Review 21/2002 5 However, there are some who argue that ban on gold imports should be re-imposed, while a few others argue that the duty be hiked on the assumption that such measures would curb the total import bill on account of gold. Past experience does not seem to favour this negative view. In this regard, there is another view which holds that both gold import and export should be totally freed, but this argument ignores the fact that gold has some characteristics of a currency.  Parameters for Medium-term Policy  In the light of the experience gained in the global trends in the gold market, and more particularly the recent trends in gold policy and gold markets in India, it is possible to suggest five broad parameters that could govern the medium-term policy in regard to gold. A positive approach to gold appears to be demonstrably less disruptive and more consistent with socio-economic conditions in the country than a negative approach to gold, as amply demonstrated by the ineffectiveness as well as disruptive nature of the control framework in the past. The response to measures aimed at discouraging utilisation and possession through schemes such as gold mobilisation and gold deposits have also not worked.  A positive approach significantly reduces transaction cost as evident, for example, from the reduction in difference in price between world markets and Indian gold markets after liberalisation. As mentioned earlier, a liberalized policy has added the comfort to public finance and management of external sector. Further, a non-positive attitude towards the use of gold on the presumption of the expenditure being productive or non-productive would be inconsistent with the liberalised framework of economic management. Thus, it would be inconsistent to allow consumption of luxury items or perfumes through imports, but not gold. Moreover, unlike tobacco and to some extent liquor, gold does not have adverse impact on health, environment or family life. In other words, it would not be proper to make any judgement about the desirability or productive nature of gold consumption to weave the policy around such a value loaded judgement. It would be appropriate to assess the Indian reality and the implications of large preference for holding gold and take appropriate policy measures. On the basis of such an assessment, a positive approach will have several dimensions viz. macro policy, financial markets, external sector and protection of consumer interest. In terms of macro policy, the objective of reduced recourse to gold would be automatically served in the long run through economic development, though the immediate effect of increased prosperity could be preference for investment in gold. Spread of literacy, particularly female literacy, could also help in reducing the preference for gold. Above all, availability and easy access to different forms of financial savings on an extensive scale, particularly for women, to protect the traditional “Streedhan” may prove to be the most viable policy option to encourage non-gold form of savings. Of particular relevance to monetary authorities, price stability and reasonably low but stable interest rates are in the medium-term, likely to contribute to reduced preference or recourse to gold as a form of savings as well as investment. As regards the role of gold in financial markets, the policy has to recognise that the Indian gold market has always been linked to international gold market in view of large requirements of imported gold. Recognition of such integration as an inevitable reality and taking appropriate institutional measures, would reduce the transaction cost and impart stability to the Indian gold market. Further, gold has been virtually insulated from the local financial market in terms of financing of the gold or gold transactions by the banking sector. Gold-linked financial instruments are not prevalent in the Indian market and forward markets in gold are virtually prohibited. Given the inevitable integration between the global and local gold markets, there is considerable merit in following the global practice of integration of gold markets with financial markets. The role of banks in the context of gold market has already been recognised, but banks are playing the role of essentially being canalising agencies. While such a risk free approach is defensible from a prudential angle, banks could fund financial instruments without taking a risk on their own balance sheet, thus improving efficiency in the gold-linked financial markets. In respect of the external sector, the liberalisation of import of gold has helped the removal of non-official transactions to a significant degree. However, the export of gold jewellery is still somewhat insulated from the domestic market. The economic opportunities for considerable liberalisation of exports could be considered as appropriate. Special treatment of gold export will no longer be consistent with the positive approach to gold policy coupled with a vibrant role of gold in external trade. 
 6 BIS Review 21/2002 Finally, studies have shown that the consumers on an average would be paying Rs. 8,000 crores extra each year by virtue of the questionable quality of gold sold to them. In particular, the rural and middle class and women are specially vulnerable to the low quality of gold. Special consumer protection measures - both educational and legal through appropriate enforcement of Consumer Protection Act - should make a positive contribution to the protection of consumer and improvement of the industry. Future Directions The broad parameters for medium-term policy would by themselves suggest several actions for the future. It may be appropriate to consider discussion and debate on the parameters of the policy indicated. However, on an illustrative basis, it is possible to identify broad areas for future direction in this regard.  First, there may be scope for further rationalisation of policy relating to import of gold. Experience has shown that select large institutions, particularly banks, contribute effectively to efficient import of gold. However, as a hangover of the past, a number of facilities are available for NRI individuals to import gold. There is considerable merit in reviewing the policy with a view to removing such individual-based special facilities. When gold is imported through NRIs, it may not be easy to track the origin or destination, hence making it vulnerable for misuse. Prohibiting such imports may also be consistent with other initiatives such as prevention of money laundering, since unlike in the banking system, the transactions are not easily traceable. Similarly, import of gold through special import licence may need review. At the same time, consistent with a positive approach to gold, the current restrictions on import of gold as part of personal baggage by returning Indians could be reviewed. Gold may not be treated differently from any other commodity in respect of eligibility as personal baggage within the allowance and levy of the standard duty on import in excess of permissible limit on par with other goods.  Second, as regards exports, consistent with the positive approach, it should be possible to remove special restrictions on gold jewellery export-oriented units and treat them like other units. Mechanisms such as customs bonding etc. may no longer be necessary, if the purchase of gold is documented and export proceeds realised are fully documented. The strategy adopted by Italy for a number of years and more recently by Turkey to dominate gold jewellery markets may have to be studied in depth for adoption in India Third, in regard to development of gold market, the establishment of a Gold Exchange would help in efficient price discovery and emergence of healthy and transparent practices in the market. The basic framework for such an exchange already exists with 13 banks active in import of precious metals. Five of them have launched the Gold Deposit Scheme also. They are exploring possibilities of introducing ‘paper gold’ products like Gold Accumulation Plans. These banks are fully authorised to sell/lease gold to the market players. They can also enter into forward contracts in a limited way. A committee set up by the RBI has studied the feasibility of introducing Futures Trading in Gold and this is being examined by the Forward Markets Commission. Once the banks start trading among themselves, with MMTC, STC and also with big traders according to the demand/supply dynamics, a formal move towards a Gold Exchange is appropriate. They can even use the infrastructure available with an existing stock exchange like National Stock Exchange (NSE) for this purpose.  Fourth, as part of the positive approach to consumers, the present initiatives by BIS may be supported, strengthened for improvement, reviewed and further measures considered. For example, several banks and other institutions, which are currently importing gold in large measures, could consider establishing a Gold Market Development Agency as a voluntary self regulatory organisation with participation from gold trade and BIS to devise mechanisms by which the efficiency of the market and the integrity of the products are ensured and augmented. For example, banks can play a role by prescribing different margins for loans extended against the pledge of gold with hallmark and those without. Similarly, the banks could take into account, the practice of issuing Gold Content Guarantee Certificates by the gold jewellers while extending credit. This would also help banks in making proper assessment of the inventories of the traders. Finally, with a full recognition of the importance of gold, not only in the Indian economy, in terms of import, export, or consumption, employment, etc., but also in the Indian society, it would be desirable to encourage research and policy studies on various aspects relating to a positive approach to gold markets and gold policy. Illustratively, these may cover three broad areas, viz., gold reserves and their role in the forex reserves; the development of gold markets in conjunction with financial markets; and 
 BIS Review 21/2002 7 the macro economic implications of gold policy and gold markets, especially in the context of financial savings. Let me again thank the organizers for giving me this opportunity and we in RBI as usual look forward to benefiting from the deliberations. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 1 Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: Reflections on recent financial incidents Luncheon speech given by Mr Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk, Basel, 8 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction I am delighted to have this opportunity to meet this distinguished group of experts and former colleagues that has come together here in Basel to study issues related to financial stability. I would like to share with you a few thoughts, inspired by the two recent cases of Enron and Argentina, respectively the largest-ever corporate and sovereign defaults we remember. Like many observers, I will try to identify whether the two cases raise any fundamental questions concerning the functioning of the financial system and the interplay between market forces and public authorities.  I started my career as a central banker some 35 years ago, when public intervention in the economy, and particularly in the financial sphere, was very pervasive. Almost all business activities by banks required a specific authorisation, and many actions were simply forbidden. Market participants had little room for free and innovative action. It has taken a long time for the pendulum of ideas, economic realities and policies to move towards market forces. Public intervention has been gradually scaled back, from having an excessively wide scope to a narrow one,  carefully targeted at market failures. This long shift – which has accidentally coincided with the span of my professional life, and to which both my actions and my convictions have fully adhered – has produced extraordinarily large efficiency gains from which our economies have greatly benefited.  Enron and Argentina can undoubtedly be looked at from various angles, and only time will clarify the lessons we have learnt from the two cases. One question we can ask today is: do Enron and Argentina indicate that the pendulum may not be very far from swinging back again, between the two extremes of very pervasive public intervention and complete laissez-faire? Is it time to reconsider – with some historical perspective – what public intervention is needed to best support the orderly functioning of financial markets? Without pretending to provide full answers to these questions, let me just offer a few thoughts.  Risks in the financial sector I start with two observations about the origin and propagation of risks. First, although the increasing complexity of the financial system renders it more and more difficult to identify the origin of risks, we should never forget that the threat to financial stability stems, fundamentally, from the real sector. It is in the real sector that events occur that ultimately cause gains and losses in the financial field. Such events may be the unexpected disruption of a particular market, a price shock, a sharp change in  technology, the deterioration of macroeconomic conditions or the policy decisions of a government. Managing the risks associated with the uncertainty and risk of the real sector is at the core of financial intermediation.  Second, the propagation of risk. The way in which risk is spread within the financial system varies over time in relation to several factors, including market and regulatory developments.  Enron and Argentina highlight once again the importance of two aspects that characterise risk propagation today: first, the growing use of complex financial instruments to assume and transfer risks and, second, the abrupt changes in international capital movements. As to the first, some evidence suggests that the markets for credit risk transfer instruments are quite concentrated, both in terms of dealers and ultimate risk-takers. As to the second, lack of data on many important players in the global financial system leaves us relatively uninformed about the possible sources of destabilising capital movements. Enron: failure to deliver transparency Let me move to the Enron case. There seems to be a broad consensus that this incident points not only to truly illegal actions and infringements of ethical codes of conduct, but also to ineffective market discipline exercised by Enron’s equity and debt-holders, due to lack of adequate transparency. Enron 
 2 BIS Review 20/2002 owed much of its initial success to deregulation, both in the gas and electricity sectors and in a variety of other areas. It was publicly perceived as a highly successful company. Only when the company was approaching bankruptcy did market analysts react and shareholders and creditors become aware of its vulnerabilities. Only then did attention focus on the risks entailed in its extensive off-balance sheet transactions. Inadequate accounting rules are partly responsible for the failure to uncover highly risky operations or for the inadequate disclosure of complex off-balance-sheet transactions. The extensive and parallel consulting business with Enron that auditors entertained are also to blame.  We are in the process of drawing many lessons regarding the public policies required to ensure the smooth operation of the market discipline, which is also of utmost importance for the functioning of the financial system. Of these lessons, three – in my opinion – stand out as crucial. First, it is timely to recall Paul Volcker’s proposal of June last year calling for an international initiative to update accounting standards so as to adequately deal with the complexity of derivative financial instruments. We should do our utmost to ensure that the Enron affair serves as a powerful incentive to speed up efforts in this field.  Second, the case highlights the question of adequate oversight of financial activities undertaken by non-financial corporations. Despite being the main dealer, market-maker, and liquidity provider in important areas of the energy and other derivatives markets, Enron was not required, by either regulators or market practice, to disclose information to its counterparties, or to set aside capital against its trading risks. The absence of such mechanisms prevented an early detection of the problem and might have even created incentives for imprudent risk-taking.  Finally, the case suggests that our system is not sufficiently alert to possible conflicts of interest. The combination of auditing and consulting in the Enron case is only one example. Such conflicts arise whenever a financial institution provides corporate finance and similar services to a specific client who issues securities in which the financial institution can invest its own funds or those of its clients.  All in all, these three issues give cause for concern and also deserve careful consideration by public authorities. My feeling here is that, if a player such as Enron is not under the control of regulators, it should be under tight market control exercised by analysts, accountants, shareholders and lending banks. If these endogenous controllers fail to be alert, they should be sanctioned in the form of monetary losses or regulatory constraints. Argentina: hands-off approach coupled with official sector weakness Let me turn to Argentina. Here, the lessons are at the international macro-economic level. Not too long ago, Argentina was the focus of attention, though for very different reasons than now. In the early 1990s, “neo-liberal” economic reforms were implemented; hyperinflation was brought to a halt; the economy was progressively deregulated and privatised. As macro-economic stability was achieved, foreign capital poured into the economy and growth quickly resumed. In a continent that had just emerged from the debt crisis of the 1980s and with very few success stories to tell, Argentina’s experience under this economic paradigm was very positive for much of the 1990s, growing at an average rate of nearly 5 per cent from 1991 to 1998. This was a period marked by a series of external shocks, which Argentina’s currency board successfully overcame, namely, the “Tequila” crisis in 1995, the East Asian crises in 1997, and the devaluation of the Russian rouble in 1998. But they were not cost-free: in the absence of using the exchange rate as a shock absorber, the burden of adjustment in the economy under a currency board agreement necessarily falls on wages and prices. In the case of Argentina, the rigidity of the hard peg came to the forefront in the wake of a series of external shocks in early 1999 – notably the higher cost of financing to emerging markets, the sharp devaluation of the Brazilian real, the rapidly appreciating US dollar, and falling commodity prices. The straitjacket imposed by the currency board cast doubts on Argentina’s medium-term economic performance and concerns about its ability to service and refinance debt were further compounded by the relative fiscal laxity in previous years. As the credibility of the currency board came under increasing pressure, the country required policy adjustments but also sustained signs of support from the official sector. Yet Argentina’s misfortune is that, as its need for official financing was increasing, opinions about how multilateral agencies should act when faced with emerging market crises were changing – in particular, with regards to the need of engaging private creditors (particularly bondholders) in the resolution of debt problems. The last IMF 
 BIS Review 20/2002 3 package in support of Argentina (September 2001), for example, contained specific provisions to this end. In the subsequent months, Fund officials publicly encouraged the Argentinean authorities to reach an agreement with private sector agents over debt-exchange operations. And in December 2001, the Fund suspended its loan programmes with the country. While private sector involvement in crisis resolution should be welcome, one may wonder if it should be the sole instrument to deal with such circumstances. Many feel that the official sector was rather unkind to Argentina. After all, its macroeconomic indicators – particularly its fiscal accounts, which were the main source of concern – were broadly the same (or better) than other countries which had received large IMF funding in recent years, such as Turkey or Brazil. Argentina’s central government debt in 2001 was less than 55 per cent of GDP, and its government deficit (including the provinces) amounted to less than 6 per cent of GDP in the same year. In contrast, Turkey posted a 57.4 per cent debt-to-GDP ratio and a government deficit of 11.6 per cent of GDP in 2000, right before its currency and banking crises. Brazil had a government deficit of 7.9 per cent and external debt-to-GDP ratio of 30 per cent in 1998.  The international community is relieved that economic and financial contagion has not spread from Argentina to other economies in the region, notably Mexico and Brazil. Yet I cannot but wonder how Mexico and Brazil would be doing today, had the same Argentine-style “hands-off” approach been followed back in 1995 and 1999 respectively. In many ways, the present robustness of these two countries is a testament to the – now much criticised – support they have received from the official sector. Conclusion  Let me conclude. Are we addressing Enron and Argentina jointly just because the two events happened at the same time or because they have something else in common? There is no doubt that the two cases are quite different. Yet I see both of them as a reminder that we need to distinguish clearly between the scope of public intervention and its effectiveness. Where there is room for public action, a minimum scope of intervention should not be tantamount to weak or ineffective intervention. The important lesson that emerged from the past experience of overextended public intervention is about excessive scope and not about unnecessary strength. Both events highlight weak responses by the authorities to a deteriorating situation. In the case of Enron, the signals provided by market authorities and policy-makers were not strong enough to ensure adequate transparency and avoid conflicts of interest. While some initiatives to improve the situation were put forward over a relatively long period before the Enron incident, the prevailing pressure from the corporate sector prevented substantive achievements. Regulators and policy markers have something in common with policemen. A policeman has to be friendly and helpful to citizens – just as regulators need to be market-friendly – but a policeman always has to remember who he is.   Hence, the main lesson I would draw from the recent events is that strong public intervention is necessary on those occasions when markets fail to work properly. This should not be confused with a wide and pervasive intervention in the markets as public authorities used to do in the past. We, who are responsible for the oversight of markets, should signal our commitment to well-defined and effective intervention, when needed, and thus contribute to the stability of the financial system. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: The inflation target and the floating krone: the interplay between fiscal policy, the interest rate and competitiveness Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Executive Board of the Federation of Norwegian Manufacturing Industries, Oslo, 20 March 2002.  This speech is based on information provided in Norges Bank’s Inflation Report 1/2002, earlier speeches and the Governor’s Annual Address on 14 February 2002. Accompanying charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website (www.norges-bank.no). *      *      * Norway’s economic policy is based on the guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. The guidelines for fiscal policy state that the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget shall be equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. Monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. Historically, periods of high inflation have always been followed by a downturn. Low and stable inflation fosters stability and growth in the economy. Establishing guidelines for economic policy is not new. Both fiscal and monetary policy have been based on such rules throughout the post-war period, with the exception of the last half of the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s. Monetary policy has had a clear anchor since 1986. The inflation target provides an anchor for expectations concerning future inflation and interest rates. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Of course, the authorities must stand firm about the figure 2½ if the inflation target is to anchor long-term expectations and if we shall reap the long-term benefits of this conduct of monetary policy. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. The current level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change occurs within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target.  Economic agents can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be 2½ per cent. If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. The global economy has experienced a slowdown during the last year. The downturn in the US has had contagion effects on European and Asian economies through its impact on world trade and the financial markets. Capital markets are global, and when revenues decline in the US, enterprises with operations in many countries also reduce investment and operating expenses in Europe and Asia. Industrial production has declined markedly in all major regions of the world economy. In Norway, manufacturing output has been more stable.  Norges Bank presented its last Inflation Report on 27 February. We expect price inflation to be about 2½ per cent in two years, if growth in the global economy picks up as assumed. The tight labour market will probably continue to result in fairly strong growth in labour costs and rather sharply rising prices for domestically produced goods and services. Annual wage growth is projected at 5 per cent in the period ahead. A subdued rise in prices for imported goods is pushing down overall price inflation. The projections are based on the technical assumption that the krone exchange rate will remain stable. On the whole, the risk associated with the inflation projection is regarded as balanced.  Exchange rates between the major currencies fluctuate widely. The effective exchange rate on the US dollar has risen by more than 30 per cent since 1995. The German mark (later euro) has depreciated by about the same amount. The effective exchange rate for the Japanese yen has fluctuated sharply. Small countries have also experienced wide exchange rate fluctuations. The Swedish krona has changed considerable in the last 10 years and is now 10 per cent weaker than in the summer of 2000. The Australian dollar has depreciated by more than 30 per cent since the spring of 1997. Countries whose exports include a large component of raw materials tend to experience considerable volatility in their exchange rate. Australia is one example.  Fluctuations in commodity prices entail changes in countries’ terms of trade, which measures the ratio of export to import prices. Changes in the terms of trade have an impact on the exchange rate, which in turn dampens the impact on profitability. The exchange rate acts as a buffer. In the 1990s, the 
 2 BIS Review 20/2002 fluctuations in Norway’s terms of trade were especially wide. Changes in oil prices were an important reason for this. The krone exchange rate has not fluctuated much compared with other countries. The Petroleum Fund acts as a buffer against fluctuations in the oil price, because the Fund’s capital is invested abroad. This contributes to stabilising the krone exchange rate.  We must, nevertheless, be prepared for fluctuations in the krone that are more in line with the fluctuations observed in other countries. Changes in the global economy can affect the krone exchange rate. The exchange rate may also react to and contribute to curbing the effects of domestic disturbances.  The floating exchange rate is by and large a well-suited instrument for absorbing unforeseen disturbances to the economy. A stronger krone may, for example, prevent demand pressures from translating into higher price inflation. As history and the experience of other countries have taught us, the real economic losses associated with eliminating high inflation and curbing inflation expectations are considerably higher than those associated with a variable nominal exchange rate. If oil prices fall to such a low level that investment on the Norwegian shelf comes to a halt, a weaker krone would contribute to facilitating the restructuring in the business sector and the rest of the Norwegian economy. Historically, a stable krone exchange rate has been the nominal anchor in the Norwegian economy. Labour costs among trading partners provided an important reference. Now, the inflation target is the nominal anchor.  The Norwegian krone has appreciated by 2½ per cent since the beginning of 2002 and by more than 8 per cent since the spring of 2000. High interest rate differentials and oil prices have played a part in this development. At present, the krone exchange rate is close to the levels in 1990-92 and 1996. The cost-competitiveness of Norwegian manufacturing companies has deteriorated by 10 per cent since 1996. This is due entirely to pay increases awarded by manufacturing industry’s organisations and companies. Underlying this cost inflation is a tight labour market that reflects high growth in employment in public and private services as well as extensive working hour reforms in recent years. The increase in labour costs is important when Norges Bank assesses the outlook for price inflation and sets interest rates. Excessively high wage growth, both in manufacturing and other industries, will affect the internationally exposed sector through two channels. First, high wage growth will reduce earnings and employment. Second, the interest rate will be increased. Normally, this will lead to an appreciation of the krone, with a further reduction in earnings and employment. Manufacturing will, therefore, feel the effects of excessively high wage growth to an even greater extent than earlier.  At present, the labour market is relatively tight, which is reflected in high wage growth. In other countries, the situation is different, with sluggish economic development and declining inflation. As a result, interest rates are higher in Norway than in other countries.  According to the guideline for fiscal policy, the use of petroleum revenues will increase every year for a number of years ahead. This will sustain the demand for labour. The service industries will need more resources. The contest for labour resources will intensify. To contain inflation, monetary policy must probably be fairly tight in the years ahead. Since 1997, labour costs have increased by between 5 and 7 per cent per year. Nevertheless, the increase in consumer prices has been about 2½ per cent the last couple of years. The krone exchange rate has appreciated since the summer of 2000 as a result of a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. Combined with low growth abroad and increased trade with low-cost countries such as China, this has led to a slower rise in import prices. A higher rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services reflects an increase in labour costs in Norway. As the world economy recovers, import price inflation will probably edge up. A rise in labour costs of more than 5 per cent will only be consistent with the inflation target if the krone continues to appreciate. In our projections for the Norwegian economy in the next two years, we expect 5 per cent wage growth. As long as wages increase this much, the business sector’s competitiveness will decline, thus contributing to a reduction in employment in goods-producing industries. When manufacturing and other industries exposed to competition are scaled back to the extent that there is room for a larger service sector, competitiveness will once again stabilise. In the long run, wages must be compatible with the value added that is generated by workers, i.e. labour productivity. Over time, the increase in real wages is therefore determined by developments in labour productivity. 
 BIS Review 20/2002 3 In mainland Norway, annual productivity growth has averaged 1½ - 2 per cent over the last 20 years. If this continues to be the case, an average increase in labour costs of around 4 - 4½ per cent in the long term will be consistent with the inflation target. The guidelines for economic policy may affect the krone exchange rate in two ways. On the one hand, increased use of petroleum revenues may lead to a deterioration of the business sector’s competitiveness. With low and stable inflation, this may at times be reflected in a strong krone. On the other hand, our inflation target is slightly higher than our trading partners’ inflation targets. In the long run, this will be offset by a corresponding depreciation of the krone.1 The international rise in prices for manufactured goods is lower than for services – around 1 per cent. The inflation target of 2½ per cent implies a depreciation of the Norwegian krone of around ½ per cent in the long term, because the target has been set somewhat higher than our trading partners’ inflation target. This means that goods prices measured in Norwegian krone must be expected to rise by about 1½ per cent in the long term. With wage growth of 4 - 4½ per cent, productivity growth in manufacturing must be about 2½ - 3 per cent to maintain profitability. For services, price inflation can be somewhat higher, about 3 – 3½ per cent, and productivity gains correspondingly lower. The size of the exposed sector will be affected by the portion of petroleum revenues that is absorbed into the Norwegian economy. In the long run, monetary policy cannot influence overall employment or its distribution across industries.  Historically, employment in the internationally exposed sector has declined in waves. The sharpest declines in manufacturing employment were observed in the years between 1977 and 1984 and from 1987 to 1992. Both periods were preceded by a considerable deterioration in cost competitiveness in manufacturing. There is a risk of a new period of decline in manufacturing.  The restructuring in manufacturing may take place rapidly. Competitiveness has deteriorated by about 10 per cent since 1996. We do not know how long this development will continue. The long-term requirements for improving the balance between wage growth and productivity growth may become apparent at an early stage. Developments for Norwegian enterprises do not, however, have to be negative. Some enterprises could be at the forefront of technological developments and increase efficiency more rapidly than the relatively high rate of growth in real wages in Norway. Many enterprises move large portions of their production abroad. Norwegian manufacturing companies could still be profitable even if the significance of the manufacturing sector in the Norwegian economy is reduced. However, scaling back manufacturing involves a risk. It makes the economy more vulnerable. The growth potential of the economy – the basis for learning, innovation and development – may be impaired when less of the business sector is exposed to intense foreign competition.                                                        1  Akram, Q.F. (2000): PPP despite real shocks: An empirical analysis of the Norwegian real exchange rate. Working Paper 2000/7, Norges Bank, Oslo. 
 BIS Review 19/2002 1 Lee Hsien Loong: Challenges in developing the Asian capital markets: the Singapore experience Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Euromoney Asia-Pacific Issuers & Investors Forum, Singapore, 19 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction  First, may I welcome all of you to the Euromoney Asia Pacific Issuers & Investors Forum, held for the first time here in Singapore. We are honoured to have here with us, a diverse and distinguished group of regional government officials, investors and issuers. Over the past few months, signs are emerging that the worst of the economic downturn may now be behind us. New orders, industrial output, consumer confidence and retail sales in the US have picked up. The swift policy response by the US Federal Reserve has helped restore liquidity and confidence to global financial markets, especially in the aftermath of Sept-11. Markets have also taken in stride the adjustment in the technology sector, the synchronized global slowdown, the Sept 11 terrorist attacks, Argentina, and Enron.  In line with the recovery in the US economy and the global electronics industry, the Singapore economy too is expected to pick up this year, after the most severe recession in decades. Private sector economists are revising their growth forecasts for the year upwards. The government’s own forecast is currently for 1-3% growth, which is a fair assessment of the prospects.  Lessons from the Asian crisis Five years have passed since the Asian financial crisis began, prompting a major re-think of policies held to be obvious and valid before the crisis. In particular, the crisis has highlighted three major issues in Asian economic and financial systems.  First, some analysts have questioned East Asia’s growth model, with its emphasis on high savings, reliance on foreign investment, and export growth. East Asian economies, it is argued, should instead lower savings rates, in order to stimulate domestic demand, develop indigenous enterprise, and insulate themselves from volatile external conditions.  Second, the crisis highlighted the dangers of liberalising capital markets too rapidly and without adequate safeguards. Before the crisis, capital account liberalization was the vogue. Conventional wisdom emphasized benefits rather than costs of free capital flows. The crisis demolished this complacent confidence. Undoubtedly, structural flaws and policy errors, especially in the financial and corporate sectors, contributed to the crisis. However, the financial markets’ reaction to these weaknesses was out of proportion to the severity of the crime. Markets proved highly susceptible to contagion and herd behaviour. Crashes and panics shook seemingly sound economies to their roots.  Third, the crisis demonstrated the dangers of over-reliance on bank-based financing. In many Asian countries prior to the crisis, capital markets were underdeveloped. Bond markets, in particular, were illiquid or nonexistent. So Asian firms relied on bank loans for working capital and to fund capital expenditure. When banks ran into trouble, firms were left without alternative sources of capital. More generally, the thin capital markets in Asia accentuated price movements when investor preferences shifted. This made Asian economies more vulnerable to financial shocks.  So how have countries responded in the wake of the Asian crisis? On the East Asian growth model, no Asian country is abandoning exports or foreign investment as engines of growth, not even those countries which harbour reservations about the risks of globalisation. For small Asian economies, and Singapore in particular, the idea of relying on tiny domestic markets to stimulate growth and enterprise is inherently implausible. Larger economies may make more of their domestic markets, and indeed the ASEAN countries as a group need to integrate their markets in the ASEAN Free Trade Area, to make themselves more attractive to foreign investments. But no single domestic market can substitute for the world market, in an age where economies of scale are global, whether in industries like electronics and pharmaceuticals, or services like banking and telecommunications. 
 2 BIS Review 19/2002 Indigenous enterprise is an important factor in economic development. Strong local companies add depth and resilience to the economy, while a spirit of entrepreneurship enables the population to seize new opportunities and thrive in uncertain times. But indigenous enterprise cannot rely on the traditional family firms, doing small scale businesses on the margins of a modern economy. It requires firms which are strong in technology and know-how, with systematic managements and meritocratic practices, firms which can hold their own against foreign competition, and with the potential to grow into significant industry players. Even then, such firms will complement, not replace, foreign investments by MNCs. Following this philosophy, Singapore’s economic policies will therefore remain externally oriented. We will continue to push for free trade, welcome investments, and integrate into the global economy, even as we promote entrepreneurship and seek to build Singapore firms into regional players. The pressures of globalisation can be uncomfortable, and the changes they force upon us can be painful. But globalisation has helped us to build a stronger, more resilient economy, one better prepared to hold our own against formidable competitors, and deliver a high and rising standard of living for our population.  On capital account liberalisation, countries are now acutely aware that sound macroeconomic management is a key prerequisite, without which no regime of exchange controls can deliver stability. They also realise that they must sequence liberalization judiciously, and strengthen financial supervision and prudential safeguards as they liberalize.  In the aftermath of the crisis, no Asian country imposed capital controls, apart from Malaysia. But several tightened safeguards to reduce the risks of destabilising capital flows, and to shield domestic foreign exchange and money markets from speculative pressures emanating from abroad. They improved monitoring, and discouraged trading in currencies that was not related to the real economy. A few countries went further, and sought to curb transactions in home currencies in offshore markets.  At the same time, there has been an ongoing effort to develop bond markets in Asia. Issuance of domestic government bonds has increased sharply in most Asian countries. Certainly, a large part of the increase reflected the spike in fiscal deficits resulting from the debt restructuring operations in the financial sector during the Asian crisis. Nonetheless, corporate bonds have also grown.  There is a trade off between tightening up the capital account, and developing the bond markets. Measures to restrict offshore foreign currency trading have been effective, in so far as reducing or eliminating offshore markets is concerned. But these safeguards come at a cost – they also hinder the development of capital markets, especially the bond markets. Size and liquidity are essential attributes for a market to attract international interest. Already in size and liquidity, we clearly lag behind our counterparts in the West. If Asian markets are fragmented and unable to grow, they risk being ignored by global investors.  In the immediate aftermath of the Asian crisis, countries that have suffered at the hands of the markets are understandably disinclined to err on the side of fewer restrictions, especially as the benefits from bond market development are not likely to be large given structural problems in the economy. However, over time as the Asian countries make progress in restructuring their economies and strengthening their institutions, they will reassess the balance of risks, and perhaps modify some of these restrictions.  Liberalisation of S$ policy  In Singapore, we are subject to the same trade-offs. But our circumstances are somewhat different as we were less severely affected by the crisis. Our financial services sector is also relatively larger and more established, compared to other countries in the region. By 1997, we had decided that we were sufficiently well established to shift from our previous highly conservative and risk-averse regulatory approach towards the financial industry and instead supervise with a lighter touch and accept calculated risks in order to promote its development. As part of this overall liberalisation, we progressively relaxed restrictions on the Singapore dollar, and fostered the growth of our capital markets, throughout the Asian crisis.  Our monetary policy has been centred on the exchange rate since 1981. But as a large financial centre with open capital markets, we are exposed to large and sometimes, volatile capital flows. Thus we have long maintained an explicit policy of discouraging the internationalisation of the Singapore 
 BIS Review 19/2002 3 dollar, in order to support our monetary policy framework. We limited the use of the Singapore dollar by non-residents for purposes unrelated to the Singapore economy, for example currency speculation.  This non-internationalisation policy, supported by our strong macroeconomic fundamentals and substantial foreign reserves, has helped us to maintain a stable Singapore dollar, and to avoid large swings in our exchange rate which would have severely damaged our economy. The trade-off was less vibrant capital markets. Indeed in some cases, the tight domestic restrictions fostered the growth of offshore markets in these restricted activities, undermining our purpose. Recognizing this, we have over the past four years progressively relaxed the S$ restrictions. Our approach has been a cautious one: weighing the trade-off between development and the risk to exchange rate management, and feeling our way forward step by step. Our efforts have yielded encouraging results. The outstanding volume of Singapore Government Securities (SGS) has doubled since 1998 and average daily turnover volume increased about three-times. SGS outstanding volume in 2001 was S$54 billion and average daily turnover was S$1.9 billion. New corporate debt issuance has continued to grow strongly, with S$ and non-S$ corporate bond issuance totalling a record S$72 billion in 2001. This was an almost 8-fold growth over issuance volumes in 1998, spurred by exceptional merger and acquisition activities, but significant nevertheless. Outstanding corporate bonds have also more than doubled to S$80 billion.  Besides higher volumes of issuance, we are also seeing a greater diversity of corporate bonds in the market. The tenors issued range evenly across a spectrum of maturity up to 15 years. The average size of S$-bond issues has also increased. Last year, there were several bond deals of about S$1 billion from domestic corporate issuers successfully placed in Singapore. Structured debt products now account for about 35% of the total S$ debt issuance, reflecting a move towards more sophisticated debt instruments.  With deeper and more mature capital markets, and greater confidence and experience in managing larger S$ flows, we are now ready to make a further move. Since October last year, MAS has been seeking the views of key market participants on how we can facilitate the continued growth of the S$ capital markets. Following these dialogues, we have reviewed the non-internationalisation policy, taking into account their ideas and suggestions.  We have decided to further liberalise the policy, to lift many of the specific restrictions on the use of the S$. Henceforth, we will retain only two basic guidelines: a. First, financial institutions may not extend S$ credit facilities exceeding S$5 million to non-resident financial entities, where they have reason to believe that the proceeds may be used for speculation against the S$ exchange rate. This continues to be necessary, as we have no reason to allow offshore speculators to access the liquidity in our onshore FX swaps and money markets. b. Second, when a non-resident entity wishes to obtain a S$ loan, or tap our equity or bond markets to fund overseas activities, it must swap or convert the S$ proceeds into foreign currency as and when it uses the proceeds offshore. This guideline is unlikely to stand in the way of market development, as the S$ is not a currency commonly used for transactions abroad, and non-resident entities would in any case wish to swap or convert the S$ proceeds into a currency of their choice for overseas use.  With this liberalisation, the following will now be possible. a. First, MAS will exempt all individuals and non-financial entities, which includes corporate treasury centres, from the S$ lending restrictions of the non-internationalisation policy. This recognises that such entities are not usually the prime drivers of destabilizing currency speculation.  b. Second, for non-resident financial entities that continue to be governed by the S$ policy, we will lift restrictions in the following financial activities:  i. Asset swaps, cross-currency swaps and cross-currency repos can now be transacted freely. MAS had hitherto treated such transactions as forms of S$ lending. It will no longer do so.   ii. Securities Borrowing and Lending (SBL) – Financial institutions in Singapore may now lend any amount S$-denominated securities in exchange for both S$ or foreign currency-denominated collateral. MAS will lift the requirement that any lending of S$ securities exceeding $5 million has to be fully collaterised by S$ collateral. 
 4 BIS Review 19/2002  iii. S$ FX options – Financial institutions may also freely transact S$ FX options with non-resident entities. FIs no longer need to maintain documentary proof showing that S$ FX option transactions with non-resident entities are for hedging purposes.  iv. Investments in financial assets and real estate – Financial institutions are no longer required to ensure that S$ credit facilities extended for investment purposes be withdrawn when the investments are either wholly or partially liquidated. This will relieve FIs of the need to institute additional arrangements to track their non-resident client's investments in financial assets.  These measures, which take effect from tomorrow, should pave the way for even greater liquidity and range of activities in the FX, equity and debt capital markets. They should also attract offshore S$ activities back onshore.  We are still maintaining the two core requirements of the non-internationalisation policy – the restriction on lending for purposes of speculating on the S$, and the requirement to swap into foreign currency the proceeds of S$ loans, debt or equity issues if these proceeds are to be used offshore. Some market participants have suggested that we should go all the way and lift these requirements too, but we continue to believe it wise to maintain a basic stance of not encouraging internationalisation of the S$, through these two requirements. They are unlikely to hinder the activities of legitimate players. They will also provide us basic safeguards in case activity in currency markets turns out not to be self-stabilising, which from time to time seems to be the case. Conclusion The new financial landscape offers many opportunities for the astute market players and investors, but at the same time, presents many challenges for regulators and supervisors. In Singapore, we have made much progress, but the task ahead remains challenging. We will continue to engage the industry and seek ways to develop our capital markets further. The key is to liberalise without compromising the soundness of the financial system or conduct of our monetary policy.  I am optimistic over the prospects for the further development of Asian capital markets and look forward to your exploring investment opportunities in this region. I wish you all an enjoyable and fruitful conference. 
 BIS Review 19/2002 1 A H E M Wellink: EU expansion and EMU Address by Dr A H E M Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Nederlands Genootschap voor Internationale Zaken, Utrecht, 13 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction "We Europeans must create the basis for a broader and deeper community among peoples long divided by bloody conflicts and lay the foundations for institutions which will give direction to a destiny henceforward shared". These lofty words, formulated over fifty years ago, can be found in the preamble to the Treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community. Although they may strike you as slightly passé, the underlying thought has lost none of its poignancy.  • To begin with, we sense a moral and historical duty to unite a long-divided continent in these words. For the first time, countries from Central and Eastern Europe will be joining the European Union, as from 2004.  • Secondly, the Preamble states that Europe should have sufficient institutional power and cohesion to give direction to a shared destiny. As you know, the European Convention which has just started is dealing with this issue; I understand that Dick Benschop will be here next week to elaborate.  • Finally, the text speaks not just of a duty to form a close-knit and strong Europe, but also of the right of every European to share in the fruits of such an undertaking.  We are aware that the tensions between these three principles have grown, as evidenced by renewed power politics at the national level and growing discrepancies between large and smaller Member States. The economic heterogeneity within the EU will only be augmented by the accession of new Member States. It is this very heterogeneity which is exacerbating the discussion on rights and duties and the need for cohesion within the Union. It is with these consideration in mind that I will be discussing the economic background to the expansion of the EU, with a special focus on Economic and Monetary Union. The central theme in my address will be the specific challenges to economic policy which the accession countries will be facing over the next few years. Given these challenges, the accession countries should, in my view, adopt a gradual approach towards the euro; they should first be properly embedded in the existing process of economic policy coordination. Situation with regard to expansion Today, twelve countries are negotiating accession to the EU: the Visegrad countries in Central Europe, the Baltic states and three Balkan countries: Bulgaria, Rumania and Slovenia. These countries must all pass what is known as the Copenhagen test. This test was drawn up by the European Council in Copenhagen in 1993, and consists of three criteria:  • To begin with accession countries must have political and democratic institutions along western lines before they can even enter into negotiations. That is why Turkey, the thirteenth accession country, finds itself in an exceptional position.  • Secondly, the potential Member States must subscribe to the objectives of European integration. This means, among other things, that they must adopt and implement all European legislation and rules, in other words the Acquis Communautaire. Exceptions, such as those made in the past for the British and the Danes with regard to participation in EMU, will not be allowed.  • Finally, the Copenhagen criteria also encompass an economic test: the accession countries must have a functioning market economy and be capable of coping with market forces within the EU. In my opinion, this means they must be able to create a stable macro-economic 
 2 BIS Review 19/2002 climate, where market operators and consumers can take decisions and develop initiatives in a predictable and reliable environment. This presupposes powerful institutions and supervisory authorities, a full-fledged physical and human infrastructure and a developed financial sector. It also means that economic sectors must be sufficiently competitive to be able to operate within the single market.  An indicator of such competitiveness is provided by trade relations with the European Union. Over the past ten years, these relations have tightened considerably. The geographical reorientation and the abolition of trade barriers since 1990 have contributed to an increase in the trade volume between the accession countries and the EU. Today about 67% of these countries’ exports go to EU Member States. It is worth noting that trade between the same sectors has also grown materially. There can be no doubt that this is largely the result of vast foreign investment in these countries. The adoption of European rules may, however, impair the competitiveness of, for instance, the agricultural and industrial industries. In its latest evaluation, of November 2001, the Commission concluded that all accession countries except Rumania and Bulgaria have a functioning market economy. Of these countries, the Baltic states, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia and the Czech Republic are considered capable of holding their own within the single market, provided they continue to reform. Malta and Cyprus already fully meet the economic criterion. Subsequent to this Commission report, the European Council of Laeken indicated in December that eight to ten countries will be joining the EU as from 2004. The chances of a big bang scenario, with all accession countries except Bulgaria and Rumania joining at the same time, has thus gained in probability. Politically, this would be the preferred route, eliminating tensions between countries joining soon or at a later stage and facilitating the ratification process of individual accession treaties. On the other hand, a big bang scenario should not conceal the persisting – and sometimes substantial – structural differences between accession countries. There is a correlation between potential problems in the economic structure and the stage of transition reached. The consequent specific policy challenges will continue to demand attention even after accession, and notably when participation in the Monetary Union is considered. Policy challenges for accession countries on the road to convergence Let me begin by pointing out that over the past ten years the countries in Central and Eastern Europe have engaged in a highly successful catching-up exercise. Painful reforms were enacted, often attended by rampant unemployment. The necessary institutions, such as central banks, were built up from scratch. At the same time, the transition process from a centrally planned to a market economy usually proved more laborious than expected. The economic downturn was such that only a few countries have managed to regain the GDP level recorded before 1990. The growth potential may exceed the average in the European Union, but so far the margin has been slim. For instance, the Czech central bank puts the potential growth rate of the Czech economy at 2-3% per annum. Income differentials vis-à-vis the European Union will consequently persist for some time to come. In fact the policy challenges of the accession countries lie in furthering structural reforms aimed at raising the growth potential. Economically, structural and real convergence towards the EU interact. It is a lengthy process, involving such measures as introducing free enterprise and corporate governance, as well as setting up social security systems and fighting abuse and corruption. In this context, the Commission recently announced an action plan intended to boost the institutional capabilities of the accession countries. Looking at my own field, I see that banking supervision will need to be stepped up. In general, the financial sector is not developing in line with the economy as a whole, and plays no more than a limited role in the financing of local enterprises. The capitalisation rate of banks and share/bond markets in Poland and Hungary is less than a third that in the EU. Financial intermediation must clearly be stimulated if economic development and growth are to be boosted. In parallel, supervisory powers will have to be strengthened further. Finally, several accession countries face specific sectoral problems. Here the restructuring of heavy industry in Poland and Slovakia comes to mind, as do the depreciation of bad debts in Slovakia and the Czech Republic and the transformation of the vast and unproductive agricultural sectors in Poland 
 BIS Review 19/2002 3 and the Baltic states. The transition to a modern economy will clearly be attended by further economic and hence social friction. All in all, it seems to me that these structural problems are taken into account in the Copenhagen test, but that the ultimate test is a general and political one. Copenhagen is consequently no guarantee for a high measure of structural convergence towards the current EU Member States. This need not pose problems so long as the structural and administrative challenges are really acknowledged in an expanded Union, an issue I will deal with in greater detail later. As noted, the prospective Member States face a major challenge in that they need to boost their prosperity, in other words, achieve real convergence with the current EU. The differences in prosperity between the accession countries and the EU are exceptionally large. Per capita income in Poland is less than 20% of that in the EU. By comparison, per capita income in Portugal, the poorest EU Member State, comes out at over 50% of that in the EU. Slovenia is currently the only accession country where this level is roughly achieved. In order to equal the average of the poorest three EU Member States, Portugal, Greece and Spain, Poland would have to record average annual growth percentages of around eleven percent. Such real convergence poses several specifical challenges for economic policy. I shall try to explain this without going into too much theory.  • First of all, achieving the necessary high growth rate goes hand in hand with rising prices. In other words: the process of convergence makes inflation go up. This upward pressure can be partly offset through appreciation of the exchange rate. Generally speaking, a flexible exchange rate regime can alleviate the pressure on the economy generated by transition and catching up, for instance, when capital inflows are considerable. Under such circumstances, flexible regimes give less rise to speculative attacks on the currency.  • In addition, fast-growing transition countries are generally vulnerable to asymmetrical shocks (affecting only the country concerned). The Baltic states, for instance, were seriously affected by the Russian crisis of 1998. Another case in point is the Czech banking crisis of the mid-1990s, which ultimately resulted in a foreign exchange crisis.  • Maybe we should see the achievement of EU membership as a shock in its own right. After all, the considerable administrative and financial burden of adopting and complying with the Acquis Communautaire and of the confrontation with competition in the single market constitute a major change to economic functioning. This calls for a flexible policy.  Given these specific challenges to policy posed by transition and convergence, it is worth noting that those accession countries which have made the most progress, such as Hungary, the Czech Republic and Poland, have switched to more flexible exchange rate regimes in recent years. This allows them to exercise greater influence on real appreciation and strong capital inflows, to reduce potential speculative attacks on the currency and to partially absorb shocks. Policy challenges and participation in EMU What is the relationship between the challenges posed by structural and real convergence and participation in Economic and Monetary Union? As you may know, countries acceding to the European Union may begin to consider changing over to the euro after two years. The question arises whether under the given circumstances early introduction of the euro is always advisable. It must be remembered that the instrument of exchange rate flexibility is no longer available to countries which have joined the monetary union. There is furthermore a considerable chance that a new Member State eager to change over to the euro quickly may find the euro area-wide monetary conditions incompatible with its specific circumstances. On the one hand, an accession country which has been successful in its efforts to catch up will temporarily face structurally higher inflation levels. On the other, such a country’s economic weight is too insignificant to affect the ECB’s monetary policy. In such a situation, negative real interest rates, overheating of the economy and erratic economic cycles may occur, making very heavy demands on macroeconomic management and the flexibility of the economy, notably the labour market. This brings us back to structural convergence and the requirements and implementation of the Copenhagen test. 
 4 BIS Review 19/2002 New Member States in the European process of policy coordination Given these structural and real challenges to policy, it would seem advisable to continue to comply with the essence of the Copenhagen test following accession to the EU. This would give the accession process the necessary flexibility if a big bang scenario were actually enacted, so that transition periods might be considered for specific parts of the Acquis Communautaire. In fact, such an approach would also allay the fears voiced by the Scientific Council for Government Policy regarding potential erosion of the single market. Their central concern is that new Member States should not only incorporate all 90,000 pages of the Acquis Communautaire in their national legislation, but actually implement them. [As a matter of fact, the European Union is already paying the necessary attention to transition- and catch-up-related policy challenges in the financial and economic field. Both the European Council of Ministers of Finance and the Eurosystem have entered into active consultations with the accession countries to discuss diverse issues such as the monetary policy strategy, financial stability and fiscal policy. During these consultations, the EU addresses not just the challenges inherent in joining the Union, but also the manner in which successful convergence can be continued after accession.] A major element in this surveillance is exchange rate poliy. Sooner or later the new Member States will take part in the European exchange rate mechanism, ERM II. The Treaty provides for a minimum participation period of two years before changeover to the euro can be considered. It cannot be sufficiently stressed that apart from this requirement, participation in the mechanism can offer the necessary stability and flexibility for a successful convergence process. The ERM offers stability in the form of a central parity anchor against the euro, and flexibility in the shape of ample fluctuation margins and the option of central parity adjustments. Participation in ERM II should therefore not be perceived as an obligatory hurdle on the road to the euro, as some policy-makers in Central and Eastern Europe unfortunately do. [Actually, the financial and economic dialogue with the accession countries could be incorporated into the regular process of European policy coordination and surveillance, with special emphasis on the monitoring of transition periods, specific challenges to policy and administrative capacity. Changeover to the euro will eventually follow, when a sufficient degree of structural convergence can guarantee the desired price stability in an environment marked by an irrevocably fixed exchange rate and a centralised monetary policy.] Conclusion Having set out the specific policy challenges facing the accession countries consequent on accession, transition and convergence, I am coming to the end of this address. Obviously these challenges will continue to present themselves in some way or another to newly joined Member States. In this context, I warned against premature changeover to the euro. The surrender of exchange rate flexibility and the euro area-wide orientation of monetary policy may not be compatible with the challenges posed by structural and real convergence. It is important that these challenges (continue to) be explicitly acknowledged in the regular process of European policy coordination. This will guarantee the successful economic integration of new Member States into the Union. Expanding the EU is a duty which ensues from the essence of the European integration process. At the same time, both the cohesion of Europe and the rights which European citizens derive from Europe must be guaranteed. In this light, it is imperative, and in the interests of all, that new Member States succeed in catching up economically. The current participants, on their part, bear the responsibility of preparing the Union for expansion. Permit me, in this context, to issue a warning before the Genootschap’s next discussion, on the institutional powers of a heterogeneous Europe. There can be no doubt that European interests are Dutch interests. This means that we must reform the single agricultural policy and structural policy in Europe before the EU expands any further. Moreover, it would only be natural if a new European regional policy were to address only the poorest regions in an extended Union. Dutch interests are best served by a strong role for the European Commission and the European Parliament, especially in an extended, more heterogeneous Union. I would therefore like to warn against a French form of intergovernmental centralisation – a gouvernement economique. If such a power policy-based authority were established, the position of the Netherlands could become bogged 
 BIS Review 19/2002 5 down in the trade-off between the interests of large Member States, with the Netherlands receiving financial compensations on the periphery. And the greater the number of countries joining the Union, the larger the periphery.  
 BIS Review 18/2002 1 Yutaka Yamaguchi: Systemic risk Speech by Mr Yutaka Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System, at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk held in Basel, Switzerland, 7 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction: A brief history of the Systemic Risk Conference Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to join you at the third conference on “Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk”. This theme has gained increasing importance since the first conference in 1995. The keen attention paid to it by the international community is evident in the fact that a number of international fora now endeavour to spot potential financial vulnerabilities which might lead to systemic crisis in the global market. Actually, the term “systemic risk” makes me a bit uneasy as it unfortunately has too realistic a connotation in my own country. I am looking forward to taking home new insights on this subject, and, as Chair of the Committee on the Global Financial System co-hosting this conference, I would be happy if you could do the same. The aim of this series of conferences is to enhance our understanding of the mechanism through which a systemic shock is generated and transmitted. Meanwhile, during the six years since the first conference, we have witnessed significant changes in the world of finance. As a result, the focus of the conferences has changed over the years. If I may generalise at the risk of oversimplification, the centre stage of the first conference in 1995 was occupied by VaR methodology, which was then gaining acceptance at leading financial institutions. Reporters explored how risk could be quantitatively measured and what would be the real-life meaning of such measures. Well, in real life, crisis erupted in Asia in 1997 triggered by events that were largely beyond the bounds of standard VaR methodology. Naturally, discussions at the second conference in 1998 were much influenced by the Asian crisis. We began to realise that market microstructure theory could shed light on market dynamics in times of stress. Our third conference today carries this theme further, with many papers paying attention to what creates stress and how stress is contagious. Triangular view of systemic risk This brief history of our conference series suggests that with the structural changes in financial markets, systemic risk has revealed a few faces in actual crisis and therefore the nexus between them has to be more deeply explored. Conventional thinking or the narrowest coverage inextricably tied systemic risk to banks. Systemic disturbances that originate in a bank spill over to the banking system, which in turn adversely affects the real economy. Obviously, this bank-centred risk propagation still holds; in fact, much of the existing safety net is aimed at preventing a chain reaction within the banking system. However, it has now become evident that financial markets play a significant role as channels propagating the disturbances involving the banking system as well as the real economy.  The importance of the market and its dynamics is underscored by our recent experiences in Japan, the Asian region, Russia and the LTCM case. The novelty of the Russian and the LTCM crises lies in the fact that the largest capital market in the world “seized up” without entailing any banking crisis. It was often the case that the sudden deterioration in asset prices brought about turbulence in the financial system. To illustrate, the successive failures of major Japanese financial institutions in 1997 and 1998 were not directly triggered by a major default. Instead, their undoing was a rapid loss of confidence in the market. Typically, as the soundness of a bank was questioned in the market, prices of its stocks and credit ratings started to fall. The bank would then begin to experience funding difficulties, as its access to markets became problematic. In such a situation, the troubled bank had to resort to fire sales of assets, which in turn damaged its balance sheet and drove its stocks down even further. In this self-fulfilling spiral, several banks went out of business. At the same time, the deterioration in asset prices led to further difficulties in channelling funds to the corporate sector, a familiar credit crunch process. A credit crunch is usually attributed to the dysfunction of the banking system – a correct observation of one aspect of such a phenomenon. A deeper look suggests that the process is more complex. We 
 2 BIS Review 18/2002 have witnessed that the borrowers blame the banks for tightening credit standards, while the lenders complain of the lack of credit demand. No doubt, an important feedback mechanism also runs from the real economy to the financial system via corporate balance sheets, asset prices, banks’ capital position, among others. I am not attempting to draw definitive lessons from a specific episode of past crisis, let alone from the unsolved problems of the Japanese economy. However, the experiences of the last several years show that disturbances are multifaceted. Systemic problems develop as market risk, liquidity risk and credit risk factors interact with each other in a complex manner. This means that any evaluation of systemic risk based on one isolated factor could only provide a fragmentary view. What is called for is the “triangular view of systemic risk” – comprehensive analysis covering the interrelations or nexus between the banking system, financial markets and the real economy. It is against this background that I think we need to devote at least as much attention to market microstructure as to sophisticated analyses of “fat tails” in loss distribution. A focus on market microstructure could shed light on the relations between various risk factors. Particularly important is to investigate how individual market participants under different budget and information constraints would behave rationally in stressful events, and how such behaviour would affect the formation of asset prices. Strategic interactions Recent episodes of financial crises seem to defy explanation on the basis of conventional economic theory, which regards macroeconomic phenomena as a mere aggregate of independent decision-making by economic agents. As a reflection of such limitations of conventional theory, there is a growing body of work attempting to interpret financial crises from the viewpoint of “strategic interactions” among market participants. I would like to devote a few minutes to outlining why.  Strategic interaction can be defined as a process in which each market participant explores his/her optimal strategy by conjecturing the response of other participants. Some of the papers presented at this conference follow this path. Herding behaviour is one example. As you know, a large number of small investors tend to follow a small number of large investors. Once stressful events happen, such behaviour is likely to lead to one-sided market sentiment, which accelerates and propagates the stress within and across the markets. From the viewpoint of policymakers, herding behaviour as a phenomenon is hard to tackle. If we understand such a phenomenon as a consequence of strategic interactions among market participants, however, we might find a key to reducing the risk of triggering herding behaviour. According to my reading of this line of research, the outbreak of systemic disturbances would heavily depend on how many market participants, when faced with systemic threats, expect disturbances to actually occur. In other words, a crisis is not necessarily an accident, but a consequence of market participants’ expectations. Their expectations are formed from conjectural views of other market participants’ responses to such threats. The magnitude of any crisis and the extent of contagion would critically depend on the feedback from market participants reacting collectively to systemic threats. Feedbacks could also accelerate any crisis. These explanations seem to offer a useful perspective on the mechanism of systemic disturbances and appropriate policy responses thereto. The strategic interaction framework seems to offer us a roadmap for developing more stress-resistant markets. A possible approach would be to enhance the visibility of future stress. Let us suppose that there is a scenario consisting of a series of events leading to stress. If market participants have the view that such a scenario could result in a serious impact on a market in the future, they might take necessary actions to avoid losses which would materialise under the scenario. As market participants take necessary actions gradually and individually, the actual impact of events as they happen would be softened and stress would not materialise. In other words, a stress scenario would not remain a stress scenario once it is publicly recognised as such. In fact, we observe such episodes in financial markets. For example, proposed changes to accounting rules sometimes raise concerns initially, but only rarely would they result in severe impacts when they are implemented. Based on these experiences, I should say that an approach enhancing the visibility of stress appears more appealing. “Macro stress-census”, an experiment conducted by the CGFS, might be one of the options for developing commonly recognised stress scenarios among market participants and central banks, although not a panacea. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 3 Challenges to central banks Before concluding my remarks, let me outline the challenges facing central banks with regard to systemic risk. In the six years since the first Systemic Risk Conference, we have learned considerably from our involvement in real-life crises and through intellectual interchanges at this conference and other venues. At the same time, one answer leads to new questions and there remain many unanswered questions. The same can be said for policy responses by central banks in times of financial crisis. In relation to policy responses to systemic risk, we have generally recognised the importance of both pre-emptive actions, ie actions aimed at preventing systemic problems, and after-the-fact measures to contain an unfolding crisis. In this regard, I see a greater rationale than ever for views that stress the importance of preventive measures. This is because globalisation of financial markets and consolidation of financial institutions have considerably raised the possible costs of dealing with actual systemic disturbances. To this end, the strengthening of market discipline as well as supervision would be essential, and the international community has made serious joint efforts. However, even the best of preventive measures may not be always successful in completely removing sources of systemic crises in an environment where financial intermediation keeps evolving at a speed beyond our wildest imagination. If there is the slightest chance of severe financial disturbances, the central bank must not lower its guard. In envisaging crisis management, the changing environment could compel us to rethink established doctrines. For example, there is no doubt about stressing that we need to minimise moral hazard. Nevertheless, in the event that a systemic crisis is actually unfolding, we must not overlook the fact that there is an inherent, conflicting aspect in crisis management. In a sense, crisis management artificially creates moral hazard in order to avoid catastrophic consequences. In real-life policy responses, authorities inevitably face a trade-off between prevention of systemic crisis and minimisation of moral hazard. Another example concerns the traditional lender of last resort functions of the central bank. According to traditional thinking, this is aimed only at banks. But the contemporary reality, as I noted earlier, is that systemic problems could originate in financial markets and such markets are populated not only by banks but also by a large number of non-bank financial institutions and conglomerates. This may argue in favour of the view that the traditional principle should be augmented. A related issue is the conditions under which central banks would take certain policy actions, such as invoking their lender of the last resort functions. Traditionally, “constructive ambiguity” was regarded as the golden rule in such cases, but the Bank of Japan distanced itself from this in dealing with the crisis in the late 1990s, with a view to precluding speculations and enhancing policy transparency and accountability. The issue of the practical significance of “constructive ambiguity” must be explored vigorously without leaving any ambiguity. Conclusions Today, I have offered my views on systemic risk, which might have raised more questions than answers for central banks. In concluding my remarks, I would like to stress that central banks must continue to pursue these issues to discharge their responsibilities. The responsibilities arise from the following facts. First, central banks are unique economic agents having relations with each corner of the systemic risk triangle – the banking system, financial markets and the real economy. Second, central banks are expected to confront almost every systemic crisis as entities that can readily provide liquidity. Fortunately, central banks have made progress in gaining insights through extensive research on market dynamics. Nevertheless, central banks must not be satisfied with what they have achieved so far. In order to answer the remaining questions, and refine views on established concepts, we are looking forward to continuously interacting with market participants, who have first-hand knowledge of the markets, and members of academia, who have been laying the groundwork. In this regard, I hope this series of conferences will remain a valuable venue that continues to inspire the central bank community. Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 1 David Clementi: A bank for all regions: promoting monetary and financial stability in the United Kingdom Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Ulster Society of Chartered Accountants, Belfast, 14 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much indeed for your kind invitation to be here with you tonight. Despite its name, the Bank of England is the central bank of the United Kingdom, and as such it is essential for us to get out and about in the country at large, explaining our actions, and listening hard to the views of businesses and the wider public about the way we are doing our job. In the past year, members of the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee have made some 50 visits across the UK. On this trip, apart from attending this dinner, I have held a meeting with the regional council of the CBI, discussed trading conditions with local business people, and explained our mission to some of the Northern Irish press. I want to cover three main themes in my comments tonight. First, I want briefly to explain the Bank's general approach to monetary policy. Second, I want to give you my current assessment of the outlook for the economy. And, third, I want to explain the Bank's other key role - that of maintaining stability in our financial system. The accountancy profession is very much under the microscope at the moment, as part of the rash of Enronitis which fills the pages of the press. I want to touch on Enron at the end of my talk here tonight, since it raises a number of issues of relevance to us at the Bank in our broader financial stability role. Maintaining monetary stability I turn first though to the Bank's role of maintaining monetary stability. The current institutional arrangements were put in place in May 1997, when the Chancellor established the Monetary Policy Committee. The MPC's target is extremely clear, and - I hope - well known. We aim for 2½% inflation in retail prices (excluding mortgage payments) at all times. That target is set by the Government. And it is symmetric: that is to say, we worry as much about being below the target as we do about being above it. That makes sense because the problems of severe deflation are just as great as the problems of severe inflation. Since the inception of the MPC, RPIX inflation has been extremely stable by historical standards, and close to target. Some commentators have suggested we have had more than our fair share of luck in achieving this outcome. There may well be some truth in that. But I'm not sure that we should be too surprised. Market and survey evidence shows that people are now clear that the MPC will do what it takes to keep inflation on track. And that expectation is factored into their own behaviour, whether it is negotiating wages, setting prices, or deciding how much to borrow and consume. All of that goes a long way towards ensuring that inflation is well anchored to the target. Of course, from month to month, inflation will still vary somewhat around 2½%. In recent months, RPIX has been a little below target, and there has even been some interest in whether it might reach 1.5%, the point at which the Governor would have to write a formal letter to the Chancellor explaining what was going on. The pick up of inflation to 2.6% in January has silenced this discussion, at least for the time being. We pore over the reasons for such developments in enormous detail at the Bank. But in the bigger scheme of things these month-to-month movements are quite small, and are I hope likely to play very little - if any - role in the key decisions of your businesses, or those you represent. People often ask if our relative success at targeting inflation has come at a cost in terms of lost output or employment. It is increasingly accepted, I think, that there is no such trade-off in the long run. And, looking at recent data, it is hard to see a trade-off even in the short run. Unemployment remains close to its lowest level for a quarter of a century - a trend seen in Northern Ireland just as much as in the UK as a whole. And UK GDP has now risen for 38 consecutive quarters (albeit in the case of 2001 Q4, only just!), the longest continuous expansion since post-war records began. Achieving low and stable inflation is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to the wider economic goals of sustainable growth and employment. Having an inflation target certainly does not mean that we ignore 
 2 BIS Review 18/2002 real activity. We have discretion over how rapidly we try to bring inflation back to target when and if it diverges from 2½%. And we regularly publish our best estimate about the likely future path of growth up to a two year horizon. But the aim of policy is clear - we do what is necessary to keep inflation on target. As you know, there are nine of us on the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee, and we meet once a month to make our interest rate decision. This is a rigorous process, and rightly so. But, of course, agreement on process need not, and does not, imply universal agreement on the appropriate stance of policy, as our minutes show. Indeed, an industry has grown up geared to guessing MPC members' personal habits, psychoanalysing our personalities and classifying us into different species of the aviary. But it is important to recognise, I think, that disagreements are evidence of the strength of the system, not its weakness. Economic analysis involves a great deal of peering into the future, so it is not surprising that there should be differences of view. And the opportunity to explore and explain these differences in a rational and open way is an important part of getting to a better answer. The outlook for the economy I now want to turn briefly to the current policy debate. The key focus of the MPC's recent discussions has been the implications of the slowdown in world growth, which became apparent in the US during the first half of last year, but was exacerbated by the tragic events of 11 September. World trade rose by only around 1½% in 2001, less than a quarter of the average growth in the previous three years. That of course has had very serious implications for businesses exposed to international trade, of which I know there are many in Northern Ireland.  Monetary policy has not been idle in the face of this challenge. Interest rates have been cut by 4¾% in the US since the start of last year, by 2% in the UK and by 1½% in the euro area. How far monetary policy by itself would be able to insulate the world economy if the slowdown were to persist is I think hard to say at this stage. Very significant uncertainties remain. But recent news from the US has been encouraging. GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year has been revised upwards, consumer confidence has rebounded somewhat and the main forward looking surveys of activity in the manufacturing and services sector have been looking substantially more positive since the turn of the year. Consistent with this tentative recovery in optimism, the Consensus survey of professional economists' forecasts for near-term growth in the US has been revised upwards for the first time in quite a period. So far, the UK has escaped the worst of the squalls raging across the Atlantic. Though GDP growth slowed over the course of last year, output in 2001 was still 2.4% higher than a year earlier, close to trend growth. Underlying this relatively benign aggregate picture, there are of course some quite marked differences: on the expenditure side, between growth in consumption, which has surged ahead, and growth in investment, which has been strikingly depressed; and, on the output side, between the fortunes of firms in manufacturing, which have borne the brunt of the global slowdown, and those of firms in the more sheltered services sector. These differences are sometimes referred to as 'imbalances', and it is certainly true that we can neither expect (nor wish) for them to persist over the long run. The shake-out in manufacturing has been particularly severe, as you know here only too well. Manufacturing output in Northern Ireland fell by some 4.6% in the year to last autumn, compared with a fall of 3.5% in the UK as a whole. But not all of the sectoral differences that have emerged are necessarily unwelcome. Indeed, for those seeking to ensure stability in the economy as a whole, it is really just as well that consumption growth has remained robust at a time when the net trade position of the economy has worsened so markedly. And, as recent MPC minutes show, that has been our intention. So long as the world economy recovers quickly enough to pick up the slack as consumption slows, it may be that we in the UK will avoid the sharp recessions of previous cycles. Of course, this is a big 'if', and I do not want to imply that I am excessively confident that this will occur. Rapid consumption growth brings with it considerable risks, not least when it is financed by a large build up in consumer debt. But it is the MPC's central expectation that we will escape a serious slowdown at current interest rates. In the last few weeks, we have seen some tentative signs of an unwinding of some of the more severe sectoral gaps in the economy, with the slowdown in retail sales growth since the start of the year, and an encouraging pickup in a number of surveys of business confidence and investment intentions. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 3 Overall, it seems to me that the risks around the outlook for UK inflation are fairly evenly balanced. On the downside, the speed of the recovery in the world economy may be held back by a number of factors, including the large outstanding debt position of corporate and household sectors; investment in the UK might remain subdued; or the weakness in pricing pressures we have seen over the past year or so may persist. But on the upside, the US might bounce back more rapidly than anticipated; consumption growth might remain robust; or the sterling exchange rate might begin to adjust downwards.  Against this background of risks, it is quite possible we may see rates at current levels for some time until the way ahead is clearer. But, as you know, economic events have a habit of developing quite rapidly, so even short term predictions are never easy. For our part, we will continue to assess the case for interest rate changes on a month-by-month basis. In carrying out our task, the MPC relies heavily on having the very best information at our disposal, and in that we are enormously assisted by our network of regional Agencies. Each month, our Agents drive thousands of miles, eat hundreds of rushed sandwich lunches and, on occasion, no doubt push your goodwill to the limit as they seek out the latest news on developments in your businesses. Nigel Falls, our local Agent, is here with me tonight, and for those of you who have not already met him I really do encourage you to do so after the dinner. Agents attend the monthly briefing in Threadneedle Street ahead of each policy meeting, so information from their contacts is fed directly into the heart of the policy process. I know I speak for all of my colleagues on the MPC when I say that we really do find this a crucial barometer of current events, so I hope you will feel that a short while with our Agents once or twice a year is time well spent! Financial stability and Enron I now turn to my final subject tonight - that of the Bank's role in ensuring financial stability. Responsibility for the day-to-day supervision of banks passed from the Bank of England to the Financial Services Authority in 1997. But as the central bank we still have a key role in overseeing the stability of the system as a whole. In this guise we meet on a monthly basis with HM Treasury and the FSA in the so-called tripartite Standing Committee, to review the risks facing the UK financial system and take stock of any actions which may be required to address them. Keeping close to the FSA is particularly important. To this end, I sit on the FSA Board, and Howard Davies is a member of the Bank's Court. Of course, as I have no need to remind you here, with the border of the euro area just a few miles down the road, we cannot look at the UK system in isolation from the wider international financial markets. The world economic slowdown, with the attendant rise in credit risks, the deepening problems in Argentina spreading to its banking system, and the events of 11 September, creating temporary liquidity strains in New York and elsewhere, have all posed serious risks to the stability of the international financial system. So far, the response has been encouraging. The capital position of many of the larger financial players is stronger than in previous cycles. There seems to be a more sophisticated approach to differentiating between sovereign risks in the emerging markets. And the hugely impressive efforts of staff, together with the largely successful operation of contingency plans, and the flexibility of the US monetary authorities, saw us through the worst of the aftermath to last autumn's attacks without a serious crisis emerging. The latest topic of discussion in financial circles is, of course, the implications of the collapse of Enron. The case raises a host of issues for firms and policy makers. Some of these relate to accounting standards; some relate to the way in which the auditing profession organises itself; and some relate to corporate governance issues more generally. There are also some issues about the scope and operation of the financial regulation net. There have also been questions raised about the implications of the collapse for health of the financial system as a whole, which is very much of interest to the Bank, given our responsibility for systemic risk. From the current perspective, these implications appear limited, however. Enron had extensive links with banks and other financial firms, mediated in part through the use of relatively new credit risk transfer instruments. Tracing these exposures through to their ultimate owners is not a particularly straightforward business - an issue that we at the Bank have been raising in a macro-prudential context for some time now, most recently in our December Financial Stability Review. But on current information, the residual exposures do not appear unmanageable. Indeed, the apparent dispersion of exposures may even turn out to demonstrate the effectiveness of these markets in spreading risk. 
 4 BIS Review 18/2002 The Bank does not have any direct locus on the accounting and corporate governance issues raised by the case. But the way in which firms' financial performance is overseen and presented does have an important bearing on the disciplines applied by financial markets, which are an essential component of maintaining financial stability in the wider sense. Public confidence in financial statements and the role of auditors is critical. One set of issues relates to the appropriateness of accounting rules governing the treatment of special purpose vehicles and those relating to revenue recognition. This is a technical area, and one in which the rules applied in the US and the UK are relevantly different. No doubt the appropriate professional bodies will be looking at these questions. Another set of issues relates to rules and practice governing the appointment of auditors, and the extent and nature of non-audit work carried out by firms' auditors. Best practice in listed companies has for some time recognised the importance of rotating individual auditors. But the relationship between a major listed company and its auditor goes well beyond the role of the senior day-to-day audit partner. Before coming to the Bank of England, I had been involved with companies where the audit partner had rotated; but the senior partner of the firm, who took a close interest in the relationship, of course had not. If the profession believes that rotation is important to maintain independence, should that rotation not relate to the firm, with whom the relationship is, rather than any individual? There are of course good arguments on the other side, and it will be interesting to see where the review of these and related matters, recently announced by Patricia Hewitt, comes out. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, it has been a pleasure for me to come to Northern Ireland, to meet with a number of business people during the course of this visit, and to join you this evening. Can I take this opportunity to wish you, and the business communities you serve, all success for the future. 
 BIS Review 18/2002 1 Willem F Duisenberg: The introduction of the euro: a (critical) retrospect and a preview Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the meeting of the Dutch Society of Editors-in-Chief, The Hague, 15 March 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It gives me great pleasure to talk to you today about the introduction of the euro. If we take the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins as a benchmark, then the process can be said to have been completed – and, if I might add, very smoothly and successfully so. However, if we take a broader perspective, then the introduction of the euro can be said to be an ongoing process. The euro area economy is large, in some respects complex and still very new on the map of major economic entities. These features imply that the policy challenges are manifold and will remain so for a long time to come. I would thus like to talk today not only about the cash changeover, but also about the policy challenges facing the euro area economy.  The policy area with which I am most closely involved is, of course, the monetary one, and the challenge for the ECB is to deliver what is required of it – namely price stability over the medium term. However, the existence of a single monetary policy and a single market implies that almost all fields of economic policy are affected by European economic and monetary integration – most importantly budgetary and structural policy. If I may be permitted to state the obvious, the challenges are to maintain sound fiscal policies, foster efficiency in public expenditure and tax systems and improve the functioning of labour and product markets in order to enhance the euro area's growth potential. The unique framework of monetary, fiscal and structural policies in the euro area has fostered recent discussion about its economic governance, that is the "interplay" between monetary, fiscal and structural policies and the issue of whether and to what extent fiscal and structural policies, in particular, should become more centralised at the European level. This is an extensive list of issues (as requested by Mr. Broertjes), meaning that my focus must necessarily be a broad one. Let me now make a few remarks about the cash changeover, before proceeding to a brief discussion of the three key policy areas, namely monetary, fiscal and structural policy. I will finish my speech by briefly touching upon the issue of the economic governance of the euro area.  Cash changeover With the end of the changeover period on 28 February 2002 the euro became the sole legal tender in all euro area countries with effect from 1 March 2002. Both in terms of acceptance by consumers and the achievement of logistical targets, the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has surpassed all expectations. Here and there some minor mishaps have occurred, but this is quite normal for such a huge and complex undertaking. In any case, with the support of European citizens, who have accepted their new money both rapidly and enthusiastically, these minor difficulties have been overcome. European citizens have clearly chosen to be actors and not merely spectators in the euro changeover. According to the latest eurobarometer of the European Commission, over 80% of euro area citizens see the euro changeover as having been successful, and almost 70% declare themselves happy that the euro has become their new currency.  But what were the logistical factors which contributed to the success of the euro cash changeover? First, measures were taken to ensure an early return of national banknotes and coins. One example which I would mention in this context are the campaigns which aimed at encouraging people to pay any surplus banknotes and coins into their bank accounts well before the end of 2001. Overall, the number of legacy currency banknotes in circulation fell by almost one-third during the course of 2001. By the end of the cash changeover period, some EUR 38 billion – or a little over 10% of the original amount of legacy currency banknotes – was still in circulation. Second, the pre-distribution or "frontloading" of the "critical mass" of euro banknotes and coins made a crucial contribution to ensuring a smooth changeover in all euro area countries. A four-month lead time was required in order to ensure that sufficient euro banknotes and coins were available within banks and other target groups on 1 January 2002. This pre-distribution was a key factor in the successful 
 2 BIS Review 18/2002 attainment of one of the primary goals of the changeover process, namely to ensure that the bulk of cash transactions in euro could be effected within a fortnight of the new currency's introduction. All in all, more than 6 billion euro banknotes were distributed by the central banks of the euro area prior to "€-day". Nearly 38 billion euro coins were frontloaded in parallel. To put these figures into perspective, four-fifths of euro banknotes and almost all euro coins were frontloaded during this period.  Third, given that in normal circumstances around 70% of banknotes are put into circulation via automated teller machines (ATMs), a quick adaptation of these machines was crucial to a smooth changeover. It was necessary to convert a total of more than 200,000 ATMs, either "on-site" in bank branches or "off-site" – for example in shopping centres. Following thorough and highly efficient preparations by the banking sector, the adaptation process was extremely rapid, with virtually all ATMs converted by 4 January 2002.  A fourth factor which contributed to the smooth changeover was the particular commitment of the banking sector to putting the low-denomination banknotes of up to EUR 20 into circulation on a large scale at the beginning of 2002. This reduced considerably the need for retailers to hold large amounts of cash during the first few days of 2002. In addition, in countries where welfare payments are paid largely in cash, these were effected in low denominations. All this ensured that, at the beginning of the year, low-denomination banknotes accounted for over 80% of the total number of banknotes and for 40% of their value. This is clearly more than the usual share of low-denomination banknotes in banknote circulation. Monetary policy Let me now talk about the introduction of the euro from a broader perspective. I shall begin with monetary policy and the primary objective of the ECB, namely to maintain price stability in the euro area.  For the sake of this presentation, I would like to divide the first few years of the single monetary policy into three phases – rather artificially on the basis of whether inflationary pressures were seen as rising or falling. In the first of these, which began at the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), inflationary pressures in the euro area were abating during a phase of economic slowdown at the global level which had started in 1998, following several episodes of financial turmoil around the world. The decline in economic growth was accompanied by a sharp reduction in commodity prices, which contributed to a significant fall in import prices. In this environment, the Governing Council decided, in April 1999, to reduce the key interest rates, to a level of 2.50% for the main refinancing rate. This was a precautionary move, aimed at reducing the risk that inflation could head towards and hover around very low levels. In the course of 1999, the second phase in my breakdown, signs gradually emerged that a recovery in economic activity was taking place in the euro area. At the same time, oil prices were gradually but steadily increasing, and the exchange rate of the euro depreciated significantly. The resulting increase in import prices was having a substantial effect on consumer price inflation. In an environment of accelerating economic growth, to levels above potential, this could have been followed by what are known as second-round effects, with possible longer-lasting effects on inflation. In addition, the high growth of M3 – well above the reference value of 4½% – and the development of credit aggregates clearly indicated that risks to price stability were moving to the upside. The Governing Council therefore increased the key rates a first time in November 1999, reversing the precautionary move made in April, and a further six times in the period up to October 2000, by a total of 225 basis points. Moving on to the third period, there were signs in late 2000 and in early 2001 that economic growth was gradually stabilising to levels in line with potential. This followed the effects of oil price increases on real disposable income in the euro area and accompanied a deterioration in the global economic climate, in particular the economic climate in the United States. At the same time, monetary growth was gradually declining to levels in line with the reference value and, in the course of the spring (when M3 growth could be corrected for some statistical upward distortions which were previously not known), even fell below it. However, in the spring of 2001 inflation was still above the ECB's definition of price stability, namely a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area of below 2%, to a certain extent owing to increases in unprocessed food prices resulting from the BSE crisis and the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in some countries. As these effects were expected to be temporary, in a situation in which it was anticipated that medium-term inflationary 
 BIS Review 18/2002 3 pressures would decline, the Governing Council acted in a forward-looking way and cut the key rates twice, in May and August 2001.  In the course of 2001 it gradually became more evident that the global economic downturn would be deeper and more protracted than initially expected, with repercussions on euro area economic developments. In addition, the terrorist attacks in the United States in September 2001 constituted a major shock to the world economy, the implications of which were entirely unpredictable at the time. In the first instance, these attacks threatened to disrupt the functioning of financial markets. Thus, immediately after the terrorist attacks, the ECB took measures to ensure the normal functioning of financial markets. The Governing Council also reacted to the events by holding an extraordinary teleconference meeting, at which it was decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates in concert with the Federal Reserve System of the United States. In the following period, as signs emerged that the slowdown in economic activity was significant, pointing in the direction of a further decline in inflationary pressures, the Governing Council again cut the key rates in November 2001, bringing the total reduction of the key rates in 2001 to 150 basis points. Since then, economic developments, which point to a gradual economic recovery in the euro area in the course of 2002, have been largely in line with the Governing Council's expectations, and we consider the current level of the key ECB interest rates appropriate to maintaining price stability over the medium term. To briefly conclude on monetary policy, the ECB has, in my view, proved itself capable of adapting to and operating in a difficult economic environment. While inflation has been above the definition of price stability for some time, medium-term inflationary expectations, as implied in bond yields or in forecasts and surveys, have consistently been below 2%. This is a sign that the credibility of the ECB is firmly established and that the public is confident that price stability will prevail. Fiscal policy The economic environment with which we at the ECB were confronted was also the day-to-day reality of the fiscal policy-makers in the individual euro area countries. In 2001, mainly as a result of the economic slowdown, the average budgetary balance in the euro area deteriorated for the first time since 1993. Automatic stabilisers played a significant role in budgetary outcomes in 2001. Major tax cuts also contributed to the deterioration, as they were often implemented without adequate offsetting expenditure restraints. As a result, a large majority of countries failed to meet the budgetary balances targeted in the stability programmes for 2001. By the same token, most countries rightly refrained from introducing a discretionary fiscal relaxation in response to the economic slowdown. Moreover, countries with remaining fiscal imbalances reaffirmed their commitment to attaining safe budgetary positions by 2003 or 2004. Developments in 2001 and the projected outcomes for 2002 confirm the vulnerability of public finances – especially in the countries with remaining imbalances. The European Commission recommended issuing an early warning to Germany and Portugal. The ECOFIN Council considered the subsequent reaffirmation and even strengthening of the fiscal commitments made by these two countries a sufficient response to the concerns. Vigilance is now needed to ensure both strict adherence to medium-term plans and rigorous implementation of the procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact. To briefly conclude on fiscal policies, recent experience shows how rapidly a budgetary position can deteriorate in adverse cyclical circumstances. This is of concern when the starting position is not fully sound. In my view, then, the main lesson to be drawn from recent experience is that, under normal circumstances, countries need to be in budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus.  And let us not forget that the medium-term challenges of coping with an ageing society also call for fiscal consolidation. Moreover, the 2000 Lisbon European Council put structural reform of public finances high on the agenda, with an eye to strengthening the European Union's growth potential.  Structural policies At the summit in Lisbon, the European Council also emphasised the need for product and labour market reforms as a key condition for the EU to become the most competitive and dynamic economy in the world. Structural reforms aimed at increasing the flexibility of euro area product and labour markets would, it was underlined, have substantial economic benefits and lower the adjustment costs associated with economic shocks. That we still need further structural reforms is, I think, beyond doubt. To take an example from the labour market: the strong employment growth witnessed in recent 
 4 BIS Review 18/2002 years suggests that labour market reforms have been progressing in the right direction, and, in particular, it suggests that the process of wage moderation in the euro area during this period has been beneficial. At the same time, however, the need for further reform is evident from the still high and persistent levels of unemployment and from low labour market participation in several euro area countries. For example, despite continued high unemployment, firms continue to report difficulties in recruiting suitably qualified workers, suggesting that improvements are needed in matching labour supply and demand.  Economic governance Finally, let me turn briefly to the issue of economic governance. With the start of Monetary Union, the Maastricht Treaty created a unique institutional structure. While there is a supranational European monetary order, most other policy areas are predominantly a national matter. This unity in diversity reflects Europe, with its wealth of different histories, cultures, political systems and constitutions. In principle, this structure has functioned relatively well and there is no need for a major overhaul. In some areas there is a clear case for permanently adopting a differentiated approach, for example in the case of labour market policies. Harmonisation in this field would hamper the very flexibility of prices and wages that each country, or even region or sector of the national economy should pursue for Monetary Union to be successful. In other areas, such as tax policies, there may be a gradual development towards more co-ordination between Member States. Diversity and differentiation should not in themselves be viewed as reflecting a lack of economic governance. On the contrary, the experience of the recent past bears out that this form of governance works well in practice. For instance, decentralised wage setting has led to broadly appropriate wage development in the recent past and contributed to employment growth. Monetary policy has kept inflation under control and reacted swiftly under circumstances which have sometimes been difficult. On the whole, fiscal policies have also reacted in a way which is compatible with both the economic environment and their medium-term objectives. All in all, there is clear evidence that policy-makers have acted appropriately in all three areas.  Conclusion Let me conclude. The cash changeover has been a resounding success. From a logistical point of view this operation proceeded very smoothly, thanks in large part to the comprehensive preparatory work undertaken by all involved. The people of the euro area countries have adapted to the new currency much more quickly than the ECB and the national central banks anticipated. In addition, notwithstanding the adverse price shocks to which the euro area has recently been subject, the prospects are good that annual inflation rates will return to below 2% in the coming months. Overall the ECB's monetary policy has been successful in maintaining stable long-term inflation expectations in a difficult environment. It is important to maintain the disciplinary effect of the Stability and Growth Pact; recent experience has shown how quickly a budgetary position can deteriorate, thus highlighting the importance of reaching and maintaining medium-term budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus. Structural policy is an area in which further action is also urgently needed. Finally, the economic policy framework of the euro area has been functioning satisfactorily, even in the largely unprecedented circumstances of 2001.  Thank you very much for your attention. I am now open to questions. 
 BIS Review 17/2002 1 David Dodge: Monetary policy choices: the Canadian experience Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Chambre de Commerce France-Canada and Les Canadiens en Europe (France), Paris, 12 March 2002. *      *      * It is a great pleasure to be with you today here in this wonderful and historic city. Canada and France share important links that cannot be weakened by time. There was, of course, a vibrant French presence in North America long before there was a country called Canada. The French contribution to Canada is not restricted to language alone. Canada's legal and political institutions, as well as our culture and way of life, retain a clearly visible French influence, and will continue to do so.  Obviously, our economies and the economic links between our countries have come a long way over the years. The Chambre de Commerce France-Canada was established just after the Second World War. The Chambre has played an important role in reinforcing commercial ties between our two countries that reflect the historical and cultural links already in place. Les Canadiens en Europe is another organization that seeks to strengthen the many ties between us. Today, France and Canada are both members of the G-7–partners at the forefront of the global economy.  The strong links between our two countries are also reflected in the close working relationship between the Bank of Canada and the Bank of France. Since becoming Governor of the Bank of Canada last year, I have been pleased to continue this relationship. I am happy to be working once again with Jean-Claude Trichet, the Governor of the Bank of France. Bank of Canada staff regularly attend the annual seminars hosted by the Bank of France. And I hope we will continue to strengthen the working relationship between our two institutions.  Over the years, both Canada and France have had to make decisions about the framework guiding monetary policy. The authorities in the two countries have made choices that reflect the differences in our economies. Today I'd like to talk about some of these choices, and what they have meant for our countries. As well, I will give you a brief update on Canada's current economic situation and outlook.  Inflation targeting  In the early 1990s, most of the world's central banks found themselves facing a common problem. They needed to make sure that their economies did not return to the high and volatile inflation seen in previous decades. Further, they were looking for a way to keep inflation expectations under control. In general, central banks did a good job with this. Certainly the Bank of France was successful in the early 1990s in building credibility as an inflation-fighting central bank.  At that time, the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada had come to a shared appreciation of the damage that inflation can do. So they made an important decision in early 1991. They announced a joint agreement to adopt explicit inflation-control targets. The agreement has been very successful in giving Canada low, stable, and predictable inflation. It has been renewed three times—most recently for five years until the end of 2006.  Today, both the Bank of Canada and the European Central Bank are working to strengthen the economies in their jurisdictions. We both want to promote stable growth and rising living standards. And, importantly, we agree that promoting low and stable inflation is the best means to those ends. There are similarities between our inflation-control systems. For example, we both focus on inflation, and we both aim for price stability over the medium term. But there are also some differences that I want to highlight for you today.  The Bank of Canada aims for price stability through its inflation target of 2 per cent. On the other hand, the European Central Bank has an inflation ceiling of 2 per cent, as measured by the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices. This may look like a subtle difference, but it is important.  For the Bank of Canada, 2 per cent is the midpoint of our 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range. It is a target, not a ceiling. Our focus on that midpoint makes it clear that we run monetary policy in a symmetrical way. That is to say, we pay equal attention to any significant movement away from 2 per cent—whether above or below.  
 2 BIS Review 17/2002 When demand is strong, it can push the economy against the limits of its capacity to produce. This will tend to raise future inflation above its target midpoint. In these circumstances, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy, and return inflation to the target.  But this process also works in the other direction. When demand is weak, as we saw in 2001, this means that future inflationary pressures are likely to ease. So the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate the economy, absorb economic slack, and return inflation to the target.  By working in a symmetrical way in response to surprises in demand, our inflation-targeting system helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle. This promotes sound, and generally less variable, economic growth.  In our experience, we have found that operating this way around our inflation target is an effective way to anchor inflation expectations. Indeed, in recent years, inflation expectations have become firmly anchored on the 2 per cent target.  This is important for the economy. With inflation expectations solidly anchored, investors can better assess the future value of their investments. Savers can be more confident that their purchasing power will not be eroded unexpectedly by inflation. Similarly, debtors can better assess the real burden of their interest payments. Wage bargaining can become less contentious so labour disruptions decrease. The duration of wage and financial contracts can be lengthened considerably. All of this is possible because people are confident that inflation will neither greatly exceed, nor greatly fall below, 2 per cent over the medium term. In short, the real economy works better and is more stable.  Moreover, the credibility of the targets has changed the whole dynamic of the inflation process. Sudden temporary swings in energy prices, or movements in the exchange rate, do not feed into other prices in the economy the way they did in the past. Again, this is because inflation expectations are well anchored.  I should be clear that adopting the inflation targets was not the only thing that happened in the past 10 years to improve Canada's economy. The federal government, and the provinces, proceeded to clean up their balance sheets. Because of that, our public debt-to-GDP ratio is on a sustainable downward path, even during a period of economic slowdown.  This improvement in the public sector balance sheet has led to a sharp increase in national savings. As a result, our net foreign indebtedness fell from a peak of 44 per cent of GDP in 1993 to about 20 per cent today. It is important that we continue to reduce our net foreign debt. In Canada, it is particularly important that we do this before the baby-boom generation retires.  So, based on our experience, I can say that a monetary policy aimed at low, stable, and predictable inflation and a fiscal policy aimed at reducing the public debt-to-GDP ratio work well together. Prudent monetary and fiscal policies reinforce each other's credibility.  The role of a flexible exchange rate  Let me now turn briefly to the role of exchange rates. This is one area where our two countries have made different choices. France is one of a dozen European countries that have chosen a monetary union with a single currency.  This remarkable effort reached a crucial milestone at the start of this year. After existing in electronic form for three years, the euro finally began to circulate as notes and coins. By all accounts, the transition went extremely smoothly. The European Central Bank, and the 12 national central banks, deserve a great deal of credit for handling it so well.  Indeed, the completion of the process has rekindled the debate in Canada: If it is advantageous for France and 11 other European countries to form a monetary union with a common currency, would a similar arrangement for Canada and the United States also be advantageous?  After analyzing the costs and benefits, in my view, a separate, floating currency continues to make the most sense for Canada for the foreseeable future. Let me take a few minutes to explain why.  A floating exchange rate is beneficial for Canada, primarily because our production and trade structures are quite different from those of our major trading partner, the United States.  
 BIS Review 17/2002 3 Let me give you a couple of examples. Canada is a net exporter of primary commodities, while the United States is a net importer of commodities. And unlike the United States, Canada's auto industry is geared heavily toward exports. We produce two cars for every one that is sold in Canada.  Because of the differences in our economic structures, major changes, such as large swings in relative prices, affect Canada and the United States differently. One way or another, the Canadian economy must adjust to these changes. A floating exchange rate is important because it helps the economy adjust to economic disturbances, such as fluctuations in world demand for, and prices of, our products. Equally importantly, it also facilitates adjustments to changes in savings and investment flows.  It is true that the Canadian and U.S. economies are becoming more integrated. It is also true that by forming a monetary union, there would be some savings for Canadians in terms of the transactions costs of converting currencies and hedging against currency movements. So the question might well be asked: Since most of Europe has moved to a monetary union with a single currency, what about North America?  From a Canadian perspective, there are at least three major arguments against monetary union in North America. First, in Europe you have single markets for goods, capital and labour. In North America, we do not have a single labour market.  Second, the structures of the largest economies in the euro zone are more similar than the structures of the Canadian and U.S. economies.  Finally, the euro zone is a collection of 12 countries. Although they differ in size, no single nation dominates the group. In contrast, in North America, the United States is dominant, both in terms of population and economic power.  So yes, North American economies are becoming more integrated. But it does not necessarily follow that the structures of our economies are becoming more alike. As long as those structures remain different, the benefits of a flexible exchange rate will outweigh the associated transactions and risk costs. For Canada, our best choice is to have inflation targets as an anchor for our monetary policy, and a distinct, floating currency. As I have said before, this should remain the case for the foreseeable future.  Now let me turn briefly to the current state of Canada's economy and the outlook for the future.  Recent economic developments and prospects in Canada  The immediate impact and the fallout from last September's tragic events in the United States led to a sharp increase in economic uncertainty around the world. This exacerbated the effects of the global economic slowdown, which had become more evident by last summer.  In those circumstances, the Bank of Canada stepped up the pace of interest rate reduction that had begun earlier in 2001. The aim was to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist acts and to limit the loss of confidence at home. Since last September, we have cut the target for our overnight interest rate by 200 basis points. The total reduction since the beginning of 2001 has been 375 basis points.  This substantial monetary easing will have its maximum impact as we move through this year and into 2003. In addition, tax cuts implemented at the beginning of last year continue to provide significant support to the Canadian economy. Further stimulus will also come from spending on enhanced national security. Thus, both monetary and fiscal policies are supporting our economy as we move forward.  Moreover, there has been an improvement since last autumn in the geopolitical climate and in consumer confidence, both in North America and in Europe. Signs are increasing that the global economy has turned the corner and will firm as the year progresses.  For these reasons, the Bank of Canada expects that the Canadian economy will gain momentum through 2002. While growth in the first half will be moderate, it should accelerate in the second half—to something like 3 to 4 per cent—and strengthen further in 2003.  This means that later this year, our economy should start expanding at rates exceeding the growth of potential output. At that point, the slack that has built up over the past several months will begin to be absorbed. Still, it could be well into 2003 before the actual level of output in the Canadian economy will again reach its potential level.  
 4 BIS Review 17/2002 This implies that core inflation will probably average about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2002. Total CPI inflation is expected to stay below the core rate until late 2002, if energy prices remain near their current levels. Given the profile for output growth, the Bank expects both total and core inflation to move back up to 2 per cent in approximately two years.  Recent economic indicators for Canada show that the worst of the downturn is over. A recovery is underway. There were several positive signs in the fourth quarter national accounts data published last month, including strong household spending. Overall, Canada's economy grew at a 2 per cent annualized rate in the fourth quarter of 2001.  In addition, there was a sizable reduction of inventories in the fourth quarter. This bodes well for the coming months, because the lower level of inventories will underpin future production.  Data for the first two months of this year show that the Canadian economy has added 82,000 new jobs. Car sales are continuing to show strength, as is the housing sector.  The Bank expects that fixed investment in Canada and the United States should start to pick up in the second half of the year. But we are very much aware that this depends on a recovery in business confidence, especially for large multinational enterprises. How quickly and how strongly profits and the confidence of those firms bounce back will have an important bearing on the strength and sustainability of the overall economic recovery.  To sum up, Canada has made some difficult choices in recent years to face the challenges of today's globalized economy. We have found that our framework of a symmetrical inflation target and a floating exchange rate is appropriate for our economy. We have a solid anchor for monetary policy, and inflation expectations are well grounded. Fiscal health has been restored and we will continue to make progress in bringing down our public debt-to-GDP ratio.  Thanks to these improvements, the effects of last year's global economic slowdown on Canada were not as pronounced as they might have been. And with encouraging signs of a turnaround in the world economy and a domestic recovery underway, prospects for the Canadian economy are favourable.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 1 Y V Reddy: Developing bond markets in emerging economies - issues and Indian experience Keynote address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Asian Conference, jointly hosted by FIMMDA, PDAI, and Thai BDC at Bangkok on 11 March 2002.  Dr Reddy is thankful to Dr A. Prasad, Mrs Usha Thorat and officers of Internal Debt Management Cell of the RBI for their assistance. *      *      * Governor Dr. Tarisa Watanagase, Dean, Yoshitomi, Dr. Nachiket Mor, Mr. Joshi & friends, It gives me great pleasure to deliver the keynote address at the Asian Bond Conference organised jointly by the Thai Bond Dealing Centre (Thai BDC), Fixed Income Money Market Dealers Association of India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI). It is a matter of significance that some of the major self-regulatory organisations (SROs) in the debt markets of Asia have taken this initiative to exchange ideas and experiences of the emerging economies from Asia and I am sure that this Conference would be mutually beneficial as each one of us gains valuable insights by absorbing the experience of other countries.  The importance of developing domestic bond markets to diversify risks in the financial system is being realised since the crisis in Asia in 1997, and development of the Government Securities Market is of course integrally linked to the development of bond markets. Worldwide, interest in the subject in the recent past is evident from several initiatives taken. For example, the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) has launched a collaborative effort on the subject. The IMF and the World Bank are currently finalising guidelines on public debt management. The IMF is also conducting select country studies in public debt management and India has agreed to be a case for study. The Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI) recently released its policy recommendations for Designing New and Balanced Financial Market Structures in Post-crisis Asia. I am happy that Mr. Yoshitomi will share the recommendations later this afternoon. The theme for the Deputy Governors Meeting at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) last December was Development of Debt Markets in Emerging Economies. I would draw heavily from these discussions in flagging issues for consideration while the Indian experience would illustrate the complexities in addressing some of these issues in a specific country context. My address today initially provides an overview of the reasons advocated for the development of a bond market, followed by a second section giving the possible motivations for development of bond markets. The third section explains the rationale for development of Government Securities market and the justification for the central bank to be actively involved in it. While section four outlines the key issues relating to the market for Government Securities, the fifth section mentions some aspects relating to the non-Government or corporate bond market. The sixth section on select institutional issues deals with the role of institutional investors, self-regulatory organizations, banks in bond markets, credit rating agencies and tax regime. The concluding section makes a few observations on the road ahead for development of debt markets in India.  1. Why develop debt market? First, the basic philosophy of developing a diversified financial system with banks and non-banks operating in equity markets and debt markets is that it enhances risk pooling and risk sharing opportunities for investors and borrowers. More specifically, the case for ensuring the presence and development of debt markets is made on several grounds. First, in the absence of a debt market, the banking system would be larger than it otherwise would be. Prevalence of a domestic debt market can move a crisis outside the banking system making it easier for the Government to stand back. As Alan Greenspan has argued, coexistence of domestic bond market and banking system helps each to act as a backstop for the other. In the past, countries like Japan have developed with almost total reliance on bank intermediation but the risks of such excessive reliance are more in a relatively open economy since non-bank intermediation may get located outside the country. It is also argued that domestic bond market helps in avoiding the double mismatches of currency and maturity. 
 2 BIS Review 16/2002 Second, it is argued that debt markets facilitate efficient financial intermediation as they use market mechanism for allocating and pricing of credit. In particular, debt markets are expected to facilitate availability of long-term funds for specific uses such as for infrastructure. They also infuse greater transparency in the process of credit allocation in view of the information that is contained in market determined rates. In fact, e-commerce makes information sharing less costly, and hence it is easier to develop bond market infrastructure in the current environment for facilitating transparent market-based allocation of credit. It may be difficult for Government to intervene through debt market for directed subsidised lending as compared with the banking system. Hence, it is claimed that debt markets facilitate the reduction of bad loans. Furthermore, since debt instruments are mostly rated, investor awareness and monitoring is greater, which mitigates the moral hazard arising out of deposit insurance as in the case of banks.  Third, debt market can help develop the derivatives market thereby facilitating hedging mechanisms and enabling greater diversification of risks by participants. Also, the variety of instruments possible in the domestic debt market may result in gains to savers and borrowers.  It is also essential to recognise that domestic debt markets may not be able to deliver in reality all that is sought from them. The efficiency of bond markets would depend on the efficiency of credit rating agencies (CRAs), standards of accounting, auditing and disclosures, institutional infrastructure, prevalence of an environment for enforcement of contracts, etc. Bond markets may not necessarily reduce systemic risk since banks themselves could be major players in bonds as issuers, investors and underwriters. Development of a debt market for long-term instruments would also require complementarity of policies such as flexibility in interest rates, enabling legal environment, etc. Though higher degree of transparency is to be expected, it has been argued that where sophisticated instruments like options exist, transparency in debt markets may not be automatically ensured. Furthermore, a domestic bond market by itself need not necessarily address the fundamental issues of risk management and pricing of risk.  On balance, the current realities would lead one to believe that the banking system will continue to be at the centre of the financial system in emerging economies. In fact, banks are likely to have significant direct or indirect presence in the debt market as issuers, investors or underwriters. If the overall environment in the financial sector contains problems in pricing of risks by banks, bond markets too can suffer infirmities in pricing. As the financial system is evolving, bank loans and bond contracts must be treated as complementary and to some extent as substitutes. In view of the undeniable benefits of a multi-institutional financial structure, a number of countries are rightly devoting considerable resources and attention to the development of domestic bond markets, though each country may have different motivations for doing so. 2. Motivations for development of domestic debt markets  The main provocation for undertaking the task of development of debt markets would depend to some extent on the different histories and cultures of countries, but predominantly on economic factors such as experience with high inflation, transition from Planning, restructuring economies after crisis, etc. More specifically, and in the context of the financial system, the objectives may relate to financing Government deficit, funding bank restructuring, creating a more complete financial markets, avoiding banks from taking on excessive credit, risk diversification in the financial system, conducting monetary policy, sterilising capital inflows, providing a range of long-term assets for pension funds, etc.  The impetus in Hong Kong for instance, seems to have come as a market development strategy towards achieving efficient financial intermediation and making the market more complete. Similarly, Singapore reportedly views the debt market as a means of financial intermediation to help credit allocation, and development of corporate bond market was given high priority as an alternative funding source in order to reduce reliance on bank intermediation.  In a restructuring economy like Hungary, the motives appear to have been different, viz., reducing the monetisation of Government deficit, increasing competition to banks which had wide spreads between deposits and advances and encouraging foreign investment in Government debt in domestic currency. In the second half of the 1990s, monetary policy considerations relating to the information content of the yield curve and concerns with the transmission mechanism of monetary policy must have added impetus to the development of debt markets.  Recapitalisation of banks appears to have been the driving force in Indonesia. In Chile, the debt market developed mainly as an offshoot of pension reforms. The growing pool of savings needed Government 
 BIS Review 16/2002 3 instruments for investments, whereas the Government had a surplus. The history of over hundred years of inflation seems to have created a demand for inflation indexed bonds.  China views Government borrowing as the most important reason for financial deepening and the Government Securities market provides the lead in development of the bond market. Furthermore, it would be possible to develop the corporate bond market with an efficient benchmark of Government Securities.  In India also, large Government borrowings have provided the impetus for development of bond market. A system of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) funding on an automatic basis, the Government’s budget deficit at concessional rates of interest was replaced in April 1997 by a system of RBI financing the temporary mismatches between expenditure and revenue of Government at market aligned interest rates. Consequent to the dismantling of the administered interest rate regime, the borrowing requirements of the Government are now largely raised from the market at market related rates. As India experienced capital inflows and considered intervention or addition to foreign exchange reserves, it used domestic eligible marketable bonds in its portfolio whenever it wanted to sterilize the money expansion. A deep and liquid debt market naturally facilitates this process and in this sense the linkage between capital inflows, sterilization and development of debt markets can also be considered to be an additional reason for development of debt market.  3. Need for widening and deepening the Government Securities market The relevance of Government Securities can be viewed from three points of view, namely from Government which wants to borrow; from their role in financial markets especially debt markets and from the operation of monetary policy. First, from the viewpoint of the Government/fiscal authorities, the development of a deep and liquid Government Securities market facilitates public borrowings at reasonable costs and avoidance of automatic monetisation of Government deficit by the central bank. Broad and well-functioning secondary markets are particularly important where the Government's borrowing needs are substantial. A well developed Government Securities market provides flexibility to the debt management authorities to exercise various options to optimize maturity as well as interest cost to the Government, to minimize the market impact of large or lumpy Government debt operations and, facilitate better co-ordination between monetary policy and debt management. Second, the Government Securities market provides the backbone of most fixed income markets across the world since it helps pricing of various debt instruments through creation of a benchmark, enables a proper evaluation of risk and acts a conduit for convergence of interest rates in other markets. In addition, the gilts market acts as the channel for the integration of various segments of the domestic financial market and help establish inter-linkages between internal and external financial markets. It is sometimes argued that it is not always necessary to develop a Government securities market. Some countries do not have Government Securities market because their Governments have no funding requirements and in such countries, alternate benchmarks have developed so that price discovery has shifted from a single Government market to a range of non-Government markets. Thus, inter bank repo rates, collateralised obligations, interest rate swaps and top rated corporate bonds have gained acceptance as benchmarks in such markets. Third, a number of countries are moving away from the use of direct instruments to indirect instruments such as repos and direct open market operations. Government Securities facilitate the development of implementing indirect instruments of monetary policy. Typically, Treasury Bills and Government Dated Securities are ideal instruments for conducting repos in many emerging economies. While the T-Bills market serves the objective of raising finances for the Government, it also spurs the development of the money market. An important ingredient in the development of money market is the terms under which liquidity is available from the central bank. If liquidity adjustment support is available with certainty in regard to quantity and price, it could impede the development of the money market as banks will desist from entering into transactions with each other. In fact, the link between development of money market and the Government Securities is an important aspect of development of debt markets.  The primary interest of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in financial markets is because of their criticality in acting as the transmission channel for monetary policy especially while RBI is moving towards reliance on indirect instruments of monetary policy. The Government Securities market is the predominant part of the overall debt market and interest rates in this market provide benchmarks for the system as a whole. Currently, the RBI is the monetary authority, regulator of Government securities market, issuer and manager of Government borrowings, for both the Centre and the States, and 
 4 BIS Review 16/2002 regulator of money markets as well as forex markets. The RBI's concern in development of the Government Securities market should be seen in this light, while recognising that the regulation of debt market as a whole, in the context of public issues by corporates and trading in stock exchanges where debt is traded, is in the regulatory jurisdiction of the Securities Exchange Board of India. In India, the RBI considers that well functioning markets for Government Securities are necessary for both effective Government debt management and monetary management, while serving the broader interest of development of financial markets in general and debt markets in particular. Accordingly, RBI has taken a number of initiatives in developing both the primary and secondary markets for Government Securities. 4. Key issues relating to the Government Securities market There are several motivations for and objectives in a central bank being interested in developing Government Securities market and hence the issues involved vary in significance from country to country as also in the context of the stage of development of markets. The key issues are: relevance of the money market, operational aspects relating to the primary market, significance of secondary markets, policy conflicts in debt and monetary management and dilemmas in market intervention. Relevance of development of money market A money market supports the bond market mainly through the process of liquidity. In addition to the importance of money market for financing positions, money market prices liquidity and anchors the short end of the yield curve. The existence of a repo market helps the development of an active Government Securities market and vice-versa since lending and borrowing under a safe environment can be fostered through repos. Where interest rates are liberalised and debt management and monetary policy functions are with the central bank, policy coordination needs to be maintained between the Government Securities and money markets.  In regard to the money market in India, the basic objective in recent years has been to develop a short-term yield curve with deep liquidity. A four-fold strategy has been adopted in this regard. First, a liquidity adjustment facility has been in operation, comprising repo and reverse repo operations through auctions conducted with a view to equilibrating the liquidity and keeping the short-term interest rates within an informal corridor. Second, the call money market is being developed as a pure inter-bank market with a phased withdrawal of non-bank participants who are currently lenders in the call money market. Third, the traditional sector-specific refinance support is being rationalized and additional recourse to the established liquidity facilities is being made increasingly market-based. Removal of established facilities on fixed terms and moving to a full-fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is on the active agenda. Fourth, the other money market segments, especially the repo market are being developed with lending as well as borrowing access to the non-banks in these markets. To help the process, a Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) has been established.  Operational issues relating to primary market Ensuring efficient price discovery process is a dominant objective of operations in primary markets and for this purpose putting in place credible systems and ensuring transparent mechanisms are critical. Auction Technique and Central Bank Participation in Auctions Auctions are the most common method for sale of Government Securities, though securities are also distributed through tap sales, syndication and book building process. In many countries, direct participation in auction is restricted to select investors while a larger investor base is permitted to enter auctions through designated intermediaries such as banks and Primary Dealers. The actual modalities of reaching the investor base would be governed by pragmatism and in fact even choices in auction techniques or even combination of techniques may in some circumstances be linked to permitted pattern of participation. As regards technique, discriminatory price auctions keep away investors because of the winners curse, whereas there are dangers of irresponsible bidding and of collusion in a uniform or Dutch type of auction. Countries have moved between discriminatory and uniform price auctions, but there is no settled wisdom as to which type of auction is better. An interesting variant that merits further consideration is a combination of the features of both auctions, i.e., discriminatory price auction with a ceiling, in order to mitigate winners curse.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 5 In general, central bank participation in auctions is best avoided, but if it becomes necessary, a central bank ought to participate without competing with other bidders. There is a distinction between a central bank buying Government Securities on its own accord and being compelled to do so. In many countries, either there are laws prohibiting central bank participation in primary auctions such as in Indonesia and Peru or central banks voluntarily restrict themselves from participation as in the case of Malaysia, Philippines and Hungary.  In India, auction method has been the most favoured, though such auction could be based on yield, price or discount, with or without some underwriting commitment of Primary Dealers at the discretion of RBI. Both discriminatory and uniform price auction techniques are used but the former is dominant and multiple price auction format is predominantly used for Government Securities issuances while uniform price auction is used for 91-Day T-Bills. In the context of the need to attract retail investors, bids received on non-competitive basis within the notified amounts are cut-off at the weighted average yields derived in an auction. The question of central bank participation as an outsider in primary auction does not arise in India since the RBI itself conducts the auction. The RBI, however, used to take private placements liberally in the past but more recently it does so only in extraordinary situations, and it has also decided to voluntarily move out of devolvements on itself. The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, which is under consideration, proposes an explicit provision that prohibits the RBI from purchasing Government Securities in the primary market.  Instruments Countries have experienced with different types of instruments, to suit their unique circumstances, to broaden the markets. Hungary for instance has gradually moved away from short maturity bonds to long-term fixed rate Government bonds enabled by the fact that it avoided hyper-inflation. Similarly, Israel favoured the simple plain vanilla bonds although there is a presence of a variety of instruments such as (Consumer Price Index) CPI-linked, fixed-rate and variable-rate bonds and it has progressively lengthened maturities. Chile favours inflation-indexed bonds. The RBI has experimented with different types of instruments such as the fixed coupon bonds, zero coupon bonds, capital indexed bonds and more recently floating rate bonds. Most of the bonds, however, are of the fixed coupon variety though recently Floating Rate Bond issues have proved to be attractive.  Maturity Profile On the maturity profile, there is no ideal solution, but trade-offs between long-term and short-term maturities on considerations of market preference, cost to Government, bunching of maturities, and development of yield curve should be recognised. Development of Government benchmark securities is an essential element of a well functioning Government Securities market and this requires the issuer to make conscious efforts to avoid fragmentation and where necessary consolidate issuance. Typically, benchmark securities in domestic markets are 2, 3, 5 and 10 years, while countries like the USA issue securities up to 30 years.  In India, Government revived borrowing at market rates in 1992-93, and most of the new maturities were compressed below 10 years. This was necessary at the time as it coincided with the period of the high interest rate cycle, and the successful implementation of the auction system in the early stages of a move to market related rates of interest required a shortening of the maturity structure. This resulted in bunching of maturities as well as rendering liquidity management difficult. In the last two to three years, the RBI’s preference has been towards longer maturities, at fixed rates to bring about a balance in the maturity structure. There would be times when Government is reluctant to lock in what it perceives to be high rates, and the banks face larger asset liability mismatches and greater interest rate risk. Recognising this, the RBI has reintroduced floating rate bonds and is attempting to develop the STRIPS market in the Government Securities segment. As regards consolidation, RBI has extensively used the technique of re-openings of existing securities on the basis of price-based auction. Thus, advantage was taken of large gross borrowing programme to lengthen the maturity profile and consolidate the profile.  Issuance Calendar Based on first principles, it is better to provide a clear and timely information about the borrowing programme through an issuance calendar, in addition to maturity profile of outstanding stock, 
 6 BIS Review 16/2002 redemption calendar, etc. In operational terms, issuance of a calendar has to tackle the trade-off between certainty to the market and flexibility to the issuer in terms of market timing.  The uncertain trends in terms of cash flow pattern of the Government of India constrains the publication of issuance calendar. In respect of T-Bills, a pre-announced issuance calendar for auctions has been evolved. Recognising that a large market borrowing programme and uncertainties in cash flows make issuance of full-fledged calendar somewhat difficult at this stage, the Finance Minister announced in the budget speech recently, that there will be a calendar of auctions of Government from the financial year beginning April 2002.  Role of Primary Dealers Many countries have established a system of licensed Primary Dealers (PDs) in Government Securities as important intermediaries to promote activity in Government Securities market. Typically, PDs are assigned specific responsibilities like minimum bidding requirements, giving two-way quotes, providing market information to the central bank, etc. In some cases, PDs have been given exclusive right to primary auctions, or some special facilities in money market operations, open market operations, underwriting commission, etc. PDs can play a vital role in the development of the secondary market. By being in the market, their prices discount all available information, they take up trading positions, and also render valuable assistance to the central bank by providing it with latest market information, designing new instruments, etc. Since PDs are generally highly leveraged, regulatory oversight over PDs appears to be warranted and a common feature among central banks has been to periodically review the performance of PDs and make the continuation of their operations performance-based. An interesting feature that merits notice is a rating of PDs as established in Poland. The institution of PDs has been adopted in India in 1996 for developing both primary and secondary markets in Government Securities. The main objectives of promoting the institutional mechanism of PDs are to strengthen institutional infrastructure in the Government Securities market in order to make it vibrant, liquid and broad based and to ensure development of underwriting and market making capabilities for Government Securities outside the RBI so that the latter could gradually shed these functions. In other words, the marketisation of Government borrowings and vacation of RBI from primary market in an environment of large borrowing programme were facilitated by a conscious development of the institution of PDs. PDs obligations include giving annual bidding commitment, underwriting the primary issuance and offering two-way quotes. In return, the PDs are extended liquidity support by the RBI and access to call money market as borrowers and lenders. Incidentally, RBI experimented with a system of Satellite Dealers (SDs) from 1996 to serve as a second tier to PDs in the Government Securities market with the particular objective of promoting retail segment. However, on a review it was found to be not as useful as was expected and is being given up.  Gilt Mutual Funds  Mutual funds dedicated almost exclusively to investments in Government Securities called Gilt Mutual Funds were established in India in April 1996. Currently, there are 13 such mutual funds in the country. Mutual funds are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). In tune with the developments that have taken place in the debt markets since 1996, the scheme of Gilt Funds is currently being reviewed by the RBI. Given the small size of the repo market during that period and the consequent uncertainty regarding availability of liquidity from the market, Gilt Funds were given limited liquidity support by the RBI. Considering that the liquidity support was introduced as an extraordinary measure and the fact that the repo market has developed and is expected to become more liquid with the operationalisation of the CCIL, there is a case for reviewing the liquidity support to Gilt Funds from RBI. Significance of secondary markets A diversified investor base with varied demand, maturity profile and risk preference is admittedly important for ensuring high liquidity and stable demand in the market. Apart from banks, PDs and mutual funds, retail investors and foreign investors can also play a role in widening the investor base. Catering to the needs of retail investors is often an essential part of the overall strategy to develop a more diversified investor base. Retail investment can also contribute to stable demand for Government Securities and can provide a cushion for the impact on volatility.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 7 Development of repo markets, short selling, the role of benchmarks and marked to market valuation, etc., do contribute to boosting of secondary market liquidity. The practice of short selling securities facilitated by securities lending and borrowing has been prohibited in some emerging markets and it is necessary to recognise the rationale for this. No doubt, the ability to sell short has a positive effect by increasing the market liquidity and price efficiency since it enables participants with differing views on the market to trade actively, but short sales, have the potential to increase market volatility and risks especially if the market assumes larger position than what it is capable of handling.  As regards benchmarks, many countries have been taking efforts towards consolidation and creation of benchmarks and the procedures depend on the composition and stock of existing debt and how much debt is proposed to be raised. Another issue relates to whether a move to marked-to-market for investments raises any risks in terms of stop-loss sale, etc. While marked-to-market serves to encourage secondary market trading, it is necessary to have a liquid market to correctly price securities. The RBI has taken a number of measures to enhance the secondary market liquidity in the Government Securities market. These include permitting a diversified participant base, improved fungibility of bonds through reopenings, stabilizing money market through Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), developing the repo market, encouraging the operationalisation of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd., initiating a negotiated dealing system for trading, enforcing marked-to-market requirement for valuation of investments, ensuring a Delivery Vs Payment system for settlement of Government Securities in scripless form, and disseminating detailed information to the public on a daily basis in respect of all Government Securities traded in the market.  In India, initially the RBI was announcing the yield curve to the market for year-end valuation. Currently, FIMMDA, a self-regulatory organisation, announces the yield curve, the methodology of which was approved by the RBI. Incidentally, although the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) for the banking system is 25 per cent, banks are voluntarily holding 37 per cent of their liabilities in Government Securities. Recognising the risks involved in such large exposures, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has created a path for banks to reach a targeted investment fluctuation reserve over a period. Policy conflicts in debt and monetary management Irrespective of whether the debt management function is vested with the central bank or not, coordination is important to avoid conflicts between cash and debt management of the Government and central bank operations. The timing and amounts of Government Securities issuance may not always coincide with the compulsions of the central bank's monetary policy. The Government may wish to issue securities at a time when the market is illiquid and the central bank needs to consider whether or not and to what extent it will provide additional liquidity. Liquidity can be provided through the secondary market or where the central bank is both the debt and monetary manager, it has the option to operate through the primary market.  Currently, almost all central banks are harmoniously co-ordinating with the fisc, both at the policy and operational levels with regard to debt management. There is general agreement that being the fiscal agent creates problems for central bank and separation of debt management function from the central bank would remove the friction. In a situation of high fiscal deficit and lack of fiscal assurances on its responsibility, separation of the two functions could increase the risk of macro instability. Controlling the fisc, developing financial markets and setting in place institutional and technological infrastructure ideally should precede such separation. The monetary policy statement of the RBI of October 2001 had clearly indicated the intentions in this regard and the conditions that would need to be fulfilled to make this separation possible. The RBI acknowledged that although it is desirable in principle, separation of debt and monetary management functions is a medium-term process that is dependent on the fulfillment of three conditions, viz., development of financial markets, reasonable control over the fiscal deficit and necessary legislative changes. Of course, institutional arrangements for establishing a separate Debt Office need to be thought through. The Federal nature of the country adds another dimension to the issue namely should each State and Central Governments have a public debt office while replacing RBI. One method could be to set up an independent corporate entity structure to manage the debt of both Centre and the States.  
 8 BIS Review 16/2002 Dilemmas in intervention in markets  On the proposition that since markets are maturing there is a case for central bank intervention to even out price volatility, there is a general consensus against intervention in the normal course. There are many central banks that never intervene in the bond markets to smoothen volatility. In fact, lowering volatility impedes secondary market development by preventing hedging instruments from developing, which in turn are necessary to deal with volatility. There are however, situations justifying an interventionist approach by central banks. For instance, the September 11, 2001 incident required the Federal Reserve to be involved intimately in the market. India has had many such situations like the border conflicts and US sanctions, etc. where the RBI had shown its willingness to be present in the market without creating expectations of being a market maker. Thus, there is a need to differentiate between normal market conditions and exogenous shocks in taking a view on intervention. While in the case of exogenous shocks, intervention or expression of intention to do may be necessary, during normal market conditions the option should always be available but, actual exercise is to be convincingly dictated by evolving circumstances with a directional preference to strengthen market forces.  On the intervention policy of RBI, three areas need to be highlighted. First, in the money market, the RBI is concerned mainly with liquidity management through the Liquidity Adjustment Facility and effectively operates an interest rate corridor between the repo and reverse repo rates. Second, in the context of market borrowing programme, the RBI intervention is through private placement under extraordinary circumstances since the RBI has the responsibility to raise Government debt. In other words, if in the RBI’s assessment the market would not be in a position to absorb the debt without disruption, it resorts to private placement. Third, when the bids in auction are unacceptable, the RBI takes on a devolvement, which in actual practice has been negligible during the last two years. Primary Dealers underwrite issues of Government paper for which they are paid underwriting commission. Thus, the twin combination of high fiscal deficit and a narrow and not so liquid market necessitates RBI intervention in the interest of financial stability. There are, however, no rules regarding sale of securities taken on private placement in terms of maximum period of holding etc. It is at the RBI’s discretion to offload securities taken on private placement when conditions are conducive.  When capital flows occur and the capacity to monetise Government debt is circumscribed by sterilisation, the maneuverability to conduct market borrowing is constrained. In the current financial year, for instance, the RBI has added $ 8 billion to its foreign currency reserves. To meet externally induced shocks in forex markets, the RBI had in the past conducted extraordinary operations and in the process considered it essential to create a firewall to prevent its transmission to the bond market. A by-product of erecting firewalls was that, whenever the central bank has resorted to monetary actions on exchange market considerations, or even when bond yields have moved sharply on sentiments, it has tended to create expectations of liquidity action in the bond markets. These are complexities that all concerned learn to live with.  5.  Development of corporate bond market To develop corporate bond market, the authorities have to actively consider increasing the supply of high quality paper, creating adequate institutional investor base, ensuring a variety of instruments of differing maturities and mounting supporting infrastructure, etc. Emphasis also needs to be placed on efficient legal systems as important infrastructure for deep and liquid bond markets. Among legal reforms, bankruptcy laws or capacity to seize collaterals are particularly important. Experience also indicates that in many emerging countries, since the risk is transferred to the creditor in bond markets as compared to banks, there is a preponderant bias towards bank deposits among household savers in many countries. In other words, development of domestic corporate debt market is bound to be a long drawn process and banks will have to continue to be special and dominant in the financial systems of most emerging economies. In Mexico, while the experience is that larger companies issue bonds abroad, the smaller companies prefer to borrow from banks. In Chile, there is some substitutability between bank and bond financing as a few companies raise bonds to prepay bank debt. Pre-crisis, Korea had a large corporate bond market and the biggest lesson from the episode was that too much Government intervention (either in exchange rate or implicit or explicit guarantees) resulted in serious distortion of markets. In many emerging economies, the corporate bond markets are fragmented. Poland for example has a fragmented and illiquid corporate bond market characterised by private placement and cross holdings. 
 BIS Review 16/2002 9 Peru is experiencing a situation where good credit was going to banks while bad credit was going to bond markets; hence there is a justified reluctance to invest in bonds. On the other hand, this raises the contrary view-point that if bond markets are developed, bad credit could go to banks. There is, however, no evidence of this so far and moreover ex ante there are only well-priced and badly-priced loans.  There is a recognition of the need to develop securitization market as a related issue. Securitization as an instrument acts as a risk transfer mechanism that could work to the advantage of both banks and investors. In Korea, non-performing loans spurred this market; Hongkong has established a Mortgage Corporation. In many countries, this market is in nascent stage, either because it needs complicated legal changes or the credit environment does not enable securitization. For instance, Hungary has no non-performing loans nor mortgage in household; hence no mortgage exists to warrant securitisation to be involved in the development of this market. The Reserve Bank of India's role in development of corporate bond market is indirect and governed by its interest in monetary policy transmission, Government Securities, and stability as well as efficiency in financial sector as a whole. As mentioned, the major preoccupation has been with Government Securities market for all the reasons explained. The corporate bond market commenced in a significant way with Public Sector Undertakings being encouraged to take recourse to them in late eighties, but the private corporate sector's debt requirements were met largely by development financial institutions and banks. With developments in capital market and establishment of rating agencies, corporates and development financial institutions themselves started taking recourse to debt, since the reform commenced. More recently, special purpose vehicles to fund infrastructure promoted by some State Governments have come to the fore especially since they are backed by State Government guarantees.  Corporate debt market in the sense of private corporate sector raising debt through public issuance in capital markets is only an insignificant part of Indian debt market. When we talk of debt markets in India, we are really referring to the Government Securities market, which accounts for 75 per cent of the outstanding stock and nearly 95 per cent of the volumes traded in the secondary market. About 90 per cent of the corporate debt market is privately placed. In the privately placed market, 58 per cent of the issuances are by financial institutions and banks, both in the public and private sector and about 26 per cent represents issues of public sector undertakings and central/state government guaranteed bonds. Two-thirds of the total issues are accounted for by the public sector. 20 per cent of the total corporate debt issuance is by the private non-financial sector.  Most issuers in the corporate debt market are AAA or AA rated borrowers and about 10 per cent may be unrated. The investors are mostly institutions with very few retail investors. Hence, at the first stage of development of the bond markets, while securitisation takes place, the disintermediation process is only partial. Transparency is limited both in the primary and the secondary markets, liquidity is poor and many bonds are held till redemption. The legal recourse in case of non-payment of interest and principal is complicated and bankruptcy laws afford little comfort. The legal and regulatory requirements, accounting and auditing standards for issuers and the infrastructure for trading, clearing and settlement need to be developed much more in case the market has to become deep and liquid.  As the non-transparent practices in this market is a matter of concern, RBI had issued guidelines in June 2001 regarding the due diligence to be undertaken, the disclosures to be obtained and the credit risk analysis to be made in regard to privately placed investments especially for unrated instruments. Banks have been advised to adopt an internal system of rating for issues of non-borrowers, whether rated or otherwise, and adopt prudential limits to mitigate adverse impact of concentration and illiquidity. Banks have been also advised to put in place proper risk management systems for capturing and analysing the risks so as to take timely remedial measures. A further review of non-SLR investments in the light of recent developments reveals that the ease of mobilising funds through privately placed debt issues could lead to the use of such funds for risky purposes other than what is disclosed in the offer document. In order to contain the risks arising out of non-SLR investment portfolio of banks and FIs, in particular through the private placement route, it was proposed by the RBI to issue further prudential guidelines to be observed by banks. The draft guidelines were circulated to the banks and FIs in October 2001. These guidelines primarily focus on the need for strengthening of internal rating systems, fixing of prudential limits and sub-limits, review of rating changes in respect of issuers and non-performing investments; and most important, disclosures in ‘Notes on Accounts’ regarding issuer composition and non-performing investments.  As announced in Mid-Term Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001 – 2002, the RBI constituted a Working Group under the chairmanship of Mr.S.R.Iyer, Chairman Credit Information Bureau of India 
 10 BIS Review 16/2002 Ltd., to evolve a framework for collecting and sharing of banks/ FIs of information on private placement of debt and prescribing minimum requirements for issuers to meet before banks/FIs consider investment in such debt. The Report is due very soon.  The major pre-occupation of the RBI in regard to corporate debt is to ensure that banks and financial institutions are protected from the risks in the current state of markets as also aid the process of qualitative changes in the corporate debt markets. 6. Institutional issues There are several institutional issues related to debt markets and each of them is critical but they are not necessarily interrelated. These are many, but this section focusses on some of them, namely, institutional investors in debt markets, self-regulatory organisations, banks, credit rating agencies and the tax regime. Role of institutional investors There is wide consensus regarding the need for institutional building for development of debt markets, though countries have approached it differently. The notion of pension reforms as an important instrument in the process is generally upheld although there is a case for regulatory limits on their investments in riskier assets in the interest of financial stability.  There are several approaches to improving institutional investors' interest in domestic debt markets. For example, Indonesia is currently embarking on substantial regulatory reforms to encourage institutional investors. Hungary is emphasizing development of mutual funds. Some countries like Philippines are concentrating on market for securitisation. Hong Kong prefers a portfolio approach, a greater role for credit rating agencies, to build Collective Investment Vehicles and to explore other options like credit enhancements, rather than increase the supply of Government or quasi-Government paper to whet the appetite of pension funds (PFs). In general, PFs are encouraged to invest in Government Securities as in the case of Chile, Indonesia and Singapore although some countries like Hungary and Philippines are permitting some portfolio diversification by allowing investment within limits, in non-Government paper. It is also observed that many pension or provident funds voluntarily invest in Government Securities above the minimum requirements.  In the case of India, investments by Provident Funds are governed by Government Regulation, which indicates that 40 per cent of their incremental accretions each year are invested in Central and State Government Securities. This is followed by 40 per cent in bonds/securities of public financial institutions and Certificate of Deposits issued by public sector banks of which a maximum of 10 per cent is permitted in rated private corporate debentures. Investment in this category is usually mopped up by development financial institutions, which are themselves financial intermediaries. Moreover, the pension funds themselves being conservative, prefer to invest in Government Securities. Thus, the resources of the PFs are preempted by the Government and DFIs, making the linkage between PFs and corporate debt market tenuous. Role of self-regulatory organisations  Self-regulation is fast emerging as a viable co-operative framework for both the regulator and market participants to come together towards the fulfilment of common goals and objectives. By creating a unique combination of private interests and official oversight, SROs have emerged as an effective and efficient form of regulation for the complex and dynamic financial services industry. International experience with self-regulation suggests that the power of self-regulatory organisations vary significantly. In its most complete form, self-regulation encompasses the authority to create, amend, implement and enforce rules of conduct with respect to the entities subject to the SRO’s jurisdiction and to resolve disputes through arbitration or other means. Typically, this authority is derived from a statutory delegation of power to a non-governmental entity. In some countries, SROs do not have formal regulatory status but nevertheless provide codes of good conduct and master agreements and perform important roles in the standardisation of common practices without any formal regulatory status. It is necessary to recognise that exercise of authority in any form by SRO does raise some fundamental issues such as their accountability and monopoly status. There is merit in constantly reviewing both the representative nature of SROs and responsiveness to overall public interest considerations.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 11 In the context of Indian debt market, self-regulatory bodies like the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and the Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI) have been encouraged in the recent past, as part of reform process to give an impetus to the development of the bond and money markets in India. These bodies have served as crucial layers between the regulator and market and have contributed to developing new benchmarks and products besides providing training and development support to participants. They have formulated guidelines for dispute resolution mechanisms and are also involved in the process of developing standard practices and codes of conduct. Both PDAI and FIMMDA are represented in the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Reserve Bank of India on Government Securities and Money Markets. FIMMDA is involved in the task of valuation of all Central Government Securities. The daily yield curve based on benchmark Central Government bonds is fast emerging as an accepted benchmark to price securities. In addition to this, FIMMDA has also been contributing to developing guidelines for documentation of repo, securitised debt and several other debt market instruments. The activities of both SROs are closely co-ordinated with policies of RBI while their functioning is also carefully and constantly observed by RBI.  Banks and bond markets The relationship between banks and bond markets is complex especially in emerging countries where the dominance of banks in financial intermediation is set to gradually decline but banks do have a critical role in development of debt markets. Banks operate as issuers, investors, underwriters and guarantors. Banks may also securitise loans and thus participate in long-term debt markets. In the process, the regulator of banks has a responsibility to ensure that banks' participation in debt markets, both as issuers and investors is consistent with their risk management. The vagaries of debt markets do impact the balance sheets of banks, while banks’ confidence and participation in debt markets influence the growth and liquidity in the markets. In some countries, banks have been active participants in equity markets but their small presence in debt markets may be partly explained by the less developed nature of debt markets, particularly in Asia. In India, the banking system which incidentally has been dominated by the public sector, played a pioneering role in initiating growth of mutual funds, merchant banking and other financial services. Structurally, banks have been permitted to operate through subsidiaries as asset management companies, PDs, merchant banks and mutual funds. The Development Financial Institutions also played a role but they dominated in promoting credit rating agencies, sponsoring national stock exchanges, depositories, etc. In regard to Government Securities segment of the market, which accounts for about 75 per cent of the stock, about 60 per cent of the stock is held by the banking system. As regards the corporate debt segment, both private placement and public issue, over half of the issuance is by banks and financial institutions. The corporates, especially the large corporate segment move in and out of bank advances and debt markets just as banks also participate in both.  In this background, the RBI continuously reviews the nature and extent of linkages and adopts a wide range of mechanisms to enhance efficiency and impart stability. Phased deregulation of limits for banks' investments in non-Government debt instruments was accompanied by exposure norms, other prudential guidelines, valuation norms for debt instruments and asset liability management guidelines. The maturity profile and issue of innovative instruments in Government Securities market were also attuned to meet varying portfolio needs. In addition to risk weights for interest rate risks, a target has been indicated for establishing investment fluctuation reserve. Legal changes have also been announced in the budget to create a market for securitisation. Development Financial Institutions have also been permitted greater flexibility to operate on their liabilities and asset sides in debt instruments. Role of credit rating agencies Banks do possess intimate and specialised knowledge of the borrowers and are thus in a unique position to assess the risks in advances, while in the case of large number of investors in debt markets, such knowledge and skill are usually lacking. Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) help mitigate this problem of asymmetric information and the dissemination of information by the CRA incidentally makes the regulator's task less onerous. CRAs have also faced a number of criticisms in recent years, especially after the Asian crisis. The independence of ratings has been questioned, especially when ratings are paid for their services. Questions are also raised about the accountability of CRAs, the potential for herding by investors and frequent changes in ratings causing volatility. Excessive reliance on CRAs is, under these circumstances to be eschewed and in any case the quality of ratings by CRAs continuously assessed. Some regulators prescribe that pension funds invest in debt instruments of investment grade 
 12 BIS Review 16/2002 only. Credit rating has also been prescribed by regulators as the basis for exemption from registration norms for issuers of asset backed securities. Some regulators insist on a minimum rating for corporates to become eligible for issuance of Commercial Paper. Furthermore, specific credit rating limits have been made on the eligibility criteria for issuance of bonds in some countries.  In India, there are four CRAs and each of them has collaboration with internationally renowned CRAs to supplement the local knowledge and skills. The RBI prescribes a number of regulatory uses of ratings. Of those related to the money and debt markets, a corporate must get an issue of Commercial Paper rated and may issue such paper subject to a minimum rating. SEBI, which incidentally is the regulator of CRAs has stipulated that ratings are compulsory on all public issues of debentures with maturity exceeding 18 months. Pension funds can only invest in debt securities that have high ratings, as per the stipulations of Government.  A trend over the last few years in India is the preference for CRAs to extensively rate private placement resulting in financial institutions' distinct preference for investment in rated paper often through private placement and sometime over normal credit. Such a trend of abdicating the responsibility for assessment of risk is not desirable from the point of view of banks. RBI has been issuing detailed guidelines to banks and financial institutions in regard to exercising their judgement and risk assessment while taking into account the CRAs ratings. The latest guidelines emphasise the importance of such internal assessments even when the rated paper happens to be backed by guarantees of Government. Thus, while CRAs are necessary, their presence is not a sufficient condition for development of sound debt markets. Tax regime and debt markets An efficient tax regime should ensure that it does not create an impediment to the development of secondary debt market. Distortions may be created if, without clear justification, some participants are exempted from tax as compared to another, certain instruments are taxed while others are exempted and procedures for calculating tax or deducting tax at source distorts prices. Similarly, lack of clarity in provisions could also hamper trading in certain segments of the debt market. While the process of reform would have to be initiated in a given tax regime, with the evolution of reform, and as the market, institutions and instruments develop, the tax regime would need to be modified to suit the changing circumstances. The removal of tax deduction at source (TDS) on Government Securities market in a way heralded the beginning of the taxation reforms in debt markets. The result was the end to the practice of voucher trading in the Government Securities market thus removing pricing distortions in the market. The incidence of stamp duty had been for a long time a major impediment to the development of debt markets. The amendments to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 have exempted debt instruments dealt in demat form from the applicability of stamp duty (Government Securities as such are exempted from the stamp duty). This encouraged demat holding/transactions in debt instruments, as also trading in debt instruments.  In the latest Budget, some more rationalisation measures in the tax regime were announced. First, the earlier exemption to equity mutual fund from the dividend tax placed the debt mutual funds at a disadvantage. The recent Finance Bill, has however, proposed the abolition of the distribution tax of 10 per cent on companies and mutual funds on the dividends or income distributed by them. Such income will henceforth be taxed in the hands of the recipients at the rates applicable to them and subject to TDS. The dividend tax exemption available to the equity-oriented mutual funds, however, is withdrawn and the dividends will be taxable in the hands of the recipients at 10 per cent. This move has to some extent reduced the disadvantages faced by the debt-oriented funds. Second, the recent amendments to Section 47 of the IT Act, facilitating securities lending and borrowing operations will ensure safe and smooth settlement through the recently established CCIL. Third, the prevailing tax treatment for zero coupon bonds resulted in distorting trading practices in these instruments. The recent notification issued by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) in bringing about rationalisation in the tax treatment for the deep discount bonds, apart from removing the distortions will keep the market in readiness for the development of STRIPS in Government Securities and facilitate a zero coupon yield curve. For the financial system as a whole, the Expert Committee to Review the System of Administered Interest Rates and other Related Committees (2002) has made certain recommendations on the tax regime, which if implemented would remove some distortions and ensure a level playing field among 
 BIS Review 16/2002 13 participants and instruments in the financial markets. These measures coupled with the decision to align the administered interest rates with market rates of interest should pave the way for significant improvement in the environment for debt markets. 7. Road ahead for Indian debt markets There have been several occasions when measures contemplated in India for development of debt markets especially Government Securities markets have been articulated by RBI. In this concluding part of my address, I will list the milestones to be reached within one- or two-year time span. On the legal side, several measures are under way. First, as the Finance Minister, in his Union Budget 2002-03, has announced, a new Government Securities Bill, which has since received the concurrence of all the State legislators, replacing the existing Public Debt Act of 1944, would be introduced in the current session of the Parliament. The new Act will facilitate wider participation in Government Securities markets as it will provide necessary protection to the beneficial owners through Constituent Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) accounts, enable lien marking and pledge of securities for raising loans against Government securities, recognition of electronic form of record maintenance, enlargement of dematerialization facility through Bond Ledger Accounts, liberalisation of norms relating to nomination and legal representation, facilitate easier transfer and allow for stripping of securities.  Second, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill which has already been considered by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance is also expected to be introduced in the Parliament in this session. The Bill seeks to limit the fiscal deficit, place limits on public debt and eliminate RBI’s participation in the primary market issue of dated Government Securities, thereby paving the way for separation of debt management from monetary management. The amendments to the RBI Act, which are under consideration of the Government, would take away the mandatory responsibility of RBI to act as debt manager to Government of India and thereby facilitate such separation, which is one of our major medium-term objectives.  Third, in pursuance with the recommendations of the Expert Committees set up by RBI and Government of India. a new Bill is also proposed to be introduced in the Parliament to strengthen creditors’ right to foreclosure and enforcement of securities by banks and financial institutions. This Bill will also enable securitisation of money locked up in long-term loans, thereby further strengthening the legal basis for transactions in such new debt securities. For development of the market and to encourage retail participation, particularly by mid-segment investors like urban co-operative banks, NBFCs, trusts, etc., non-competitive bidding scheme allowing 5 per cent of the amount issued under select auctions by Government was introduced in January 2002. The amount could be revised to 10 per cent keeping in view, the response. Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs) were reintroduced recently in two launches in November and December 2001. Certain percentage of total Government borrowings could be earmarked for such FRBs to provide good hedging instruments to banks/other investors to minimise their interest rate risk. With clarifications issued by Government of India recently in the tax treatment of zero coupon bonds, decks have been cleared to introduce STRIPS which would satisfy the segmental needs of the market. Necessary preparatory work for software development is being taken up. To provide transparency and stability in the market, as announced by the Finance Minister in the recent Union Budget, a calendar of primary issues for the first half of the next fiscal will be announced soon. On the institutional development side, the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), which was set up in April 2001, has commenced its operations since February 15, 2002. CCIL, acts as the central counter party in Government Securities for trades accepted for clearing and settlement through Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) with automated connectivity with the Delivery versus Payment (DvP) settlement system. It provides guaranteed settlement of transactions in Government Securities now. The reduction in number of transactions for settlement with RBI will bring down the associated risk, cost and time in completion of settlement. The establishment of CCIL is expected to pave way for entry of non-SGL participants for repos market and repos in corporate debt instruments thereby improving liquidity in debt market. We hope this will become possible within the next one year. The CCIL will also act as a central counter party for settlement of forex transactions. This is expected to be put in place within the next six months.  On the technology side, as part of NDS-PDO computerisation project, Negotiated Dealing System which provides for screen based electronic dealing system for trading in Government Securities and money market instruments including repos and electronic bidding in the primary auction of Central and State 
 14 BIS Review 16/2002 Government Securities/Treasury Bills has also commenced its operations since February 15, 2002. At this stage, it has been possible to invite bids for primary auctions on the NDS for daily repos under Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) and for reporting secondary market trades on near real time basis. The submission of manual SGL form has been done away with and direct links established between reporting of transactions, their confirmation and settlement in a DVP 2 system. By end of 2002, we can expect a centralised PDO with connectivity to all 15 centres of RBI, complete automation of all services for investors and completion of primary market operations with seamless linkages to settlement system. Very soon, we also intend to place on real time basis, information available on NDS in the public domain. This will facilitate transparency and also enable banks/PDs to service their clients better at various parts of the country.  To facilitate faster funds transfer for debt market settlements, Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) facility, which is now available at 13 centres covering more than 8,000 branches, will be available at 40 centres in the next 6 months after integration with SBI managed clearing houses covering almost 75 per cent of the transactions. Contract for a state of the art Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) has been awarded in October 2001 and it is expected to be operationalised in the first quarter of 2003, thereby facilitating funds settlement at real time gross basis, which will ensure finality of settlement. By next year, securities trading and settlement will link to the RTGS. 8. Conclusion The road ahead for the next year is thus fairly clear but on the way forward, there are several issues which need to be addressed. Let me at this stage flag a few of these issues for the benefit of your deliberations.  First, heterogeneity of market participants in terms of transaction needs, risk assessments and investment horizons needs to be encouraged to lend greater stability to the market. With the liberalisation and activation of insurance sector, long-term saving through debt instruments is bound to increase and the debt market will have an important role to play in this regard. Mr.Rangachary, Chairman of the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) had raised the issue of lengthening of maturities of Government Securities and the RBI had assured fulfillment of this requirement of the insurance sector. Also, pension reforms have made a start in the recent Union Budget. This is bound to result in an increased demand for long-term debt securities. In addition, the SLR requirements of cooperative banks and NBFCs are increasing. It would be necessary to ensure easy availability of Government Securities to meet this demand.  Second, in the above context of greater thrust on market players with different perceptions, retailing of Government Securities assumes great importance. A three-pronged strategy would seem ideal viz., a greater role by PDs in providing liquidity so that exit route is available always for the retail investor; banks and major custodians to facilitate investment and ease of transactions for retail demand; and establishing order-driven trading system in stock exchanges with adequate safeguards. Third, in view of the in-principle decision taken to discontinue the system of Satellite Dealers, time is appropriate for a review of the system of PDs in terms of their number in the system, obligations, activities and regulation. In this regard, a decision in the RBI has already been taken to bring the PDs under the supervision of Board for Financial Supervision of the RBI. Fourth, as regards non-Government debt markets, the major issue of private placements will have to be squarely addressed sooner than later. In this context, ensuring greater transparency, adequate disclosures, enhanced efficiency, and proper accounting standards would be in the larger interest of development of debt markets.  Let me conclude by submitting that we in RBI are keen to understand theory and practice of debt market but eschew ideological extremes. We want to gain from the experience of others but chart our own course of action. We are aware of the complexities and the difficult road ahead. We approach the tasks with caution, humility and flexibility, but with determination to reach international best practices as suited to India's evolving needs.  Let me wish the deliberations all success and we look forward to learning from the expertise and experience of the distinguished participants.  Thank you. 
 BIS Review 16/2002 1 A Wellink: The Euro, a major challenge and catalyst for Europe Speech by Dr A Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, for the Dutch Business Round Table, Zürich, 12 March 2002. *      *      * Introduction It was in here in Zürich over 55 years ago that Winston Churchill held his famous speech on the future of Europe. He depicted a United States of Europe that would put an end to centuries of conflicts and bring prosperity to its peoples. Indeed, since then we have come a long way in actually fulfilling his grand vision, although without Switzerland - the nation he addressed - playing an active role.  Of course, there are many reasons - mostly of a historical -political nature - why Switzerland chose to stay outside the process of European integration. In this respect, I certainly do not want to pass judgement. Nevertheless, you find yourselves surrounded by an ever closer union of Member States that has also introduced a single currency. In this light, I would like to elaborate on the introduction of the Euro and it´s consequences for the European Union - taking into account, where possible - the position of this country.  First, I shall briefly touch on the actual changeover to the Euro at the beginning of this year. Then I shall go into the merits that monetary union already brought over the last few years. Finally, I will give my vision on future challenges and dynamics of the Euro. Changeover  Ten years after the Treaty of Maastricht, the Euro finally found its way into the pockets of 300 million Europeans. This unprecedented process - comprising the distribution of 239,000 tonnes of coins and 2 million kilometres of notes - was an outstanding logistical success. Moreover, doom scenarios predicting mass forgery, robberies and threats to public security proved wrong. Of course, a clear, central scenario and tight planning, especially within the European System of Central Banks, provided a firm foundation, but the operation remained highly dependent on local players; transporters, retailers, bankers, administrators, law-enforcers. In fact, there were also a number of Swiss companies (Lanqart (paper), OVD Kinegram) involved in developing and producing the high quality Euro notes. The efforts of these local players and the sheer public enthusiasm for the Euro were central to the success of the changeover. Indeed, through the sale of so-called eurokits, people on average had already 14 eurocoins in their pocket before 1 January. This “euro-eagerness” explains that by the first week, already 75% of cash payments were in Euro.  In the Netherlands, this 75% level was already reached on the second day, and after one week, the changeover was virtually completed. As such, it was not without pride that I proclaimed my country European champion - though that could not entirely wash down the bitter aftertaste of missing this year´s World Championship soccer. In hindsight, people felt well-informed about the Euro and found the Euro introduction in no way the drama that some had predicted.  Finally, on 28 January, the Dutch Guilder was the first of the former euroland currencies that in practice lost its legal tender status. To ease the minds of Dutch Roundtable members present, Guilders can - under certain conditions - still be exchanged for Euros at my central bank; coins until 2007 and banknotes even until 2032. One tiny spot on the otherwise shiny, new currency is the anecdotal reporting of price changes associated with the changeover. There is, however, little evidence of any significant effect on aggregate inflation figures in the Euro area. According to the European statistical office, Eurostat, the effect is likely to fall within the range of 0.0% to 0.16%. On a country-by-country basis, the possibility to round up prices would, of course, be linked to the conversion rate of the national currency. For example, calculating back from Euros to German Marks is much easier than from Euros to Dutch Guilders. In addition, the cyclical position of the economy would influence the direction in which rounding may have occurred.  
 2 BIS Review 16/2002 For the Netherlands, our research suggests that there might have been a slight upward effect on the price level of 0,2% to 0,4%. Overall, competition and peer pressure from consumer organisations would clearly limit room for manoeuvre. Moreover, possible one-off effects will be more than compensated by increased price transparency over the years to come. The merits of the Euro so far This brings me to the reasons why the Netherlands decided to give up its beloved currency. Foremost, the Euro is a political project in which the Dutch could not afford to stay out. Integration in a supranational context protects the interests of smaller European players.  In economic terms, the Euro increases macro-economic stability and cross-border price transparency. It reduces transaction costs by eliminating exchange rate risks. Moreover, the Euro is a catalyst for further economic reform and integration. In this respect, the economist Andrew Rose recently published an interesting article on common currency arrangements. Using cross-country panel data, he shows that countries with the same currency, trade substantially more than those with different currencies. Interestingly, the impact of a common currency is also larger than of a fixed exchange rate regime, which reduces volatility but retains separate monies.  In this light, the Euro is the icing on the internal market cake by broadening and deepening its scale. But, as always, the proof of this cake is in the eating. Indeed, the three years of the Euro´s virtual existence confirm the Dutch political and economic motives. Though some tend to be misled by its exchange rate, the Euro has proven to be rock solid with low inflation and, with it, a credible European Central Bank. Now, with hard currency in hand, the public will become more aware of the fact that a Euro is a Euro, and that the internal stability of the Euro counts. Stable price developments and a low level of long-term interest rates provide a firm basis for growth. In addition, the Euro ended once and for all the uncontrolled spending dynamics of the past. Indeed, the EU is unique in having set itself a standard for sound government finances through the Stability and Growth Pact. In this light, you probably all heard about the early warning that the European Commission recommended for Germany and Portugal. As a consequence, both countries strongly re-committed themselves to budgetary consolidation and the close to balance rule of the Pact. The outcome clearly reflects the respect of all countries involved for the Pact, and underlines the credibility of the macro-economic policy framework in general. Thus, the Euro has offered a stable environment both to governments and business.  Finally, the Euro has already made a spectacular impact on financial markets in Europe. These have become broader and deeper, with a sharp rise in both the volume of capital issues and the spread of credit quality. Compared to 1998, total international bond issuance in Euros have more than doubled, and now compares well with the level of dollar-bonds. The sharp rise in the corporate bond market has increased financing possibilities and enhances merger & acquisition activities in Europe.  Switzerland and the Euro  Being closed in by Euro-territory, the Swiss can also reap the Euro fruits, all be it partly, in terms of bigger investment and borrowing opportunities in the Euro-market. In addition, the trading environment has improved with more price transparency in comparing potential trading partners and less exchange rate risks. On the downside, potential exchange rate volatility remains, as you have experienced between the Frank and the Euro. Given that business services and tourism are central to the Swiss economy, there is no doubt that Euro coins and notes will increasingly pop up cross border. Indeed, large retailers appear to accept Euros and a large number of cash dispensers in major cities and at the border produce Euro notes. I heard that in this city even ticket machines for car parks are made “euro-fähig”.  Some point to a possible parallel use of the Euro in economies surrounding the Euro area. In fact, it was the British that first introduced the notion of a parallel currency back in the early seventies, and again during negotiations at Maastricht. As an alternative to monetary union, they wanted the intangible European Currency Unit to compete with the national money. Should the European currency prove stable and successful, it would by the laws of nature become the sole legal tender. Along these lines, Helmut Kohl argued recently that Switzerland would adopt the Euro in 2010 at the latest.  
 BIS Review 16/2002 3 However, I think that mature countries such as the UK, Sweden or Switzerland, are not likely to take on the Euro as national currency without further political integration with the EU. In other words, they will have to be part of - and committed to - Economic and Monetary Union. Here, we can draw a parallel with, for example, the limited role of the US dollar in Canada - despite the relative economic weight of the US and strong trading relations in the context of the North American Free Trade Area.  Future challenges and dynamics of the Euro  It appears, I am already looking into a crystal ball, so let me move on to the future challenges and dynamics of the Euro for Europe. The dynamics of the Euro clearly lie with the expectations and pressures of markets and the public opinion at large. A good example is the recent agreement in the EU that the costs of cross border bank transfers should be substantially reduced. In a similar vein, economic agents simply do not accept that cross border security transactions are more expensive than within the US. Therefore, the European Parliament recently accepted the report, prepared under chairmanship of Baron Lamfalussy, that foresees in speeding-up decision-making on the elimination of barriers in the European security market. This plan is part of an ambitious EU programme to create a truly integrated financial market by 2005.  This political spin-off is not limited to the EU alone. For example, the European Commission has recently opened discussions with Switzerland, and other third countries, on banking secrecy and the fiscal treatment of savings. I understand that on the Swiss side, this sensitive dossier has been linked to other fields of negotiations such as Schengen and European immigration policy. It goes to show that even in third countries the impact of the Euro surpasses the economic domain.  Clearly, the Euro enables the “E” of EMU to reach the critical mass necessary for progress in many policy areas. In that sense, a further deepening of financial markets will enhance labour mobility, for example through the portability of pensions and social security entitlements across borders. More importantly, there are signs that labour market flexibility has been improving. Thus, the European labour force tends to absorb cyclical fluctuations more effectively. In a similar vein, wage negotiations appear to adjust faster to changing economic conditions, while inflation expectations have decreased. This change in behaviour is a reflection of the fact that in the Euro-countries exchange rate flexibility is no longer available to neutralise structural deficiencies.  The extent of success is determined by one, major factor - European policy makers must recognise the Euro dynamics and live up to the expectations of long-term integration. Here lies the central challenge that follows from the introduction of the Euro: Politicians have to deliver. In that sense, the European Council, that convenes in four days´ time in Barcelona, will have to put its political weight behind the liberalisation of the energy market and the deadlines of the Financial Services Action Plan. Moreover, the Council should be committed to - for example - the speedy adoption of the European take-over and patent directives, both of which have been on the table for decades. Conclusion Let me conclude. A representative of the Deutsche Bank recently said that ´there has been a lot of positive Euro speak in the last couple of years, but nothing that has led to better growth´. I disagree; the virtual Euro has brought macro-economic stability and increased dynamics in the internal market, the financial market in particular.  Moreover, the changeover to the tangible Euro has been a major success thanks to the great acceptance and enthusiasm around Europe for the common currency. The historical and political importance of the Euro for “an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe” (preamble Treaty of Rome) is without any doubt. However, I agree that one needs to put the money where the mouth is. The benefits of the Euro can only be reaped to the full if its dynamics are acknowledged. In this respect, the Euro is a catalyst for more growth and employment, while it is a challenge for European policy makers to shape the right climate.  In a way, the Swiss also face this challenge - the more, now that the EU is on the brink of a sizeable enlargement. Following Winston Churchill´s address here half a century ago, the time might come when sensitive questions on sovereignty and neutrality no longer tilt the balance against playing an active role in Europe. In fact, an historic breaking point might have been reached with the recent, public majority 
 4 BIS Review 16/2002 support for membership of the United Nations. Should Switzerland ever decide to take part in European integration, I am convinced that you will embrace the Euro as warmly as the Dutch did on 1 January.  
 BIS Review 15/2002 1 Glenn Stevens: Economic performance and issues in 2002 Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian Industry Group "Economy 2002 - Forecasting Industry Prospects", Sydney, 6 March 2002. *      *      * Thank you to the Australian Industry Group for an invitation to return to your annual conference. It is a pleasure to be here.  Since this is my third appearance here, I thought it might be useful to give a brief history of the past couple of years as a prelude to making some observations about the current state of things, and about some of the issues for the year ahead. The world economy As we all know, the year 2000 was a strong year for global growth. In that year, world GDP rose by almost 5 per cent, and growth in the major countries (the G7) ran at about 3½ per cent. This was led by the US, which enjoyed a very strong performance through the second half of the 1990s, though the growth was not confined to the US, and a number of countries did quite well, including, in particular, Australia. The Asian region generally recovered from the crisis of 1997 and 1998, with several countries riding the global boom in spending on information technology. Japan was perhaps the most conspicuous exception, with a very weak performance overall through most of the 1990s – which held down the G7 aggregate mentioned above quite noticeably. But towards the end of 2000, it began to become clear that a slowing in the US economy, which had been talked about, but not seen, for several years, was finally beginning to occur. At that time, expectations were for lower growth in the major economies in 2001 than in the preceding year, but still for growth at about average rates. Then, in the early months of 2001, assessments of the health of the US economy, and by extension much of the rest of the world, were revised dramatically. For those who closely watch the US economy, the bell was rung in early January last year, with a reduction in interest rates by the Federal Reserve, undertaken in between their normally scheduled meetings. That was to be followed by a sequence of policy changes which were aggressive compared with the experience of the preceding decade. When we met here about a year ago, then, we were in a period in which expectations were moving quickly, both about the international scene and about the Australian economy. Perceptions about the world economy were to worsen noticeably in the subsequent months. Those about the Australian economy worsened as well, though not as far, or for as long, as those abroad. It is reasonable to claim that sentiment about the Australian economy reached a low point around March-April last year. Since then, perceptions have improved, reflecting the actual course of the economy, which has held up well given the global downturn. Talk of recession in America began to grow, though there was vigorous debate about that for some time. By June 2001, the manufacturing sector of the US economy had been contracting for about a year. The exceptionally strong growth in demand for ITC products initially disguised the weakness more broadly in manufacturing, but that strength itself faded during 2001. Employment began to fall. There was active debate about whether all of this constituted a "recession" in the normal sense of that word. Then the events of 11 September 2001 occurred, and ended that debate pretty quickly. Pessimists and optimists alike revised down their assessments of growth and worried about the possibility of a much more pronounced and long-lasting contraction in the US economy. To date, however, such fears have not been borne out. It is true that there was an initial shock to confidence in the US. It is also true that the long-term responses to the terrorist events could well be of considerable importance for economic performance. Higher costs of security and insurance will have to be borne. Ways in which businesses organise themselves, in both the goods and service producing sectors in the US, may well change. On top of this, no-one can foretell the way in which the military response to terrorism may change the world, either strategically or economically. But so far, the path of the US economy we have observed since the attacks has shown remarkably little lasting direct impact beyond the initial disruption lasting a few weeks. The financial system was quickly back in operation. Patterns of consumer behaviour were apparently only affected briefly. 
 2 BIS Review 15/2002 Industrial output, which fell for a year prior to the attacks, looks as though it may have stopped falling not long thereafter, a picture corroborated by some important surveys of that sector. There has been a recession, according to the US National Bureau of Economic Research, but it was not caused by the attacks. That much is clear from the fact that the NBER had the evidence to declare a recession with very little post-attack data: it was the data from earlier in the year on which they mostly relied. Moreover, if a recession began about March 2001, as the NBER suggests – that is, almost a year ago – we would normally expect to see some signs of a turning point getting close by now. The behaviour of manufacturing production and orders, inventories, some labour market data, and financial market prices are all consistent with that idea. To cap that off, there was of course the news last week that real GDP in the final quarter of 2001 rose a little more than had earlier been estimated. So it is not surprising that people have recently begun to talk increasingly about the shape of a pick-up in US growth. The forecasters polled by Consensus Economics collectively increased their forecasts for US growth in 2002 quite substantially when asked in February – even prior to the latest GDP revision. If what we are seeing is indeed the first stage of a recovery, and if it continues, then the recession of 2001 will have been very mild indeed by historical standards. That itself may well mean that the recovery will be a pretty moderate affair compared with previous upswings. There are also one or two apparent imbalances which might slow down a business cycle upswing during the coming few quarters. Exceptionally high levels of business investment in recent years raise the question of whether there might be excess capacity in some areas. US equity prices remain high by historical standards, and so may be subject to correction. Certainly profitability of US corporations appears to be particularly poor at present, which ordinarily is not conducive to expanding investment. Some argue that households are financially stretched. How all this will play out remains to be seen. Nonetheless, the weight of opinion has recently become more optimistic than it was a few months ago, and not without reason. An improved US outlook, if it comes to fruition, will be good for other regions of the world. In Asia, we can already see signs of a stabilisation in industrial output after a pronounced contraction through most of 2001. This was the effect back through the supply chain of the slump in the demand for computer and information technology products last year. While the shape of any pick-up in this area remains far from clear, the contraction at least appears to have abated. European growth slowed more than anticipated in 2001 – indeed the economies of the Euro zone recorded no more growth than the US. Signs of a cyclical turning point are emerging there as well, though again it is early days. Japan, as is well known, is another story altogether. Contractionary and deflationary forces have continued, and arguably become stronger, in the past year. Restoring Japan to economic health will be a long process. Were Japan to continue its recent performance, but not be materially worse than that – which seems to be the consensus view – growth in the world economy in total should start to look up as 2002 progresses. Measured on a year average basis, Consensus forecasters suggest that the G7 countries will record growth of about 1 per cent in 2002. This number is about the same as for 2001, but as the chart below shows, this conceals a more pronounced pick-up in the profile of growth through the year – from zero through 2001 to 2½ per cent through 2002. 
 BIS Review 15/2002 3 The Australian economy Let me turn now to the Australian economy. As I am sure you are well aware, we have been affected by the global recession, through a few channels. The most obvious one is a reduction in export growth. Eighteen months ago, export values were growing at 25–30 per cent, with growth in prices and underlying quantities each contributing about half of the overall increase. That growth has stopped completely over the most recent year. Parts of the tourism sector have been affected quite badly by the decline in international travel and the collapse of Ansett. Australian businesses, especially large businesses, look abroad quite actively, and their confidence cannot help but have been affected by the unfolding global story. My impression is that, across a wide range of firms, managers have responded to the threat of difficult times by curtailing discretionary spending on things like travel, advertising, consultants and the like. They have also, one must presume, looked carefully at planned capital expenditure. In addition, the general populace has had a daily diet of reading about the difficulties in the US and other countries. In light of all this, it is perhaps all the more remarkable that, on the available evidence, the economy seems to have recorded quite reasonable growth through 2001 and, based on the very preliminary data available, into the early part of 2002. The responses of businesses to surveys suggest that they are beginning to increase investment spending again. Consumer confidence is also holding up very well. Hence, as best we can judge, the economy is not only continuing to expand, but has reasonable prospects of continuing to do so in the near term. Nor is this all due to the current strength in the housing sector. This is a point I have made in more detail elsewhere, but even stripping out the contribution from housing – which has operated in both directions in recent years – we find moderate growth in the economy over the past couple of years, of the order of 2½ per cent. In the past twelve months at least, this compares well with outcomes in the US, Europe, Japan and much of Asia. It is slower, of course, than the 4–5 per cent growth of 1998 and 1999. But some slowing was always going to occur from such levels, and in the context of widespread recession around the world, Australia's performance is good, and much better than would have been anticipated had our performance in previous global downturns been extrapolated. To what do we attribute this favourable outcome? As was pointed out in our most recent Statement on Monetary Policy, it is rare for an external event, on its own, to precipitate recession in Australia. To be sure, the impact effect of such events in the past has been quite substantial and, no doubt, there is a "multiplier" effect of such shocks through the economy. But for an economy which typically grows at 3-4 per cent, a shock which affects production by 1 or even 2 per cent needs something else at work to precipitate a contraction in the economy overall. There usually needs to be a slump in domestic demand to precipitate an outright contraction in overall GDP. That can occur because, say, an excess of capital spending by businesses, or excessive leverage, leads to a sharp correction in investment (and employment), which exacerbates a slowdown which was already under way because of external events. It might occur because some shock comes along which fundamentally erodes business profitability and hence reduces prospects for investment. It might occur because domestic macroeconomic policies, responding belatedly to serious inflation pressure, are faced with a need to tighten abruptly late in the business cycle. As has been pointed out on several occasions by the Governor, the extent of such problems on this occasion has, we judge, been small. True, a rise in inflation has occurred, but the Bank believes that the tightening phase of 1999–2000 addressed any longer-term problems which might have threatened on this front. We therefore felt we could ease policy in 2001, and did so some considerable time ahead of the likely peak in inflation. That inflation expectations remained well anchored through the past year or more helped in this. Investment has not been excessive overall (though this does not rule out some individual "mistakes") and, on the whole, businesses do not appear to be over-leveraged. This means that the likelihood is rising, rather than falling, investment during the coming year. The recent survey on capital expenditure intentions confirms that this is occurring; indeed, it suggests the pace will strengthen considerably in the second half of the year – although of course this is a very early estimate of such expenditure. Profits and productivity It is probably worth spending a little more time on profits. Businesses were affected by the rise in prices for inputs over the past couple of years, which resulted from the decline in the exchange rate. In addition, the moderate slowdown in the economy itself presumably affected earnings. As a result, 
 4 BIS Review 15/2002 corporate sector gross operating earnings tended to weaken, though the most recent data suggest this decline may have ended. There has been a much larger decline in profits in the US. The chart below, prepared by staff in our Economic area, undertakes a comparison of corporate sector profits in the national accounts as a share of GDP, for the US and Australia. The Australian data here have been adjusted to remove interest costs and depreciation so as to make them more comparable with the way US data are usually published. The Australian profits share is higher than in the US, but we should not make too much of the difference in levels – there are possible differences in the relative sizes of incorporated and non-incorporated sectors, the extent of public versus private sector ownership of the capital stock, and so on.   But the trends, and levels relative to longer-term averages, can be more meaningfully compared. The differences in the extent of the falls in profits since 1998 are quite striking. US profits are back to 1990 levels; Australian profits are similar to the post-recession average, and look nothing like a recession scenario. This is obviously partly because the downturn in the economy itself has been milder. But it also makes for better prospects for growth in the short term, because it greatly lessens the likelihood of abrupt adjustments in investment, or employment. Longer term, prospects for profits rely heavily on productivity performance, an issue in which the business and policymaking community both have a vital interest. Productivity is key both for businesses in sustaining profitable performance and for the community as a whole since it is productivity growth which is ultimately the source of higher living standards. It is well known that Australian productivity growth accelerated during the 1990s, to a rate about one percentage point per year higher than what had been observed during the preceding ten to fifteen years. (This was, incidentally, both a higher average rate of productivity growth and a greater degree of acceleration in productivity than seen in the US over the same period.) It is no coincidence that profits did relatively well through most of that period, and that this was able to co-exist with rising real wages. During the past couple of years, the rate of expansion in productivity first slowed markedly, then sped up again. This is a standard cyclical pattern, in which employment moves in response to economic activity, but with a lag. Hence employment lags the slowing in activity, and measured productivity slows or even declines. The reverse happens when growth picks up, as it did during the first three quarters of 2001. 
 BIS Review 15/2002 5   The extensive program of liberalisation of the economy during the past couple of decades was a major driving force behind the improvement in trend productivity growth. As a side note, we in Australia have not tended to allow much role for "new economy" developments, such as the adoption of information technology, though some research does suggest that this may have played a greater role than conventional wisdom has allowed. But the bigger question is the future. Leaving aside recent cyclical ups and downs, will the strong trend productivity growth of the 1990s continue into the next ten years? On this there are, I suppose, optimists and pessimists. Optimists would argue that the faster productivity growth we have seen in the past decade represents an accelerated process of "catch up" to the leading edge levels of productivity we see globally, usually in the US economy. Moreover, they accept that there is still some gap between productivity levels in Australia and those of the world frontier in at least some sectors. Hence the catch up is not complete, and a process of good productivity growth can continue for some time yet. Pessimists tend to point out that this depends on the right policies. They worry that if the process of liberalising markets does not continue, or is even reversed, productivity performance will suffer. They voice the concern that it is getting harder to build support for liberalising ideas. Both of these views have some merit, and it is possible to have an optimistic outlook, but equally to see the importance of sustaining the liberal market arrangements which already exist, and of being disposed towards further sensible reforms that may be possible over time. Good policies will be important, of course – that goes without saying. But policies can only establish pre-conditions conducive to enhanced productivity. The outcomes will depend quite heavily on you, the business community. It is you, after all, who, in the pursuit of profit, have to seek out the opportunities for new products and markets, better ways of organising business activity, and better ways of motivating your employees and tapping and developing their human capital. In the simple growth accounting exercises used to measure productivity, the source of the genuine improvements in productive techniques is not considered (though there is a considerable separate literature aimed at establishing that). But productivity does not get handed down from somewhere – it is the outcome of the efforts of people across the economy to find better ways of doing things. What macroeconomic policy can contribute to this endeavour is a measure of stability. We will never be rid of the business cycle, nor of the tendency for businesses, households and especially financial markets, to alternate between moods of optimism and pessimism. But through the past decade or so, the Australian economy has been somewhat less volatile from year to year than it used to be. That may be explained partly by smaller shocks hitting us from abroad for much of the 1990s (though both the Asian crisis and the global recession of 2001 were big shocks). The economy's capacity to handle shocks has also improved, a factor due in some degree to the liberalising reforms themselves. I would argue that macroeconomic policies have played a role too, and in particular that a monetary policy 
 6 BIS Review 15/2002 regime which seeks to respond to the likelihood of significant build-ups of inflationary or disinflationary pressure, has made its contribution. It is, of course, our intention to continue in that vein.  Conclusion In most respects, the global situation, while not without uncertainty, is better than it was a year ago. A renewed expansion in the world economy may well be beginning, though it will probably be moderate, rather than strong. Even though we do not want to throw our hats too far in the air just yet, it is very encouraging to see such signs. Australia has come through the international difficulties well to date. In an underlying sense, we have slower growth than we experienced in the late 1990s, and slower growth than we would ideally like to sustain in the medium term. But we have not had the deep slump characteristic of earlier world downturns, and the probability of experiencing one soon seems recently to have diminished. This is good news, and perhaps should have us all casting our minds past the short term, towards the question of how to sustain good, stable growth, and good productivity performance, into the medium term. I am sure you will all be doing just that. 
 BIS Review 15/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: A supervisory perspective on disaster recovery and business continuity  Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, D.C., 4 March 2002.  *      *      * Good morning. I would like to thank the members of the Institute of International Bankers for the opportunity to speak about disaster recovery and business continuity. This topic has been receiving a great deal of attention at the Federal Reserve and in the financial industry as a whole since September11. It's fair to say that following September 11, we (bankers and supervisors alike) have a renewed appreciation of the meaning of the term "emergency preparedness."  The Federal Reserve and other regulators, both here and abroad, have been analyzing the aftermath of the terrorist attacks with a view toward strengthening the overall resilience of the financial system. This work has benefited from discussions with leading members of the financial services industry over the past several months. In this presentation, I want to give you a flavor of the ideas and issues under review.  Since many of you had first-hand experience of the impact of September 11, I do not intend to dwell on the details of the operational breakdowns and related challenges that faced institutions in lower Manhattan. Suffice it to say that, through a fortuitous combination of existing plans, people, systems, and tools and an extraordinary level of cooperation among market participants, the financial system recovered remarkably quickly from the tragedy. However, we cannot assume that the same combination will always work in our favor, and therefore, regulators and the public have a strong common interest in learning from our horrific experience of September 11.  What did we learn?  Let me review some of the key lessons that we believe have emerged from September 11. First, business continuity planning at many institutions, although improved by Y2K preparations, clearly had not fully taken into account the potential for wide-spread disasters and for the major loss or inaccessibility of critical staff. Some firms arranged for their backup facilities to be in nearby buildings for quite legitimate efficiency and convenience, and, as a result, lost both primary and backup sites. Very few firms planned for an emergency that would disrupt multiple sites in an entire business district, city, or region.  Second, business concentrations, both market-based and geographic, intensified the impact of operational disruptions. Besides the geographic concentration of financial institutions within New York City, some critical market functions, particularly in the clearing and settlement of funds, securities, and financial contracts, rely on only a few entities. When even one of those entities has operational problems, many market participants feel the effects.  Moreover, significant telecommunications vulnerabilities resulting from concentrations became evident when failures affected numerous institutions, both within and outside lower Manhattan. In fact, Federal Reserve staff were personally involved in setting priorities for the restoration of key telecommunications circuits supporting the financial services system during the week of September 11.  Third, the events of September 11 graphically demonstrated the interdependence among financial-system participants, wherever located. Though organizations located outside the New York City area were affected much less than those within it, many felt the effects of the disaster. The difficulty customers and counterparties had in communicating with banks, broker-dealers, and other organizations in lower Manhattan seriously impeded their ability to determine whether transactions had been completed as expected. In some cases, some customers were affected by actions of institutions with which they did not even do business, for example, when funds or securities could not be delivered because of operational problems at other institutions.  In fact, during the week of September 11 liquidity bottlenecks at times became so severe that the Federal Reserve needed to lend substantial amounts directly to institutions through the discount window, besides providing billions more in payment system float on uncleared checks, and through 
 2 BIS Review 15/2002 open market operations. We kept our payment systems open until nearly midnight each night that week as institutions attempted to clear out payment queues. Heightened liquidity needs were not limited to domestic financial institutions. The Federal Reserve set up swap lines with other major central banks to allow foreign banking organizations to obtain liquidity directly from their own authorities, to prevent U.S. liquidity imbalances from being transmitted overseas.  Most important, we learned, as a result of these interdependencies, that contingency-planning decisions made by an individual institution may affect not only the safety and soundness of that institution but also the safety and soundness of other institutions and, indeed, the very functioning of the financial markets. As a result, we believe that coordinated discussions of sound practices for business continuity involving the financial industry and regulators are an important part of our response to the events of September 11.  Steps financial institutions are taking  Let me turn to steps that institutions are taking to improve their own preparedness and business continuity planning. September 11 may lead to changes in institutions' planning for emergencies, as well as changes in their ongoing operations. In addition to a range of tactical steps, such as enhancing security measures, updating communication plans, and strengthening real-time data backup, institutions also are making some interesting strategic choices.  For example, many institutions use a traditional model of business continuity that is based on an "active" operating site with a corresponding backup site, often with separate sites for data processing and for business operations. This strategy generally relies on relocating staff from the active site to the backup site and on maintaining backup copies of technology and data that are up-to-date.  In the traditional model, backup capabilities are ensured through periodic testing. Even so, maintaining the effectiveness of backup sites, staff, and systems that are not routinely used for production is often difficult. For example, during the week of September 11, many institutions found that disaster-recovery plans of particular business lines were not always accessible or up-to-date, and sometimes the backup and primary sites used different hardware and software versions. Finally, the assumption that key personnel could be relocated was not always well founded.  In contrast, some institutions are now moving toward a "split operations" model, in which two or more active operating sites provide backup for one another. Each site can absorb some or all of the work of another for an extended time. For banking organizations with nationwide operations (particularly those that have grown through mergers), such sites are often hundreds of miles apart. For international firms, routine workloads can be shared among sites in different countries or different continents. This strategy can provide almost-immediate resumption capacity, depending on the systems supporting the operations and the communications and operating capacity at each site. The strategy also addresses many of the key vulnerabilities of the traditional model. For example, technology must be kept current at all active operating sites for normal business operations to proceed.  At the same time, the split-operations approach can have significant costs, in terms of maintaining excess capacity at each site and of adding operating complexity. This approach may be more suited to some types of business activities, such as trading, clearing, and settlement, than to others. Other business-continuity models may be able to provide a high degree of resilience. Over time, technological change will significantly affect the range of business continuity strategies and, importantly, their relative costs and benefits.  Whatever operating model they chose, financial institutions clearly are reassessing the range of scenarios they need to address in their business-continuity planning. Such scenarios posit effects on business operations over much broader geographic areas than previously imagined (such as a city or a metropolitan area) and involve consequences that could harm or significantly disperse an organization's critical employees.  Institutions are also exploring methods to provide a greater diversity of telecommunications services and to eliminate points of failure. Contract provisions and audit oversight of telecommunications vendors may heighten attention to this critical vulnerability. At the same time, many recognize that overcoming telecommunications vulnerabilities will be extremely difficult given the current physical infrastructure. In the longer term, establishing diverse telecommunications methods (such as Internet and wireless) and moving toward wider geographic diversification of operations may address these vulnerabilities. Industrywide discussions with telecommunications providers may help institutions to 
 BIS Review 15/2002 3 avoid some of the vulnerabilities exposed on September 11. Some institutions are reexamining arrangements with disaster-recovery vendors because they have found that these vendors' "first-come, first-served" policies mean just that.  Testing of backup plans is also receiving renewed focus. Testing is seen no longer as a compliance issue or an item on a checklist but as a critical part of business operations. In the wake of September 11, many market participants found themselves operating from their backup sites and discovered they had problems connecting and communicating with the backup sites of other displaced entities. As a result, financial institutions now seem receptive to coordinated testing between backup facilities.  In addition, several public and private-sector initiatives have begun to examine the issue of coordinated crisis management communication. Overall, I believe that financial institutions are addressing many of the key vulnerabilities. In large part, the market will demand this. Customers increasingly require assurances that their financial institutions' operations will continue as expected even in the event of a disaster. We need to maintain our focus on this issue even as the harsh memories of September 11 fade. We must also find ways to make business-continuity planning more consistent, more coordinated, and more transparent across the industry. With that in mind, I will discuss some of the steps that regulators are taking.  Steps regulators are taking  The Federal Reserve and other financial services regulators want these lessons to be addressed before the next disaster, whenever and whatever it may strike. First, we are talking to our industry colleagues about appropriate sound practices. However, I would stress that we still have a lot to learn from financial institutions and from experts in business-continuity planning. No one knows for certain which threats (both man-made and natural) we are most likely to face in the coming years. We have much less experience modeling and predicting these operational risks than we do credit or market risks, and indeed some threats may be too idiosyncratic to be modeled at all.  As a result, a prudential supervisory model appears preferable at this time. Through the routine supervisory process, we are talking to institutions about the robustness of their disaster-recovery planning but are stopping short of setting detailed regulatory standards at this point. Although I anticipate that we will issue updated supervisory guidance and examination procedures for business continuity before long, I am not certain that we want to approach this issue with a checklist. In this process, we are working closely with other regulators, including the other federal banking regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission.  Cities and regions outside New York City are not without risk and also need to consider reasonable threats, both man-made and natural. I am therefore pleased that many institutions in those cities and towns, like their colleagues based in New York City are seriously considering updating and implementing business-continuity plans.  Institutions also need to define their targets for recovery from a disaster in a consistent manner. Although in practice, expectations for recovery time may differ depending on the scenario, some critical functions, including those safeguarding and transferring funds and financial assets, are so vital to the domestic and global financial system that they arguably should continue with minimal, if any, disruption, even in the event of a major regional disaster. Clearly, all institutions need to plan to continue serving their customers in a major disruption, and supervisory standards have required them to do so for many years. In addition, it is increasingly clear that the operational resilience of the largest institutions in key markets needs to reflect their systemic impact across the financial sector. Expectations should be highest for institutions whose activity can significantly affect other institutions, such as major clearing and settlement entities, and institutions that act as financial "utilities" in some of their functions.  However, we need to balance competing issues. We have an ongoing interest in the safety and soundness of individual institutions, as well as in systemic financial stability. But we also recognize that, even though the largest nationally and internationally active U.S. and foreign banking institutions have a key role to play in financial stability, they also participate in a competitive marketplace. Thus, we need to be careful not to create undue burden on a handful of institutions.  
 4 BIS Review 15/2002 Conclusion Six months after September 11, much has been planned and achieved, but we still have much to do. We must sustain the current drive to minimize or eliminate the vulnerabilities I have discussed. We must view September 11 as a wake-up call to improve the resilience of financial markets and institutions. We cannot afford to ignore the lessons learned.  I ask for your cooperation in what we view as a partnership. We were there for those who needed us on September 11 and in the days that followed, and we will be there again, if necessary. But we also look to financial institutions to conduct an honest appraisal of their vulnerabilities--or to listen to our appraisal of them in our routine supervision over the institutions' U.S. operations--and to take the necessary actions to remedy any significant operational weaknesses and deficiencies.  I wish us all the best in this endeavor.  
BIS Review 15/2002 1 Urban Bäckström: Sweden’s economy and monetary policy Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at Skanes Provinsbank, Helsingborg, 7 March 2002. *      *      * First a word of thanks for the invitation to Helsingborg to discuss matters to do with the Swedish economy and the Riksbank’s monetary policy. For me it is particularly interesting to come here since I lived and worked for some years in Helsingborg in the 1980s. As the published minutes show, at the Riksbank’s latest monetary policy meeting on 7 February the Executive Board concluded that some shift has occurred in the risk spectrum and there is now an overall tendency towards an upside risk for inflation one to two years ahead. The Board also made the overall assessment that the time for an interest rate increase is probably not far off if economic statistics continue to confirm an upturn and if inflation remains high. In what I have to say here today I shall be starting from this appraisal, which I will place in its context and then to some extent try to look ahead. Inflation prospects determine the repo rate When the Riksbank sets the repo rate, the focal point is an analysis of future inflation in Sweden. This analysis is based in turn on three factors in particular: total resource utilisation, the path of the exchange rate and people’s inflation expectations. Inflationary pressure normally varies with the demand situation and with changes in resource utilisation. The stronger the upswing in relation to potential output, the greater will be the risk of a faster increase in prices and wages and vice versa. That is why those of us who work in central banks around the world talk so frequently about the cyclical picture even though our target variable is actually inflation. The future value of the krona plays a part in our assessment of inflation. Exchange rate movements affect inflation directly in that they show up in the price of imported goods and services; they also have indirect effects through aggregate demand. Changes in the value of the krona relative to other currencies of importance for foreign trade have consequences for the competitiveness of Swedish goods and services. Turning finally to inflation expectations among households and firms, there is the effect on the actual formation of prices and wages and thereby on inflation. Altered expectations are liable to influence price formation if the Riksbank does not act through monetary policy. There are, however, other price impulses that the Riksbank also has to handle. Examples are last winter’s shortage of snow that restricted the supply of hydroelectric power, cattle diseases that pushed up the price of meat, and the unusually cold weather in Europe that raised the price of fruit and vegetables. Price shocks of this type can occasion large shifts in the general price level at the same time as their impact on inflation is probably only transient. Suppose such a price shock occurs in a particular month; it will then leave its mark on the annual inflation rate in the coming year and then drop out of the statistics. As we normally count on a time lag of more than a year before monetary policy has its full effect on inflation, countering such temporary price impulses is both difficult and not particularly meaningful. Monetary policy accordingly focuses instead on the forecast of inflation one to two years ahead. Occasional shifts in the price level can, however, affect inflation prospects more permanently if they alter the general perception of inflation’s path in the longer run. To put it briefly, if temporarily high inflation induces a general belief that inflation will also be high in the years ahead, then monetary policy must intervene. Even if the economic situation as such does not give grounds for worrying about inflation, in such a case resolute action may be called for so that the higher inflation does not become entrenched via inflation expectations. This is quite simply because, in terms of decreased output and employment, preventing inflation expectations from rising is less costly than pushing them down once they have become established at too high a level. 
2 BIS Review 15/2002 These, then, are the types of assessment from which we, as members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board, form a picture of the prospects for inflation. We look at them from various angles, consider the risks and opportunities. Four times a year the Riksbank presents a more comprehensive account; at present we are working on this year’s first Inflation Report. Let me remind you that for those who are interested, these reports are easily downloaded from our website: www.riksbank.se. Perhaps I should add that in addition to the text, the site provides the equally relevant statistics behind the charts. Two routes for a central bank Any central bank with an explicit target is faced with a choice that in its most extreme form looks something like this: either aim to keep inflation continuously on target or admit that there will be deviations that may last for quite some time. If inflation is to be kept close to the target all the time, there will be a constant need for sizeable repo rate adjustments, with the attendant marked fluctuations in market interest rates, output and employment. If temporary deviations from the central bank’s target are tolerated, on the other hand, monetary policy can be implemented more smoothly. A gradual adjustment of output and employment ultimately brings inflation back into line with the target. Both these routes have their drawbacks. Negative effects on employment and output from major changes in the repo rate are liable to erode public confidence in the central bank and the monetary policy regime. At the same time, undue acceptance of large deviations from the inflation target may weaken the target’s credibility and lead both to rising inflation expectations and to high costs for ultimately bringing inflation back on target. As a result, central banks tend to prefer a monetary policy strategy that lies somewhere between these two extremes, avoiding excessively large interest rate adjustments but not hesitating to adjust when this is called for. The Riksbank normally formulates monetary policy with a view to inflation one to two years ahead. This unfortunately means that the repo rate has to be set with the aid of forecasts and forecasts can err. Moreover, there is always the possibility of price shocks that are a-cyclical but still affect the rate of inflation. A forward-looking policy has the advantage, however, of permitting an implementation that is smoother yet firm. The Riksbank reacts to the inflation forecasts in a determined manner but as the forecasts include an assessment of the extent to which inflationary impulses are transient, over-reactions are avoided. The supply shocks I referred to earlier as having occurred during the past year are examples of price fluctuations that, with the monetary policy strategy the Riksbank has chosen, can occasion deviations from the inflation target. This is not the first time inflation has been affected by occasional factors. In the late 1990s, for example, successive deregulations of electricity and telecom markets resulted in deviations from the target, the difference being that at that time the gap was on the downside. What has happened now is the opposite. With our monetary policy strategy, this is a natural case of striking a reasonable balance between maintaining the fixed value of money and avoiding excessively large fluctuations in economic activity. It cannot be stressed too strongly that although the Riksbank’s sights are consistently on the target, inflation will always tend to hover around the bull’s-eye. Looking back, however, it will be seen that ever since the target was instituted, inflation has on average been very close to it. The intention is that this will continue to be the case in the future. More and more signs of a recovery So it is not the transitory price shocks that give the greatest cause for concern. Things are worse if we cannot rule out the possibility that part of an increase in inflation stems from strong activity earlier. Such effects usually show up after some time and tend to persist. During a strong upward phase, firms can begin to pass through rising business costs to consumers in the form of higher prices. Perhaps it is precisely this we have seen recently, at least to some extent. Support for such a conclusion may lie in that fact that, according to the latest statistics, the average wage level in Sweden is rising somewhat faster than is compatible with a 2 per cent inflation target. This may indicate that resource utilisation is in some sense more strained than we counted on earlier. If economic activity in Sweden were to rise only moderately, leading in time to a weakening of inflationary pressure, the risk of inflation would diminish. But if activity were rather to show signs of freshening, there is a risk of the existing high inflation continuing and being incorporated in our 
BIS Review 15/2002 3 perceptions of inflation in the longer run, with possible effects on, for example, future wage negotiations. That of course must not happen. A scrutiny of the current cyclical picture reveals a growing number of signs that activity abroad, above all in the United States, is on the way to improving. This is something that also affects conditions for the Swedish economy. A majority of leading indicators point in that direction. Although the upward phase does contain risks to which I shall be returning, there is still a good deal of evidence that a recovery in the rest of the world as well as in Sweden may be on the way to materialising later this year. A factor that often contributes to a cyclical swing is movements in stocks. When stocks are plentiful and sales are falling, firms often cut back production so that this falls more than demand. In this way, stock adjustments initially accentuate the cyclical downturn. When the reduction of stocks ultimately comes to an end, firms may step up production again even though demand has not yet started to recover. This drives a cyclical upturn and perhaps it is just such a positive effect that may be on the way. There are signs of this in the United States in particular but also in Sweden. A continued recovery requires that this is accompanied by a broad and sustained increase in demand; otherwise the upswing is liable to be relatively brief. In this respect there may still be some uncertainty, mainly perhaps as regards the American economy. The economic imbalances in the United States are still large and stock-market values are high, both historically and in relation to the current cyclical phase. However, high productivity compared with the rest of the world may make these problems less troublesome. Household saving has admittedly become somewhat higher relative to disposable income since the end of last year but the level remains very low compared with earlier years. Unemployment continues to rise. Against this background there are grounds for expecting that growth in the coming years will not be as high as in the late 1990s. But as overall economic policy is expansionary, there should be a successive recovery during the second half-year, though of course there are both upside and downside risks. Turning now to Europe, there do not seem to be any clear signs of a strong recovery. Leading indicators admittedly point to a more positive business mood but the prospects for Germany – the largest economy in the euro area – are still uncertain and unemployment is rising from a high initial level. The euro area has not accumulated imbalances such as those in the United States and this may help to maintain a recovery once it has begun. In Sweden, economic policy has charged the economy with a good deal of stimuli that can help to generate a broader increase in demand now that the stocks cycle is beginning to have a favourable effect and the prospects for the international economy are brightening. As a result of lower taxes and increased transfers, for example, most things suggest that household purchasing power is rising comparatively strongly this year. Seen over a complete economic cycle, the Riksbank’s instrumental rate is comparatively low. Considering the rate of inflation and the signs that activity is picking up, the real repo rate (the repo rate less the rate of inflation) can be said to be low. Then there is the weak exchange rate, which has subdued effects of the international slowdown and is now helping to stimulate the export-oriented sector. All this amounts to not inconsiderable stimuli to general demand in the Swedish economy, stimuli that look like materialising successively. How heavily should we tread on the accelerator? If inflation, even disregarding the temporary effects, is above the target initially, activity is entering an upward phase and economic policy’s impact on the economy is expansionary, then monetary policy ought to contribute to a somewhat lighter foot on the accelerator. But if most of the unduly high inflation stems from transient increases in the price level and if an economic upturn is not yet assured, it may then indeed be advisable to somewhat defer an upward adjustment of the instrumental rate. It is likely to be around these and other aspects that our deliberations at the Riksbank will circle when the Executive Board finally adjusts the coming Inflation Report and next discusses monetary policy on 18 March. That is still almost a fortnight ahead and some more statistics are due to be published. In the meantime, the six of us on the Board will have to form our opinions step by step and decide whether there is to be some increase in the repo rate already in March or whether it is possible to go on waiting. Personally I share the concern about inflation prospects that a number of my colleagues have expressed in speeches recently. 
 BIS Review 14/2002 1 Susan Schmidt Bies: Strengthening the financial system of the 21st century through sound accounting and disclosure Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: an agenda for Europe and the United States, Rüschlikon, Switzerland, 28 February 2002.  *      *      * I appreciate the opportunity to participate in a symposium that is exploring ways to improve the financial systems of Europe and the United States. The unfolding concerns in recent months about the quality of the accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices of major nonfinancial and financial companies give added importance to our discussions here. As banking supervisors, we have increasingly recognized the importance of sound accounting and disclosure in our risk-focused examination policies, capital adequacy approaches, and risk-management practices to address the growing complexity of banking organizations.  As organizations grow in size and scope, outside investors have more difficulty understanding a particular firm's unique combination of risks and business line earnings. Modern risk-management tools can describe risk in ways that traditional accounting standards for recognition and measurement cannot. Thus, disclosure of firms' risk-management positions and risk management strategies--not necessarily another accounting schedule--is becoming a key component of improving market transparency. Tonight, I would like to address the role of disclosure in describing the risk exposures of financial organizations.  Evolution of risk management  The last decades of the twentieth century were, without doubt, periods of dramatic change in financial engineering, financial innovation, and risk management practices. Traditionally, net interest income has been the primary source of income to bankers. Deposit interest rates in the United States were fixed by regulators until the 1970s and rarely changed, so that fixed-rate, term loans did not create significant income volatility. By the end of the 1970s, however, bankers in the United States were faced simultaneously with deregulation of interest rates on deposits and rising interest rates due to the prevailing high inflation. In 1980, price and credit controls that were enacted to curb inflation further increased market volatility. Bankers found themselves paying higher rates on outstanding six-month certificates of deposit than they received as interest on prime-rate loans when money market interest rates fell 800 basis points from March to June. As a result, at the beginning of the 1980s, asset/liability models were developed at banks to help manage the effects of the variability of interest income and expense. Banks began to match the repricing frequency of loans and investments against that of deposits and other funding sources. Scenarios were created to determine the sensitivity of net interest income to varying interest rates and loan and deposit growth patterns. Larger banks began to describe the volatility of their interest margins in the Management's Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section of their annual and quarterly reports.  By the start of the 1990s, bankers had new tools to manage balance-sheet risk. Loans could be securitized so that term-loan volume that exceeded fixed-rate funding could be sold to investors who would bear the risk of rising interest rates. Securitization also meant that banks were better able to manage the periodic swings in liquidity when loan demand grew beyond the flow of new deposits. Of course, the movement of loans off the balance sheet into special purpose entities, as well as the creation of servicing rights and high-risk residual interests retained by banks, has resulted in a different set of risks.  Derivatives have become another tool for banks to manage risk exposures. A mismatch between the rate sensitivities of assets and those of liabilities creates the potential for unacceptably large swings in net interest income. Banks can now use interest rate-based derivatives--options, futures, forwards, and so on--to mitigate their exposures by changing the timing of interest-rate effects on net interest income. Interest-rate derivatives are also used to hedge fee income and expense streams, such as mortgage servicing rights.  Credit-risk management has evolved in a similar way. New tools supplement the credit judgments of individual lending officers making decisions within the criteria established by the credit policies of their 
 2 BIS Review 14/2002 organizations. Today, scoring models help them quickly decide on applications for consumer and small business loans because the small size and large number of these types of credits make them particularly amenable to statistical modeling. Since these models have not been in place throughout the course of a full credit cycle in the United States, they lack the validity that additional experience will bring.  Larger, more complicated credits still require individual credit analysis by loan officers, but tools have been developed to manage the resulting credit exposures. Loan syndications help the lead bank to diversify risk by limiting the size of individual credits in the loan portfolio. Credit derivatives and notes allow further mitigation of risk by transferring unwanted exposures to other market participants. Thus, credit officers today can mitigate and diversify risk with new tools that go beyond the traditional underwriting criteria that had been used in the past to establish the risk appetite of the bank.  The complex organization  Mergers and the expanded powers given to financial institutions by both law and regulation have increased the size and variety of operations within leading financial organizations. Significant developments in financial theory and technology have enabled innovations in financial instruments that facilitate the separation and reallocation of risks to parties more willing and able to bear them. The pace of financial innovation has quickened considerably. The twenty-first century will see financial firms offer, and businesses use, almost limitless possible configurations of products and services and sophisticated financial structures. A byproduct of these developments will be that it will become ever more difficult for outsiders to understand the positions of financial organizations and snapshot financial reporting as of a moment of time will be less meaningful.  Indeed, as financial and technological innovation continues, financial institutions and businesses generally will necessarily engage in more complex activities. In response, the risk management practices of businesses and banks should adjust. Transparency requires that as these practices advance, so must the approaches used by firms to disclose their financial condition and performance as well as their risk profile and risk-management activities.  Nonetheless, the intended or unintended risk of opaqueness that comes with complexity raises serious issues, particularly as entities become larger and more complicated and hence increasingly difficult to supervise. The Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors around the world have recognized the importance of market discipline in encouraging sound risk management practices and in promoting the stability of financial markets. Effective market discipline can complement bank supervision and regulation. But its prerequisite is having the information necessary to understand the risks in the entity the market is observing.  With sufficient, timely, accurate, and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources. Lenders and investors have an obvious interest in meaningfully assessing a firm's risk-management performance, underlying trends, cash flow, and income-producing potential. In this regard, transparency is essential to providing market participants with the information they need to effect market discipline.  Sound, well-managed companies can benefit if enhanced disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that more accurately reflect their lower risk profiles. On the other hand, well-managed firms could be penalized as a result of inadequate disclosures if market participants are unable to assess their fundamental financial strength and sound risk-management practices.  Achieving sound accounting and disclosure practices for complex firms  While most market participants favor sound accounting standards and meaningful disclosure, it has become clear in recent months that some companies have not been completely transparent in their application of accounting and disclosure standards to specific transactions. In these situations, accounting practices and techniques have neither reflected nor been consistent with how the business has been run, that is, its overall business strategy. As a result, the market was not able to appropriately discipline the risk-taking activities of these firms on a timely basis because it lacked the information from either financial statements or other disclosures to do so. As information became available, as it virtually always will at some point, the market reflected its concerns about underlying business practices and accounting through the declining values of equity and debt instruments and in 
 BIS Review 14/2002 3 the rates charged by counterparties to obtain funds. These premiums were placed not only on offending firms but also on those whose statements might have also lacked some clarity. The message is clear that the marketplace will respond quickly when companies are found to lack sound accounting and disclosure practices.  At this point, we do not have all of the facts about many of the situations involving alleged accounting and auditing problems, but consensus is growing that changes should be made to some underlying accounting standards and to their application by companies and their auditors. Many different groups are undertaking initiatives to correct the problems that have recently been identified. For example, the U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board and the International Accounting Standards Board are considering how to improve the accounting for financial instruments and standards for consolidated financial statements so as to achieve greater transparency of companies' exposures to special purpose vehicles and other unconsolidated entities.  The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has issued recommendations that focus on disclosures regarding liquidity and capital resources, including off-balance-sheet arrangements; certain trading activities that include non-exchange-traded derivatives accounted for at fair value; and the effects of transactions with related parties and certain other parties. The accounting profession has announced initiatives to curb external auditors of publicly traded companies from also providing internal audit and consulting services to their clients. Possible regulatory measures are being explored and many other fundamental reforms are under development by private-sector organizations.  Improvements in accounting and auditing standards are needed to address the potential problems that have been identified. In particular, it would be very helpful if fundamental principles and standards could be revised to emphasize that the financial statements should clearly and faithfully represent the economic substance of business transactions. We need to insist on higher professional standards and not permit financial officers and auditors to benefit from "gaming" the rules-based accounting standards that are increasing in complexity, particularly in the United States. Standards should ensure that companies give appropriate consideration to the substantive risks and rewards of ownership of the underlying assets in identifying whether risk exposures should be reflected in consolidated financial statements.  In addition to applying sound accounting treatments, company managers must ensure that public disclosures clearly identify all significant risk exposures--whether on or off the balance sheet--and their impact on the firm's financial condition and performance, cash flow and earnings potential, and, for regulated institutions, capital adequacy. Equally important are disclosures about how risks are being managed and the underlying basis for values and other estimates included in financial reports. A sound risk-management system should continually monitor risks in a changing business climate --including credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks. Disclosures consistent with the information used internally by risk managers could be very beneficial to market participants. Information on the sensitivity to changes in underlying assumptions could also be very meaningful to financial statement users. Companies should ensure that they not only meet the letter of the standards that exist but also that their financial reports and other disclosures focus on what is really essential to help investors and other market participants understand their businesses.  I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard accounting framework nor exactly the same for all--otherwise we would be certain to create statistical artifacts and implications of safe harbors. Rather, what we should all be insisting on is that each entity disclose what that entity believes its stakeholders need to evaluate the entity's risk profile. Companies should be less concerned about the vehicle of disclosure and more concerned with the substance of what is made available to the public.  Enterprise risk management and disclosure Leading companies have been taking advantage of the new innovations in risk management. New functions for chief risk officers are being created so that they can provide comprehensive oversight of the various risk exposures of the enterprise. The chief risk officer is an executive officer charged with independently monitoring risk identification, measurement, mitigation, and controls. A primary responsibility of the chief risk officer is oversight of risk reporting within the company.  Unlike typical accounting reports, information generated by risk management tends to be oriented less to a point in time and more to a description of the risks. For example, accounting information might report that the book value or disclosed fair value of a loan portfolio is $300 million and has dropped 
 4 BIS Review 14/2002 $10 million from the last report. However, the risk report would show much more extensive information, such as the term and interest rate of the assets, their credit quality, and the range of values the portfolio would take under alternative future scenarios. The user of the report could tell if changes in value were due to declining credit quality, rising interest rates, or sales or payoffs of loans. By tracking the amount of loans in each internal credit grade and the amount of allowances or "provisions" set aside in each "bucket" for inherent losses, the user of the report could determine whether the credit risk of the portfolio was increasing or decreasing.  Other reports that risk officers are developing provide information on the extent to which the total return in a particular line of business compensates for its comprehensive risk. On an enterprise basis, a reader would be able to tell if the growing lines of business have risk exposures that tend to be offsetting and that thereby make the earnings of the corporation as a whole less volatile.  Financial institutions should continue improving their risk management and reporting functions. When they are comfortable with the reliability and consistency of the information in these reports, they should begin disclosing this information to the market, perhaps in summary form. Not only would this disclosure provide more qualitative and quantitative information to the market, but the resulting discussion about risk management practices would help the market assess the quality of the risk oversight and risk appetite of the organization.  Banking supervision and accounting and disclosure  The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets. The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well. The most recent proposal to amend and augment the Basel Capital Accord, which was published in January 2001 and called Basel II, seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy. It consists of three pillars, or tools: risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III). This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach for many years to come. Our goal in the Basel process is to develop a risk-sensitive framework that provides appropriate incentives to banking organizations to maintain strong capital positions and sound risk-management systems. The history of the 1990s, which includes episodes of global financial instability spreading from small countries through international capital markets and banks, underscores the need to maintain adequate capital in the internationally active banks. For the sake of maintaining global financial stability, I hope that everyone values that goal.  Basel II would also improve risk disclosure by many banks worldwide. The proposal recommends specific disclosures to better convey an institution's capital adequacy and risk profile. The incentives in Basel II should greatly diminish the opacity that cloaks many international financial institutions and help bring about a convergence of international norms on banking disclosure. I believe that counterparties will expect, indeed force, greater disclosure. Recent history certainly teaches us that understanding what drives a counterparty's financial performance and its risk appetite is necessary for accurately pricing any transaction or even for deciding whether to engage in a transaction.  Conclusion Sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure concepts, consistently applied, have long been at the heart of efficient markets. Accounting and auditing standards setters should continue their efforts to make more meaningful information available in financial statements and other reports. At the same time, the more complex nature of organizations--and constantly changing services, customers, and business conditions--imply that market participants need additional types of information to make appropriate investment decisions. Leading firms have been developing comprehensive risk management processes for internal decisionmaking that can provide the framework for more meaningful risk disclosures. Regulators and market participants should encourage financial firms to develop these new approaches and, in these early stages, give them the flexibility to choose the most appropriate format for risk disclosure. Taken together, these measures should improve the transparency of complex firms; in doing so, they will enhance the quality of information available for 
 BIS Review 14/2002 5 effective market discipline and banking supervision in ways that strengthen the financial system of the twenty-first century.  
 BIS Review 14/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Federal Reserve Board's semiannual monetary policy report to the Congress Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 27 February 2002.  *      *      * Since July, when I last reported to you on the conduct of monetary policy, the U.S. economy has gone through a period of considerable strain, with output contracting for a time and unemployment rising. We in the Federal Reserve System acted vigorously to adjust monetary policy in an endeavor both to limit the extent of the downturn and to hasten its completion. Despite the disruptions engendered by the terrorist attacks of September 11, the typical dynamics of the business cycle have re-emerged and are prompting a firming in economic activity. An array of influences unique to this business cycle, however, seems likely to moderate the speed of the anticipated recovery. At the time of our last report, the economy was weakening. Many firms were responding to the realization that significant overcapacity had developed. The demand for capital goods had dropped sharply, and inventories were uncomfortably high in many industries. In response, businesses slashed production, and the resulting declines in incomes amplified the cyclical downturn. Real gross domestic product did not grow in the second quarter and contracted in the third. A coincident deceleration in activity among the world economies was evident over the past year, owing, at least in part, to the retrenchment in the high-technology sector and the global reach of the capital markets in which the firms in that sector are valued and funded. However, before the terrorist attacks, it was far from obvious that this concurrent weakness was becoming self-reinforcing. Indeed, immediately prior to September 11, some sectors exhibited tentative signs of stabilization, contributing to a hope that the worst of the previous cumulative weakness in world economic activity was nearing an end. That hope was decisively dashed by the tragic events of early September. Adding to the intense forces weighing on asset prices and economic activity before September 11 were new sources of uncertainty that began to press down on global demand for goods and services. Economies almost everywhere weakened further, a cause for increasing uneasiness. The simultaneous further slowing in activity raised concerns that a self-reinforcing cycle of contraction, fed by perceptions of greater economic risk, could develop. Such an event, though rare, would not be unprecedented in business-cycle history. If ever a situation existed in which the fabric of business and consumer confidence, both here and abroad, was vulnerable to being torn, the shock of September 11 was surely it. In addition to the horrific loss of life, enormous uncertainties accompanied the unfolding events and their implications for the economy. Indeed, for a period of weeks, U.S. economic activity did drop dramatically in response to that shock. In the immediate aftermath of the strikes, the Federal Reserve engaged in aggressive action to counter the effects of the shock on payment systems and financial markets. We provided a huge volume of reserves through open market operations, the discount window, and other means to facilitate the functioning of the financial system. We worked closely with many market participants, industry groups, and other government officials on a broad range of financial infrastructure problems that needed to be resolved quickly and in the common interest. Still, market functioning was impaired for a time. The substantial damage to trading, settlement, and communications facilities forced many market participants to their backup sites. Owing in part to careful and thorough contingency planning, many firms, markets, and exchanges were able to resume business within a few hours or days of the attacks. Nonetheless, the episode did reveal threats to, and vulnerabilities of, the operations of financial institutions that had not been previously considered and illustrated the significant interdependence of the modern financial infrastructure. Institutions will need to continue to work diligently toward ensuring that their backup capabilities are adequate. We at the Federal Reserve have been reexamining intensively our own contingency capabilities to ensure that our central banking functions can be performed in the most pressing of emergency circumstances. 
 2 BIS Review 14/2002 In the weeks following the attacks, along with the drops in activity and confidence, equity prices fell markedly, and lenders became more cautious, boosting risk premiums, especially on credits already considered to be weak. In response, the Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates considerably further. Longer-term yields, including mortgage rates, fell to extraordinarily low levels. The monetary stimulus that we provided was visible not only in interest rates but also in a rapid growth of liquidity over the final months of the year, as gauged by the broad monetary aggregates. As the fourth quarter progressed, business and consumer confidence recovered, no doubt buoyed by successes in the war on terrorism. The improved sentiment seemed to buffer the decline in economic activity. Indeed, in the past several months, increasing signs have emerged that some of the forces that have been restraining the economy over the past year are starting to diminish and that activity is beginning to firm. The appearance of these signs, in circumstances in which the level of the real federal funds rate was at a very low level, led the Federal Open Market Committee to keep policy unchanged at its meeting in late January, although it retained its assessment that the risks were tilted toward economic weakness. One key consideration in the assessment that the economy is close to a turning point is the behavior of inventories. Stocks in many industries have been drawn down to levels at which firms will soon need to taper off their rate of liquidation, if they have not already done so. Any slowing in the rate of inventory liquidation will induce a rise in industrial production if demand for those products is stable or is falling only moderately. That rise in production will, other things being equal, increase household income and spending. The runoff of inventories, even apart from the large reduction in motor vehicle stocks, remained sizable in the fourth quarter. Hence, with production running well below sales, the lift to income and spending from the inevitable cessation of inventory liquidation could be significant. But that impetus to the growth of activity will be short-lived unless sustained increases in final demand kick in before the positive effects of the swing from inventory liquidation dissipate. Most recoveries in the post-World War II period received a boost from a rebound in demand for consumer durables and housing from recession-depressed levels in addition to an abatement of inventory liquidation. Through much of last year's slowdown, however, spending by the household sector held up well and proved to be a major stabilizing force. As a consequence, although household spending should continue to trend up, the potential for significant acceleration in activity in this sector is likely to be more limited than in past cycles. In fact, there are a number of cross currents in the outlook for household spending. In recent months, low mortgage interest rates and favorable weather have provided considerable support to homebuilding. Moreover, attractive mortgage rates have bolstered the sales of existing homes and the extraction of capital gains embedded in home equity that those sales engender. Low rates have also encouraged households to take on larger mortgages when refinancing their homes. Drawing on home equity in this manner is a significant source of funding for consumption and home modernization. The pace of such extractions likely dropped along with the decline in refinancing activity that followed the backup in mortgage rates that began in early November. But mortgage rates remain at low levels and should continue to underpin activity in this sector. Consumer spending received a considerable lift from the sales of new motor vehicles, which were remarkably strong in October and November owing to major financing incentives. Sales have receded somewhat as incentives were scaled back, but they have remained surprisingly resilient. Other consumer spending appears to have advanced at a solid pace in recent months. The substantial declines in the prices of natural gas, fuel oil, and gasoline have clearly provided some support to real disposable income and spending. To have a more persistent effect on the ongoing growth of total personal consumption expenditures, energy prices would need to continue declining. Futures prices do not suggest that such an outcome is in the offing, though the forecast record of these markets is less than impressive. Changes in household financial positions in recent years are probably damping consumer spending, at least to a degree. Overall household wealth relative to income has dropped from a peak multiple of about 6.3 at the end of 1999 to around 5.3 currently. Moreover, the aggregate household debt service burden, defined as the ratio of households' required debt payments to their disposable personal income, rose considerably in recent years, returning last year to its previous cyclical peak of the mid-1980s.  
 BIS Review 14/2002 3 However, neither wealth nor the burden of debt is distributed evenly across households. Hence, the spending effects of changes in these influences also will not be evenly distributed. For example, increased debt burdens appear disproportionately attributable to higher-income households. Calculations by staff at the Federal Reserve suggest that the ratio of household liabilities to annual income for the top fifth of all households ranked by income, who accounted for 44 percent of total after-tax household income last year, rose from about 1.10 at the end of 1998 to 1.20 at the end of the third quarter of 2001. The increase for the lower four-fifths was only about half as large. Although high-income households should not experience much strain in meeting their obligations, others might. Indeed, repayment difficulties have already increased, particularly in the subprime markets for consumer loans and mortgages. Delinquency rates may well worsen as a delayed result of the strains on household finances over the past two years. Large erosions, however, do not seem likely, and the overall levels of debt and repayment delinquencies do not, as of now, appear to pose a major impediment to a moderate expansion of consumption spending going forward.  Although the macroeconomic effects of debt burdens may be limited, we have already seen significant spending restraint among the top fifth of income earners, presumably owing to the drop in equity prices. The effect of the stock market on other households' spending has been less evident. Moderate-income households have a much larger proportion of their assets in homes, and the continuing rise in the value of houses has provided greater support for their net worth. Reflecting these differences in portfolio composition, the net worth of the top fifth of income earners has dropped far more than it did for the bottom 80 percent. As a consequence, excluding capital gains and losses from the calculation, as is the convention in our national income accounts, personal saving for the upper fifth, which had been negative during 1999 and 2000, turned positive in 2001. By contrast, the average saving rate for the lower four-fifths of households, by income, was generally positive during the second half of the 1990s and has fluctuated in a narrow range in the past two years. Accordingly, most of the change in consumption expenditures that resulted from the bull stock market, and its demise, reflected shifts in spending by upper-income households. The restraining effects from the net decline in wealth during the past two years presumably have not, as yet, fully played out and could exert some further damping effect on the overall growth of household spending relative to that of income.  Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after September 11, and the unemployment rate rose sharply. However, layoffs diminished noticeably in January, and the reported unemployment rate declined though adjusting for seasonal influences was difficult last month. Moreover, initial claims for unemployment insurance have decreased markedly, on balance, providing further evidence of an improvement in labor market conditions. Even if the economy is on the road to recovery, the unemployment rate, in typical cyclical fashion, may resume its increase for a time, and a soft labor market could put something of a damper on consumer spending. However, the extent of such restraint will depend on how much of any rise in unemployment is the result of weakened demand for goods and services and how much reflects strengthened productivity. In the latter case, average real incomes of workers could rise, at least partially offsetting losses of purchasing power that stem from diminished levels of employment. Indeed, preliminary data suggest that productivity has held up very well of late, and history suggests that any depressing effect of rapid productivity growth on employment is only temporary. The dynamics of inventory investment and the balance of factors influencing consumer demand will have important consequences for the economic outlook in coming months. But the broad contours of the present cycle have been, and will continue to be, driven by the evolution of corporate profits and capital investment.  The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year and a half was central to the sharp slowing we experienced in overall activity. The steep rise in high-tech spending that occurred in the early post-Y2K months was clearly not sustainable. The demand for many of the newer technologies was growing rapidly, but capacity was expanding even faster, and that imbalance exerted significant downward pressure on prices and the profits of producers of high-tech goods and services. New orders for equipment and software hesitated in the middle of 2000 and then fell abruptly as firms re-evaluated their capital investment programs. Uncertainty about economic prospects boosted risk premiums significantly, and this rise, in turn, propelled required, or hurdle, rates of return to markedly elevated levels. In most cases, businesses required that new investments pay off much more rapidly than they had previously. For much of last year, the resulting decline in investment outlays was fierce 
 4 BIS Review 14/2002 and unrelenting. Although the weakness was most pronounced in the technology area, reductions in capital outlays were broad-based. These cutbacks in capital spending interacted with, and were reinforced by, falling profits and equity prices. Indeed, a striking feature of the current cyclical episode relative to many earlier ones has been the virtual absence of pricing power across much of American business, as increasing globalization and deregulation have enhanced competition. In this low-inflation environment, firms have perceived very little ability to pass cost increases on to customers. To be sure, growth in hourly labor compensation has moderated in response to slowed inflation and deteriorating economic conditions. A significant falloff in stock-option realizations and in other forms of compensation related to company performance has likely been a factor. But over most of the past year, even those smaller hourly compensation increases outstripped gains in output per hour, on balance, precipitating a marked decline in profit margins.  Business managers, with little opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash flows by trimming workforces. These efforts have limited any rise in unit costs, attenuated the pressure on profit margins, and ultimately helped to preserve the vast majority of private-sector jobs. To the extent that businesses are successful in stabilizing and eventually boosting profits and cash flow, capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably. Part of the reduction in pricing power observed in this cycle should be reversed as firming demand enables firms to take back large price discounts. Though such an adjustment would tend to elevate price levels, underlying inflationary cost pressures should remain contained. To be sure, output per hour is not likely to accelerate this year as much as in a typical recovery because businesses have not delayed, as they have in past recessions, shedding workers at the first indications of weakened demand. But slack in labor markets and further increases in productivity should hold labor costs in check and result in rising profit margins even with inflation remaining low.  Improved profit margins and more assured prospects for rising final demand would likely be accompanied by a decline in risk premiums from their current elevated levels toward a more normal range. With real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, that should provide an additional spur to new investment. Reports from businesses around the country suggest that the exploitation of available networking and other information technologies was only partially completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers are still of the view, according to a recent survey of purchasing managers, that less than half of currently available new, and presumably profitable, supply-chain technologies have been put into use. Recent evidence suggests that a recovery in at least some forms of high-tech investment could already be under way. Production of semiconductors, which in the past has been a leading indicator of computer production, turned up last fall. Expenditures on computers rose at a double-digit annual rate in real terms last quarter. But the contraction of investment expenditures in the communications sector, where the amount of overcapacity was substantial, as yet shows few signs of abating, and business investment in some other sectors, such as aircraft, hit by the drop in air travel, will presumably remain weak this year. On balance, the recovery in overall spending on business fixed investment is likely to be only gradual; in particular, its growth will doubtless be less frenetic than in 1999 and early 2000--a period during which outlays were boosted by the dislocations of Y2K and the extraordinarily low cost of equity capital available to many firms. Nonetheless, if the recent more-favorable economic developments gather momentum, uncertainties will diminish, risk premiums will fall, and the pace of capital investment embodying new technologies will increase. Even a subdued recovery beginning soon would constitute a truly remarkable performance for the American economy in the face of so severe a decline in equity asset values and an unprecedented blow from terrorists to the foundations of our market systems. For, if the tentative indications that the contraction phase of this business cycle is drawing to a close are ultimately confirmed, we will have experienced a significantly milder downturn than the long history of business cycles would have led us to expect. Crucially, the imbalances that triggered the downturn and that could have prolonged this difficult period did not fester. The obvious questions are what has changed in our economy in recent decades to provide such resilience and whether such changes will persist into the future. Doubtless, the substantial improvement in the access of business decisionmakers to real-time information has played a key role. Thirty years ago, the timeliness of available information varied across companies and industries, often resulting in differences in the speed and magnitude of their 
 BIS Review 14/2002 5 responses to changing business conditions. In contrast to the situation that prevails today, businesses did not have real-time data systems that enabled decisionmakers in different enterprises to work from essentially the same set of information. In those earlier years, imbalances were inadvertently allowed to build to such an extent that their inevitable correction engendered significant economic stress. That process of correction and the accompanying economic and financial disruptions too often led to deep and prolonged recessions. Today, businesses have large quantities of data available virtually in real time. As a consequence, they address and resolve economic imbalances far more rapidly than in the past. The apparent increased flexibility of the American economy arguably also reflects the extent of deregulation over the past quarter century. Certainly, if the energy sector were still in the tight regulatory fetters of the 1970s, our flexibility today would be markedly less. That the collapse of Enron barely registered in the relatively recently developed markets for natural gas and electric power was encouraging. Although the terrorist attacks hit air travel especially hard over the past few months, deregulation of that industry has demonstrably increased the quantity and flexibility, if not the profitability, of air travel over the past twenty years. Trucking and rail deregulation has added flexibility to the movement of goods across our nation.  Both deregulation and innovation in the financial sector have been especially important in enhancing overall economic resilience. New financial products--including derivatives, asset-backed securities, collateralized loan obligations, and collateralized mortgage obligations, among others--have enabled risk to be dispersed more effectively to those willing to, and presumably capable of, bearing it. Shocks to the overall economic system are accordingly less likely to create cascading credit failure. Lenders have the opportunity to be considerably more diversified, and borrowers are far less dependent on specific institutions for funds. Financial derivatives, particularly, have grown at a phenomenal pace over the past fifteen years, evidently fulfilling a need to hedge risks that were not readily deflected in earlier decades. Despite the concerns that these complex instruments have induced (an issue I will address shortly), the record of their performance, especially over the past couple of stressful years, suggests that on balance they have contributed to the development of a far more flexible and efficient financial system--both domestically and internationally--than we had just twenty or thirty years ago. As a consequence of increased access to real-time information and, more arguably, extensive deregulation in financial and product markets and the unbundling of risk, imbalances are more likely to be readily contained, and cyclical episodes overall should be less severe than would be the case otherwise. If this is indeed the case--and it must be considered speculative until more evidence is gathered--the implied reduction in volatility, other things equal, would lower risk and equity premiums. Other things, however, may not be wholly equal. The very technologies that appear to be the main cause of our apparent increased flexibility and resiliency may also be imparting different forms of vulnerability that could intensify or be intensified by a business cycle. From one perspective, the ever-increasing proportion of our GDP that represents conceptual as distinct from physical value added may actually have lessened cyclical volatility. In particular, the fact that concepts cannot be held as inventories means a greater share of GDP is not subject to a type of dynamics that amplifies cyclical swings. But an economy in which concepts form an important share of valuation has its own vulnerabilities. As the recent events surrounding Enron have highlighted, a firm is inherently fragile if its value added emanates more from conceptual as distinct from physical assets. A physical asset, whether an office building or an automotive assembly plant, has the capability of producing goods even if the reputation of the managers of such facilities falls under a cloud. The rapidity of Enron's decline is an effective illustration of the vulnerability of a firm whose market value largely rests on capitalized reputation. The physical assets of such a firm comprise a small proportion of its asset base. Trust and reputation can vanish overnight. A factory cannot. The implications of such a loss of confidence for the macroeconomy depend importantly on how freely the conceptual capital of the fading firm can be replaced by a competitor or a new entrant into the industry. Even if entry is relatively free, macroeconomic risks can emerge if problems at one particular firm tend to make investors and counterparties uncertain about other firms that they see as potentially similarly situated. The difficulty of valuing firms that deal primarily with concepts and the growing size and importance of these firms may make our economy more susceptible to this type of contagion. Another, more conventional determinant of stability will be the economy's degree of leverage--the extent to which debt rather than equity is financing the level of capital. The proper degree of leverage 
 6 BIS Review 14/2002 in a firm, or in an economy as a whole, is an inherently elusive figure that almost certainly changes from time to time. Clearly, firms find some leverage advantageous in enhancing returns on equity, and thus moderate leverage undoubtedly boosts the capital stock and the level of output. A sophisticated financial system, with its substantial array of instruments to unbundle risks, will tend toward a higher degree of leverage at any given level of underlying economic risk. But, the greater the degree of leverage in any economy, the greater its vulnerability to unexpected shortfalls in demand and mistakes. Indeed, on a historical cost basis, the ratio of debt to net worth for the nonfinancial corporate business sector did rise, from 71 percent at the end of 1997 to about 81 percent at the end of the third quarter of last year, though it is still well below its level at the beginning of the recession in 1990. The ratio of interest payments to cash flow, one indicator of the consequence of leverage, has crept up in recent years, reflecting growth in debt. However, owing to lower interest rates, it remains far below its levels of the early 1990s. Although the fears of business leverage have been mostly confined to specific sectors in recent years, concerns over potential systemic problems resulting from the vast expansion of derivatives have reemerged with the difficulties of Enron. To be sure, firms like Enron, and Long-Term Capital Management before it, were major players in the derivatives markets. But their problems were readily traceable to an old fashioned excess of debt, however acquired, as well as to opaque accounting of that leverage and lax counterparty scrutiny. Swaps and other derivatives throughout their short history, including over the past eighteen months, have been remarkably free of default. Of course, there can be latent problems in any market that expands as rapidly as these markets have. Regulators and supervisors are particularly sensitive to this possibility. Derivatives have provided greater flexibility to our financial system. But their very complexity could leave counterparties vulnerable to significant risk that they do not currently recognize, and hence these instruments potentially expose the overall system if mistakes are large. In that regard, the market's reaction to the revelations about Enron provides encouragement that the force of market discipline can be counted on over time to foster much greater transparency and increased clarity and completeness in the accounting treatment of derivatives. How these countervailing forces for stability evolve will surely be a major determinant of the volatility that our economy will experience in the years ahead. Monetary policy will have to be particularly sensitive to the possibility that the resiliency our economy has exhibited during the past two years signals subtle changes in the way our system functions.  Our most recent experiences underscore this possibility, along with the persistence of a long list of older, well-tested, economic verities. Inventories, especially among producers and purchasers of high-tech products, did run to excess over the past year, as sales forecasts went badly astray; alas, technology has not allowed us to see into the future any more clearly than we could previously. But technology did facilitate the quick recognition of the weakening in sales and backup of inventories. This enabled producers to respond forcefully, as evidenced by output adjustments that have resulted in the extraordinary rate of inventory liquidation we experienced late last year. For the period just ahead, the central tendency of the forecasts of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee is for real GDP to rise 2-1/2 to 3 percent during 2002. Such a pace for the growth of real output is somewhat below the rates of growth typically seen early in previous expansions. Certain factors, such as the lack of pent-up demand in the consumer sector, significant levels of excess capacity in a number of industries, weakness and financial fragility in some key international trading partners, and persistent caution in financial markets at home, seem likely to restrain the near-term performance of the economy. In line with past experience during the early stages of expansion, labor market performance is expected initially to lag as firms rely primarily on overtime and shifts from part-time to full-time work. The unemployment rate is anticipated to rise somewhat further over 2002, to the area of 6 to 6-1/4 percent. FOMC members evidently anticipate that slack in resource utilization, the lagged effects of past declines in energy prices, and productivity growth will keep inflation low this year, with the price index for personal consumption expenditure increasing about 1-1/2 percent.  Despite its forecast that economic growth is likely to resume at a moderate pace, as I already noted, the Federal Open Market Committee at its meeting on January 30 saw the risks nonetheless as continuing to be weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness in the foreseeable future. In effect, the FOMC indicated that until the dynamics of sustained expansion are 
 BIS Review 14/2002 7 more firmly in place, it remained concerned about the possibility of weak growth for a time, despite the very low level of the federal funds rate. Although there are ample reasons to be cautious about the economic outlook, the recuperative powers of the U.S. economy, as I have tried to emphasize in my presentation, have been remarkable. When I presented our report on monetary policy to this Committee last summer, few if any of us could have anticipated events such as those to which our nation has subsequently been subjected. The economic consequences of those events and their aftermath are an integral part of the many challenges that we now collectively face. The U.S. economy has experienced a substantial shock, and, no doubt, we continue to face risks in the period ahead. But the response thus far of our citizens to these new economic challenges provides reason for encouragement. 
 BIS Review 13/2002 1 Willem Duisenberg: China and the euro area in a global perspective Address by Dr Willem F. Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the symposium of the People’s Bank of China, Beijing, 25 February 2002. *      *      * Governor Dai, ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be here in China and I feel especially honoured to be invited to deliver a speech at the People’s Bank. First, I would like to wish you all a very prosperous new year, under the sign of the horse. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank Governor Dai and his staff, among other things, for their hospitality and for having prepared such an excellent programme for our delegation.  Ever since China opened up to the outside world in 1978, it has been a major trading nation thanks to social and economic reforms. The process has turned China into a major economy and strengthened it as a political power. In 2000, the size of the Chinese economy, measured in terms of GDP, passed the USD 1 trillion mark, and is now ranked fifth behind the United States, the euro area, Japan and the United Kingdom. To accompany China’s growing economic and financial weight in the international community, the EU is committed to further developing a comprehensive partnership with this country. The ECB is playing its part through co-operation in both international and bilateral meetings. For example, we meet regularly with other central banks in the context of the IMF, G20 and BIS to exchange views on global economic and financial issues. In fact, I have already met Governor Dai once this year (actually, last week) in Hong Kong, at a BIS Special Governors’ meeting. Europe and Asia also co-operate closely through the ASEM (Asia-Europe meeting) process, launched in Bangkok in 1996. This has now developed into a broad forum for in-depth consultations between European and Asian partners and has prompted a range of co-operation initiatives. For example, in April this year the ECB will be organising a seminar on “Regional economic, financial and monetary co-operation: the European and Asian experiences”. Of course, I would also like to recall that the EU has long been in favour of China joining the World Trade Organisation, as it now has done, for which I should like to congratulate you. On a bilateral basis, four summit meetings between the EU and Chinese leaders have been held since 1998. Leaders exchanged views on EU-China relations as well as international and regional issues of common interest, and agreed at the fourth summit in 2001 that the EU and China should continue their efforts to promote stability, peace and development in the world. Meanwhile, 2001 also witnessed a strengthening in the relations between the ECB and China. Following the visit of the PBC delegation headed by Governor Dai to the ECB in June, we agreed to establish a regular dialogue between the two central banks so as to enhance our co-operation on issues of common interest. Towards the end of the year, our Vice-President, Mr. Noyer, was invited twice by the Delegation of the European Commission in China (once to Beijing in November and once to Shanghai in December) to speak on the subject of the euro cash changeover. On those occasions, Mr. Noyer outlined the importance of the process for the whole world, and reviewed relevant issues for countries outside the euro area.  Today, I would like to dwell on the same topic – the euro. Let me begin by giving you an update of the euro cash changeover. I will then talk about the recent global economic developments and their impact on the euro area, before turning to the international role of the euro.  Euro cash changeover Let me first turn to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. While the euro was introduced as a new currency on 1 January 1999, the euro banknotes and coins were only issued and became legal tender in the countries participating in the euro area at the beginning of this year. With the cash changeover, the process of introducing a single European currency is completed. Paying with a single currency in daily transactions throughout the euro area can be regarded as an achievement of historic proportions and as a major step towards greater European integration.  Now, three days before the remaining national currency denominations will cease to be legal tender, I can say that the operation has progressed very smoothly and successfully, even beyond our expectations.  
 2 BIS Review 13/2002 The introduction of euro banknotes and coins has been a complex and ambitious undertaking. In addition to understanding and collaboration on the part of the public, it required organisational, logistical and technical efforts on the part of those sectors directly involved in the use of banknotes and coins. By the end of 2001, more than 6.4 billion euro banknotes worth some EUR 133 billion and amounting in volume to around 80% of the euro banknotes now in circulation had been frontloaded (i.e. pre-delivered) to banks. With regard to the euro coins, more than 37.5 billion coins or 90% of the coins now in circulation with a total value of around EUR 12.4 billion had been frontloaded. Broadly speaking, sub-frontloading – the pre-delivery by banks to retailers and other professional target groups – represented an overall amount of 10 to 20% of the frontloaded amount.  Given that, in terms of transactions, around 70% of banknotes are put into circulation via automated teller machines (ATMs), the quick adaptation of these machines was one of the key factors for a smooth changeover. In total, more than 200,000 ATMs either on site in bank branches or off site, for example in shopping centres, had to be converted. This was achieved within less than one week. As a result, on average, 75% of all cash transactions were already effected in euro after only one week. On the whole, the euro banknotes and coins were introduced considerably faster than originally foreseen, not least because of the favourable attitude of and quick acceptance by European citizens. I should like to mention that the changeover has also been smooth outside the euro area. The euro banknotes were received positively in third countries. Information to the public has been generally adequate and euro banknotes were readily available in banks and exchange offices, in most cases. With regard to the frontloading of central banks outside the euro area, I should mention that 26 central banks, mainly in central and eastern Europe, the Mediterranean area and in Africa, requested to be frontloaded with euro cash. The total value of the euro banknotes provided to these central banks and to wholesale banks outside the euro area amounted to some EUR 4 billion. Overall, the Eurosystem is proud of and grateful to all actors’ contributions to this historic process. The enthusiasm of the European citizens to get hold of euro cash can be seen as a clear vote for a united Europe.  Recent global economic developments Let me briefly review the current international environment. I feel quite some relief that the world economy has proved relatively resilient to the shock of the terrorist attacks in September of last year. The events of 11 September and their aftermath undoubtedly increased uncertainty, and for some time contributed substantially to the already ongoing deterioration in confidence in most countries.  However, there are now more and more signs that the global economic downturn may have come to an end around the end of 2001. At the current juncture, a mild recovery is generally expected to start in the course of 2002 and to accelerate in 2003. The risks previously envisaged in connection with the 11 September events appear to have largely evaporated. Nevertheless, the level of uncertainty on the precise timing and strength of the recovery remains high. While I am reasonably optimistic about the sustainability of the recovery that, we expect, will start this year, I am also aware of the remaining downside risks.  These risks relate, for instance, to the imbalances that have built up during the past episode of exceptionally strong growth in the world economy and have only been partially corrected. Examples of these imbalances are protracted current account deficits, household and corporate indebtedness, overinvestment in certain industries, and fragility in the financial sectors of some countries. In that context, an important issue is the extent to which trade will finally pick up from the historical lows witnessed in the second half of 2001, and how beneficial the international transmission mechanism will be in transforming the current limited signs of recovery into a virtuous circle for world growth. Needless to say that protectionism and, more generally, obstacles to further international trade integration would be counterproductive also in this respect. In this context, I think we all agree that China’s entry into the WTO has been a significant step towards further progress in world trade development.  Economic outlook for the euro area Let me now turn to the economic outlook for the euro area. Overall, 2001 was a rather disappointing year with regard to macroeconomic performance: growth in activity was below potential and consumer 
 BIS Review 13/2002 3 price inflation was above the 2% limit set by the ECB for price increases over the medium term. This disappointing performance was the result of an unfortunate combination of adverse supply and demand shocks, originating to a large extent from developments in the external environment. These included the sharp increase in oil prices in 2000 and early 2001, the slowdown in the US economy and the terrorist attacks in the United States. Taken together, these adverse shocks led to a protracted weakening in demand – from both the external and the domestic side – and to considerable uncertainty with regard to the outlook for growth.  Looking ahead, we expect that the negative impact on growth and inflation from these adverse factors will diminish and that this will pave the way for a more satisfactory macroeconomic performance this year and next. Most recently, projections have shown that real GDP growth in 2002 as a whole should be somewhat lower than in 2001, but this would be consistent with a recovery in growth in the course of this year. At the end of the year, economic growth should reach a level close to potential growth. For the time being, however, the strength and the precise timing of this recovery remain uncertain.  A number of positive factors can be identified that should support the upturn in growth in the euro area. First, as regards the domestic side of the euro area economy, an important reason for expecting a recovery is that there are no fundamental imbalances that would require an enduring correction process. Second, as regards the external environment, there are some encouraging signs of a stabilisation in the outlook for growth at the global level, related mainly to positive news from the US economy. Other indications of an improvement in economic activity are that, owing to the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy, financing conditions are now very favourable. Moreover, the declines in consumer price inflation observed in the second half of 2001 and expected over the course of 2002 will support higher growth in real disposable income, which, in turn, should underpin growth in domestic demand. We continue to expect no medium-term upward pressures on inflation. At the same time, however, annual inflation rates in the euro area will be somewhat erratic at the beginning of this year. Preliminary HICP data for January 2002 saw an increase in inflation, which was due to a large extent to exceptional and short-lived factors. I should like to emphasise that, notwithstanding many anecdotal reports of price changes associated with the introduction of euro notes and coins, there is currently little evidence of any significant effect on the aggregate inflation figures. Barring unforeseen developments, the Governing Council expects that annual HICP inflation should fall safely below 2% during this year and remain at levels consistent with price stability thereafter.  International role of the euro Last but not least, I should like to address the use of the euro outside the euro area. The introduction of the euro has contributed to the emergence of a new economic player, the euro area. The euro area includes 12 countries and over 300 million people. It is also the largest trading partner in the world economy, accounting for 19% of world exports. Let me explain how the European Economic and Monetary Union has modified global finance. I would like first to comment on the building-up of a new integrated financial market within the euro area, and then turn to some evidence on the role of the euro outside the euro area. I will finally explain why the two aspects (the domestic and the international role of the euro) are intertwined.  The euro and European financial markets The creation of the single currency is one step in the integration process in Europe, which started with the establishment of the European Economic Community in the 1950s. The integration among the Member States gained further momentum with the completion of the single European market in 1992. By the time the European Central Bank was created in 1998, capital movements in the EU were already completely liberalised, and commercial banks have been allowed to operate within the entire European Union since 1996. However, exchange rate fluctuations among the currencies of EU countries – although not close to the size of the wide swings in the early 1990s – still implied, if unhedged, currency risks for any EU-wide allocation of investment portfolios. Moreover, financial investors had to face very diverse levels of monetary stability and fiscal soundness across EU countries. The success of the nominal convergence process – which preceded the start of Monetary Union – and the governments’ commitment to honour the fiscal regulations associated with the monetary 
 4 BIS Review 13/2002 integration itself, reduced risks of EU-wide investments even before the creation of the ECB. The irrevocable pegging of exchange rates and the effective start of Monetary Union on 1 January 1999 created an unprecedentedly large single financial area in Europe. Today, we have a single interest rate prevailing in the short-term financial markets and only minor spreads between long-term bond yields among the 12 euro area Member States. Since 1999 we have observed a surge in the dimension of our domestic financial markets: euro-denominated securities issued by euro area residents (other than shares) have increased by 20% to around EUR 7 trillion. New market segments – for instance, corporate and municipal bonds – have recorded strong growth. We have observed a market-driven integration process, through which stock exchanges have been linked to each other, by creating single trading platforms, and the settlement system infrastructure has been streamlined with the creation of cross-border hubs. Every day, the wholesale payment system for the euro (TARGET) processes around 200,000 large-value payments among credit institutions, 20% of which relate to cross-border transactions. The latter amounts to an increase of cross-border activities by more than 15% in the last two years. The euro outside the euro area The significant size of domestic markets for euro-denominated assets has increasingly attracted financial operators outside the euro area. In particular, the euro has been used by international borrowers as a currency to secure funding. Let me give you two examples.  Since the launch of the euro, around one-quarter of international money market instruments issued by residents outside the euro area were denominated in euro. This is mainly due to the investors’ interest in the higher liquidity brought about by the creation of the integrated money market. Before the launch of the single currency, only 8% of all international money market instruments issued by non-euro area residents were denominated in the legacy currencies. Likewise, around 30% of international bonds and notes issued by residents outside the euro area are currently denominated in euro, as opposed to less than 20% in euro legacy currencies prior to 1999. Also in this case, market expectations of growing liquidity have probably been the key driving force behind the upward trend. Let me add that, outside the euro area, the euro is not only used by private agents but also by the official sector. In particular, more than 50 countries currently maintain an exchange rate regime involving an external anchor in which the euro plays a role.  As a reserve currency, the euro accounts for 13% of official reserves and, admittedly, plays currently a smaller role than the US dollar, whose share amounts to 66%. The ECB itself, by holding a large amount of US dollar foreign reserves, contributes to the prevailing role of the US currency as an official reserve currency. The current share of the euro in international reserves is comparable with the share reached by the euro legacy currencies prior to the introduction of the euro, implying that, in aggregate terms, there had been no reallocation of official reserves out of the US dollar.  The link between domestic and international factors Let me now elaborate briefly on the interaction between domestic and international factors as a determinant of the international use of the euro. Without doubt, when deciding on the use of the euro or another currency as a means of transaction, international markets also assess economic policies carried out in the various economic areas. In this vein, the commitment of the ECB to price stability – which is defined as an inflation rate below 2% over a medium-term horizon – should underpin international investors’ confidence that the purchasing power of their euro-denominated assets will be maintained over time. Indeed, a currency can only reach international status if internal price stability is ensured over the long run.  International investors also consider the size and liquidity of domestic financial markets as crucial. In this regard, efforts currently undertaken to further promote integration of financial markets (with more than 40 measures to be adopted by EU institutions) are likely to further attract international financial operators. Larger and more liquid financial markets imply lower transaction costs, and make it more efficient for foreign agents to trade euro-denominated financial instruments, as well as to resort to the euro in the foreign exchange market.  
 BIS Review 13/2002 5 It is not the task of the ECB to try to influence directly the international investors’ decisions regarding the currency in which they want to invest, borrow or lend. The international role of the euro will ultimately depend upon the market’s judgement. However, this neutral stance of the ECB should not be misinterpreted, as the increasing use of the euro is an issue of policy relevance to the ECB, and requires continuous monitoring.  To sum up, the creation of the euro facilitates the deepening of the financial integration inside Europe. Moreover, the single currency has already had consequences outside the euro area, as the euro has rapidly become the second most used currency in the world. Conclusions To conclude my speech, I will pre-empt the Q and A session by first telling you “What will happen after February?” From 1 March 2002, not only will the euro be the sole legal tender in the euro area, but it will also become one of the main channels that should facilitate the future co-operation between the ECB and the PBC. While China will manage to sustain strong growth and to open further its internal market as part of the WTO membership process, we expect the trade and financial ties between China and the EU to grow even stronger. I attach great importance to the relations between the ECB and the PBC, and I am very confident that such relations will flourish over time. “Xie Xie”  
 BIS Review 13/2002 1 David Dodge: Canada’s experience with inflation targets and a flexible exchange rate: lessons learned Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Society of New York, New York City, 20 February 2002. *      *      * The Canadian economy has undergone a dramatic transformation over the past decade. And it has emerged as a low-inflation economy, with declining levels of public and foreign debt and a private sector that is more cost-conscious, productive, and efficient, thanks to restructuring and investments in new technology. There is little resemblance between this economy and the one many of us had to contend with in the 1970s and 1980s - one that was racked by high and variable inflation and by unsustainably large and rising public deficits and debt. Since the 1990s, Canada’s monetary policy framework, based on an explicit inflation-control target and a flexible exchange rate, has contributed importantly to putting the Canadian economy back on the right path to longer-term prosperity. This is the main theme of my talk today. I will conclude with a few remarks on recent developments and the outlook for the Canadian economy. The mark of the 1970s and 1980s: high inflation and fiscal excesses  To put Canada’s inflation-targeting approach to monetary policy in context, a quick look into our economic history over the past three decades is in order. Through the 1970s and 1980s, Canada, like many other countries, found that high inflation, large fiscal deficits, and rising public debt exacted a heavy toll on the economy. Indeed, those of us who had to struggle with those unhappy times do not need to be reminded that high, variable, and unpredictable inflation increases uncertainty about the future. That it distorts the key signals and information individuals and businesses rely on to make important economic decisions. That it leads to exaggerated ups and downs in economic activity and employment. That it wastes valuable economic resources - resources that ought to be going into productive uses, but are instead diverted into hedging, as people seek protection from rising inflation. To make matters worse, through much of the 1970s and 1980s, Canadian governments were running large budget deficits. Those deficits were absorbing a major part of our national savings. The resulting accumulation of public debt meant high risk premiums in our interest rates. And these, in turn, discouraged the investments in equipment and technology that were necessary to improve productivity. To state the obvious, this was not a sustainable situation. Speaking for monetary policy, I can tell you that it took us a long time and a lot of work with different policy frameworks before we arrived at our current approach. By the late 1980s, it had become clear to the Bank that an explicit policy framework, which could be easily and clearly communicated to the public, was necessary to deal with the inflation problem. In January 1988, former Governor John Crow articulated a clear need to focus on achieving price stability. As the macroeconomic problems intensified through the late 1980s, it became evident that what we needed was an explicit commitment to a path for bringing inflation down. The Canadian experience: agreeing on targets for inflation control February 1991 marked a turning point in this process. At that time, the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada, acting on a growing shared appreciation of the economic damage caused by high inflation, agreed to adopt explicit targets for inflation reduction. 
 2 BIS Review 13/2002 Subsequently, inflation came down quickly - indeed, faster than envisaged by the agreement. By January 1992, it had already fallen to close to 2 per cent. Now, I do not want to leave you with the impression that this was a quick and painless process. Far from it. Indeed, because of the magnitude of our imbalances, we had to take strong medicine and live with high interest rates for some time. This caused a lot of economic dislocation and pain in the short run. And even as interest rates came down, there was still an appreciable risk premium built into those rates that reflected, at least partially, our fiscal problems. But once the fiscal adjustment got underway, financial markets quickly took note of it and the risk premiums were reduced significantly. Thus, we were able to reap one of the key payoffs of low inflation. The original inflation-control agreement with the government has been renewed three times - most recently, in May 2001. The current agreement, which runs to the end of 2006, continues to aim at keeping inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. The fact that we aim at the midpoint is of the essence, as I shall explain later. Through the past decade, and with two different governments, there has been increased shared appreciation among Canadian authorities of the important contribution that inflation control can make to good economic performance. I want to underscore that, in a democratic society, it is essential that the central bank and the government share the ultimate objective of a well-functioning economy. And that they both take action, and work co-operatively, to contribute to that common goal - hence my repeated emphasis today on words like “shared” and “agreement”. Based on the Canadian experience, I can tell you that the combination of a monetary policy aimed at low, stable, and predictable inflation and a fiscal policy aimed at bringing about a significant decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio works to reinforce the credibility of both policies. Low and predictable inflation provides a credible monetary policy anchor When the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada jointly announced explicit inflation targets in 1991, the purpose was to provide a clear path for inflation over the medium term to help Canadians make better economic decisions. To make those better decisions, Canadians had to understand what their central bank was trying to do. At the Bank, we were expecting that the targets would help us communicate clearly the specific policy objectives down the road and, in that way, make our actions more understandable to everyone. The targets would also provide a better basis for judging the effectiveness of monetary policy. The importance of communication in monetary policy is also something I would like to return to later. Right now, let me tell you what we have learned from our experience with inflation targeting. One lesson we draw is that a credible monetary policy requires a credible anchor. Inflation targets fulfill that role successfully. They do so because they make inflation more predictable and firmly anchor inflation expectations well into the future. With inflation expectations solidly anchored, investors can better assess the future value of their investments. Savers can be more confident that the purchasing power of their money will not be unexpectedly eroded by inflation. Wage bargaining can become less contentious and labour disruptions decrease. The duration of wage and financial contracts can lengthen considerably because people are confident that inflation will not greatly exceed 2 per cent over the medium term. Nor are they unduly concerned about the risk of deflation. Altogether, the real economy works better and is more stable. Moreover, the significance of the increased credibility of the targets is that it changes the whole dynamic of the inflation process. For example, sudden temporary changes in energy prices, or movements in the exchange rate, do not feed into other prices in the economy and into wages the way they did in the 1970s and 1980s. Again, this is because inflation expectations are well anchored. A main benefit of a credible monetary policy based on inflation targets is that it has helped the Canadian economy avoid the boom and bust cycles of the past. This is because the forward-looking framework of inflation targeting acts as an automatic stabilizer for the economy. Let me explain how that works. 
 BIS Review 13/2002 3 When demand is too strong, pushing the economy against its capacity limits, and there is a risk that future inflation will move appreciably above the target midpoint, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. But this works also in the other direction. When demand is weak, and future inflationary pressures are likely to ease, as was the case in 2001, the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate the economy, absorb economic slack, and return inflation to the target midpoint. Let me stress here that the midpoint of our inflation target range is a target, not a cap. That is to say, we pay equal attention to any significant movement away from the 2 per cent midpoint - whether above or below. By working in a symmetrical way in response to surprises in demand, our inflation-targeting system helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle and to promote sound, and generally less variable, economic growth. In this connection, let me emphasize that our mandate, as expressed in the preamble to the Bank of Canada Act, is not dissimilar from that of the U.S. Federal Reserve or from those of many other central banks. Our Act enjoins the Bank “to mitigate by its influence fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada”. The symmetry of monetary action that goes with our inflation-targeting framework is the best way to achieve inflation control and thus the objectives of the Act with respect to output and employment. In addition, a monetary policy that consistently delivers low, stable, and predictable inflation is likely to provide the greatest contribution to sustained growth in output and employment. This brings me to a key point I noted earlier. It is vital that the central bank communicate with the public and with financial markets on the goals of monetary policy. Here too, inflation targeting can play an important role - both in making monetary policy actions more understandable and transparent, and in making it possible for an independent central bank to be held accountable by the public. It can also provide financial markets with a clearer view of how the central bank will operate over time. Finally, let us not forget that monetary policy actions affect inflation with a lag of six to eight quarters. Because of that lag, in setting policy, one wants to emphasize those changes in prices that affect the underlying trend of inflation and downplay temporary fluctuations in very volatile components of the consumer price index. That is why, unlike some other central banks, we have explicitly chosen to focus on the underlying trend of inflation and use a core rate as our operating guide. The core rate excludes the eight most volatile components of the consumer price index as well as the effects of changes in indirect taxes. But I should add that the central bank can downplay those temporary price changes only if there is good reason to believe that they will not feed into other prices in the economy and affect inflation expectations. The reason we have been able to do that is because the inflation targets have helped to establish monetary credibility and to anchor inflation expectations. Inflation targeting and a flexible exchange rate  My review of Canada’s current monetary policy framework would not be complete without reference to its other key element - our flexible exchange rate. Monetary policy can pursue only one objective - keeping inflation low as a means to promote the economic well-being of Canadians. In pursuing that goal, we have chosen an inflation target as our anchor. And that means that we have to have a floating exchange rate. But I want to emphasize that Canada is a small and very open economy, with a structure of production and trade that differs significantly from that of the United States. A floating exchange rate is important because it facilitates the adjustment to economic disturbances, such as fluctuations in the world demand for, and prices of, our products. It also facilitates adjustment to changes in savings and investment flows. Over the last few years, more countries around the world have moved to flexible exchange rate systems and have adopted inflation targets as their monetary policy anchor. Today, I have given you a flavour of the Canadian experience in this area, and I have talked about some of the lessons we have learned over the past decade. I hope that this has provided you with some useful insights. Let me now turn to recent economic developments and the outlook for the Canadian economy.  
 4 BIS Review 13/2002 Recent economic developments and prospects in Canada The immediate impact and the fallout from last September’s tragic events here in New York, and elsewhere in the United States, led to a sharp increase in economic uncertainty around the world, exacerbating the effects of the global economic slowdown that had become more evident by last summer. In those circumstances, the Bank of Canada moved quickly and aggressively to lower interest rates. The aim was to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist acts and to limit the loss of confidence at home. Since last September, we have cut our overnight rate target by 200 basis points, bringing the total reduction since the beginning of 2001 to 375 basis points. The substantial monetary easing undertaken in 2001 will have its maximum impact as we move through this year and into 2003. In addition, tax cuts implemented at the beginning of last year continue to provide significant support to the Canadian economy. Further stimulus will also come from spending on enhanced national security. Thus, both monetary and fiscal policies are providing very significant support as we move forward. Moreover, with the improvement since the fall in the geopolitical climate and in consumer confidence in North America and Europe, there are increasing signs that the global economy has turned the corner and will firm as the year progresses. For these reasons, the Bank of Canada expects that the Canadian economy will gain momentum through 2002. After growing modestly in the first half - by 1 to 2 per cent, on an annualized basis - it should accelerate in the second half - to something like 3 to 4 per cent - and strengthen further in 2003. Once our economy starts expanding at rates exceeding the growth of potential output later this year, the considerable amount of slack that has built up over the past several months will begin to be absorbed. Still, it could be late 2003 before the actual level of output in the Canadian economy will again reach its potential level. This implies that core inflation will probably average just under 1 ½ per cent in the second half of 2002. Total CPI inflation is expected to stay below the core rate until late 2002, if energy prices remain near their current levels. Given the profile for output growth, the Bank expects inflation to move back up to 2 per cent in approximately two years. Recent economic indicators for Canada support the view that a recovery is starting. Household spending, particularly on interest-sensitive purchases, has been stronger than expected. Exports have lately shown signs of revival. The inventory adjustment is progressing. And with early evidence of a firming U.S. economy, the world prices of non-energy commodities appear to have bottomed out. Moreover, the national accounts data for Canada may well show slightly positive economic growth in both the last quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of this year. All available indicators suggest that final demand in the fourth quarter was stronger than anticipated. And the healthy employment data for January suggest that this strength is continuing. Also notable is the fact that production, especially in manufacturing, did not keep up with growth in final demand in the closing months of last year. So part of that demand was met by running down inventories. This bodes well for the coming months, because it means that production will likely begin to increase. This is another factor contributing to the momentum we expect to see in economic activity as the year unfolds. This is not to say that there are no uncertainties or risks in the economic outlook, or that the Bank of Canada will not remain alert to unfolding developments. While we expect fixed investment to begin to increase in the second half of the year, we are very much aware that this is conditional upon a recovery in business confidence, especially for large multinational enterprises. How quickly and how strongly profits and the confidence of those enterprises bounce back will have an important bearing on the strength and sustainability of the overall economic recovery. *      *      * To sum up, over the past decade, Canada has made major economic strides. We now have a solid anchor for monetary policy, and inflation expectations are well grounded. Fiscal health has been restored and, even in the short run, we will continue to make progress in bringing down our public debt-to-GDP ratio. And significant business restructuring has taken place, with more to come. 
 BIS Review 13/2002 5 Thanks to these improvements, Canada fared better in 2001 than many other countries. And with encouraging signs of a turnaround in the global economy and strengthening final demand at home, prospects for the Canadian economy are favourable. As we look past the current difficulties to the more positive longer-term trends and the potential of our economy, I expect that we will be moving forward with an enhanced sense of the importance and contribution of sound macroeconomic policies to good economic performance. I have talked at length today of how Canada has gone about fostering a climate of low, stable, and predictable inflation by means of a monetary policy framework based on an inflation target and a flexible exchange rate. The inflation target and a floating exchange rate work well together - indeed they reinforce each other. This approach has worked extraordinarily well for us over the last decade. And we expect that it will continue to provide the foundation for a prosperous future. 
   1Glenn Stevens: The economic outlook in 2002 Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to CEDA Economic and Political Outlook Conference, Adelaide, 18 February 2002. *      *      * It is a pleasure to be invited to speak to CEDA’s Economic and Political Outlook in Adelaide. I have taken part in CEDA functions at this time of the year in other cities, but it is particularly nice to come to Adelaide.  I would like to note at the outset, for the benefit of the local audience, that the Bank has undertaken a considerable increase in the resources put into "on the ground" economic intelligence around the country. During 2001, we established Regional Offices in Victoria, Western Australia and Queensland. In those States, the Bank’s branches had earlier been closed because their original functions – banking and registry operations, currency distribution – were either no longer demanded by customers or had been overtaken by improved technology. The purpose of the Offices is to retain some RBA presence and, more fundamentally, to gather information about local economic conditions. In South Australia, of course, the Bank still has a presence in the form of a Branch operation which conducts banking business for the South Australian Government. So as part of the process of strengthening our liaison effort, during last year we re-positioned one of our economists from Head Office to the Adelaide Branch.  The local staff are in continual contact with the Economic Group in Head Office and they take an active part in the assessment of the economy in the preparation for the monthly Board meetings. We have found the information gathered at the local level to be extremely helpful and are very grateful for the way businesses, government departments and agencies and other groups have responded to our questions. The South Australian economy has turned in a reasonably strong performance over the past year, with growth in household demand running above the national average. In common with some of the other States, South Australia’s export exposure no doubt means that businesses here will be keeping a watchful eye on events abroad. Equally, the apparent intention of the mining sector to begin raising its capital spending, according to the available surveys, will probably be good for South Australia. I do not intend to attempt a detailed analysis of local economic conditions. Instead, most of my remarks will be about the global and national scenes. The world economy presents no fewer sources of uncertainty, and hence no less potential for surprises, than it has for a number of years now, though from the perspective of the international business cycle, there are some quite encouraging signs at present of a turning point. In Australia, the economy has clearly coped with the international downturn pretty well so far, and there are good reasons for confidence about its performance over the coming year.  As it happens, the Bank has just published a Statement on Monetary Policy, containing our comprehensive analysis of the international and Australian economies. My task today is to elaborate some of the themes in that document, rather than to bring any new messages. The US business cycle On 26 November 2001, the US National Bureau of Economic Research announced that, according to the methodology they use for dating business cycles, the US economy had reached the end of a decade-long expansion in March 2001, after which it had been in a period of contraction. That pronouncement effectively ended the debate about whether there would or would not be a recession – defined by the NBER as “a significant decline in activity spread across the economy, lasting more than a few months, visible in industrial production, employment, real income, and wholesale-retail trade”. One had apparently been under way for eight months.  
  It is not that unusual, by the way, for such classifications of recession and expansion to lag the actual event by a good few months. In fact, it is not unknown for a recession to be actually finished by the time the data make it clear that one had begun (though the fact that it had finished was itself, of course, not known until later). This was the case in the early-1990s recession in the United States. Note also that there have not, as yet anyway, been two consecutive quarters of declining GDP in the United States – the definition of "technical" recession so beloved of the headline writers.   Debate quickly moved on, focusing briefly on the role of the September 11 events affecting the economy. Clearly, those events did not cause the recession. All the dynamics typically associated with a contraction in output were in train prior to mid September – otherwise the NBER would not have been able to decide by November that there was a recession under way. Moreover, the direct impact of the attacks themselves was, despite the horrifying images, not all that large on the US economy. Arguably, though, they came at a time when the US economy was already contracting and accelerated the adjustments by businesses to the underlying reality which was emerging. Certainly, the event was a watershed for commentators. Those voices saying there would not be a recession went quiet immediately, some weeks before the NBER’s pronouncement. But a business cycle contraction was definitely under way prior to September 11.  The NBER’s statement was only 12 weeks ago. Between late November and today, many observers have begun talking about a US recovery. Financial market prices reflected this change relatively early on, as they tend to do. Share markets rallied strongly through the last weeks of 2001 and into the early part of this year, though the shine has come off a little since then. Bond markets pushed up long-term interest rates somewhat, and credit spreads for corporate bonds have tended to decline. Forecasts of economic growth in the United States appear to have stopped falling, and the latest actual figure for GDP, while weak in an absolute sense, was stronger than most had expected, and much stronger than many feared in the early days after September 11.  To no small extent, this reflects the fact that the underlying US economy weathered the impact of the terrorist attacks themselves very well. Post-attack, the financial system was up and running again very quickly, especially given the destruction of physical infrastructure at the heart of the system. And while American corporations have cut their investment spending very sharply indeed, households have continued to increase their spending on consumer goods and services. Macroeconomic policy has been supportive, with a tax cut affecting household incomes during the second half of 2001 – right when it was most needed – and a very rapid easing of monetary policy beginning in early January 2001, and continuing with force right through the year.  In fact, if one were to adopt the view that a recession began last March and, noting that recessions typically (if there is a typical recession) last about a year, to set about looking for signs that an upturn might be near, one would find some evidence in the real economy to support that view. Inventory adjustment, part of the classical business cycle story – and very much a part of this recession in the "new economy", especially in the production of IT goods themselves – began quite early, and is by now well advanced. The adjustment to investment spending has been quick. Signs of a bottoming in parts of the tech sector have begun to emerge. The adjustment to business payrolls may also have gone a long way towards completion, judging by recent labour market data.  
   3So an analysis of the normal business-cycle dynamics does increasingly suggest that the US economy could well begin a new expansion soon. If it does, the US recession would have been no deeper, and probably shallower, than the one in 1990–91, which was the mildest recession in the past three decades.   Such an outcome is by no means yet assured, and it is entirely possible that there will be setbacks, and associated fluctuations in sentiment. Those inclined to a pessimistic view would, of course, point to some other features of the US economy which I have not, as yet, mentioned. It seems likely, for example, that there was excessive investment in certain areas during the height of the euphoria over returns to information technology. Even though new investment has been slashed, an overhang of past investment might remain – and hence scope for an early return to rising business investment spending may be limited, though this depends on the speed with which equipment becomes obsolete, which is much higher for ITC-type investment than for, say, buildings. To the extent that a good deal of the investment was simply "wasted", there is presumably not much overhang – but in that case the question is whether the full extent of the lost wealth entailed is yet apparent. We could also add that the true state of corporate balance sheets is more uncertain in general, as highlighted by the recent revelations of accounting irregularities in some high-profile US firms, and that American share valuations still seem high by historical standards, supported by exceptionally strong forecasts of earnings growth.  Households have expanded spending beyond the rise in their income over the past year – indeed they have done so over a number of years. That can be sustained only for so long, especially given more subdued gains in wealth. Can the household sector keep the US economy ticking over while the business sector sorts itself out? Or will the loss of wage income resulting from the higher unemployment dampen consumers’ enthusiasm?  Opinions on these and other uncertainties differ. The weight of opinion has, I think rightly, become more optimistic lately, but the pessimists who doubt that a recession can be over so quickly are not without their reasons. Even some of those who are relatively optimistic might concede that factors such as these may well mean that the rate of expansion is initially relatively modest, and certainly slower than the growth seen in the late 1990s.  Other areas of the world economy What of other regions? 
  I think we can see evidence in a number of countries in east Asia that the contraction in industrial production came to an end during the closing months of 2001. These countries were hit very hard by the global tech sector slump during 2000 and 2001, which affected their exports. Some countries which were not badly affected by the Asian crisis in 1997 and 1998, but which have very extensive exposure to technology production, such as Singapore and Taiwan, have suffered much more on this occasion than they did three or four years ago. But for east Asia as a whole, the impact has not been as serious. In contrast to events during the Asian crisis, macroeconomic policies on this occasion have acted in a way which has cushioned, rather than reinforced, the impact of global events. Exchange rates have been allowed to decline, and monetary and fiscal policies have generally been eased.   Activity seems to have stabilised recently. Semi-conductor prices have firmed appreciably, having collapsed over the first nine months or so of 2001. As an example of the roller-coaster ride producers in this area have experienced, consider the price of memory modules published by a web-site called DRAMexchange.com. In October 2000, the price quoted for a 128mb SDRAM module was about US$10. By October 2001, it had fallen to US$1. Some of the fall was, no doubt, the decline over the (very short) life span of high-technology components with which we are familiar – driven by productivity improvement and competition. However, much of the fall presumably reflects the cyclical dynamics. Over the past few months, prices have risen to around US$3.50. It is encouraging for the small east Asian countries to see this, and to see hopeful signs of expansion in the United States, which remains such a powerful force driving the business cycle for externally oriented economies. In Europe, growth slowed noticeably in 2001. However, in some surveys one can see very early signs of what should turn out to be an improvement in economic conditions over the year ahead.  Japan, unfortunately, is in quite a different position. Japan was affected by the tech sector slump, but it is also afflicted with very powerful forces at work in its domestic economy. Deflating asset prices, associated pressure on corporations and banking sector asset quality, and generalised price deflation in producer prices and even consumer prices, make for a very difficult situation. These dynamics have been in operation for some years, but appear to have intensified over the past year or so. Conventional macroeconomic policies have been pushed to their limits. Structural reform is necessary but will be painful in the short term. While attention has been (understandably) fixed on developments in the United States, the biggest threat to the world economy in terms of the drag on aggregate economic activity may well be Japan. How things will play out there remains extremely uncertain. 
   5 But overall, barring a sudden and major further intensification of contractionary forces in Japan, there are reasons to think that global economic activity will begin to improve this year. A pretty strong policy stimulus has been applied, led by the United States, in a timely fashion. Global short-term interest rates are unusually low. In addition, the price of oil, which played an important role in producing the slowdown, has fallen substantially over the past year. These two factors, plus the outworking of inventory overhangs, would usually be enough to produce a cyclical upturn. As I have sketched above, we can see evidence beginning to appear which is consistent with that view. For these reasons, as our recent Statement on Monetary Policy made clear, some of the pessimism about the United States, and hence the world economy, that existed a few months ago has waned.  The question may soon be, not whether there is an upturn, but how strong and durable it will prove to be. At this stage, that is unclear, and it probably will remain so for a while. Implications for Australia It is well recognised that the Australian economy has been quite resilient in the face of the global recession. Growth through the first three quarters of 2001 ran at an annualised rate of 4 per cent. Even a moderate increase in GDP in the December quarter, which is what most observers expect, would mean that growth through the full year would be of the order of 3½ per cent. That compares well with the growth for the United States of about zero for the same period, and with the outcome for the major countries as a group, which was also about zero.  In past periods of global downturn, Australia has rarely outperformed the major countries; historically, our tendency was to have a period of weakness that was, if anything, more pronounced than those of the G7 group. This time it has been different, though not because the global recession has not affected Australia: the impact on exports has become increasingly clear over the past six months or so. The value of exports, which was growing at 25-30 per cent per annum at one point, is little changed now compared with a year ago. The contribution to growth in GDP from net export volumes ran to about 2 percentage points in the year to June 2001, but was negative during the second half of 2001.  
   So two questions can be posed. First, why is it that on this occasion, so far at least, we have done better than on others? And second, will it continue?  A lot has been made of the housing upswing which is currently increasing activity and employment in the construction sector and associated parts of manufacturing. It is true that this is helping growth at present, and that it will most likely fade from the middle of the year. But of course it is equally true that we "paid for" this boost with a large contraction – of unprecedented size, in fact – during the second half of 2000. We took a brief but very large housing downturn at a time when the world economy was still doing acceptably well, and then got the benefit of an upswing in housing as the world slowed. The timing of this was not, of course, something over which we had any control.  Looking through the ups and downs of the housing sector, it is still the case that the Australian economy has performed better than in other episodes of global recession. This is not to deny that growth has declined – in some underlying sense, stripping out the housing fluctuations, growth might have run at something like 2½ per cent over each of 2000 and 2001. That is noticeably slower than the outcomes for 1998 and 1999 (which were exceptional). But it is still a better performance than those in the US and most other major countries, and better than an extrapolation of historical experience in previous global downturns might have suggested.   We should also, of course, keep in mind that the full effects of the global downturn on Australia are probably not yet apparent. Even so, as we begin to get the very early pieces of economic information for 2002, it seems that business and consumer confidence has held up quite well, and there are some signs of improvement in demand for labour. All this is consistent with growth continuing thus far. So the question remains as to why that has occurred.  One major factor which has helped has been that few of the problems which have dogged us in past episodes, and hence exacerbated business cycle downturns, have been present on this occasion.  The obvious one which a central banker would nominate is inflation, which has increased, but not beyond manageable levels. Core inflation picked up from about 1½ per cent in 1998 and 1999, to about 3¼ per cent, on our reading, in 2001. As I am sure you know, the centre-piece of Australia’s monetary policy regime is an inflation target of 2-3 per cent, on average. This system has been in place since 1993, and has worked well for Australia over that period. It requires the Bank to move our policy instrument so as to keep medium-term inflation outcomes consistent with the target.  During 1997 and 1998, inflation was below target. Monetary policy’s response was to ease, seeking interest rates low enough to engender a stronger expansion of aggregate demand in the economy. The intention of this was to allow inflation to increase a little, back up to the target. By the second half of 1999, it was apparent that the period of below-target inflation was drawing to a close. In anticipation of higher inflation, policy began to move interest rates up from unusually low levels to more "normal" levels, a process which continued through to August 2000.  
   7 During 2001, even as inflation was still increasing, ultimately moving above our target, monetary policy was eased substantially. We felt that the previous tightening phase had done enough to ensure that this rising trend would not persist, and therefore that we had some latitude to offer support to growth in the face of the contractionary shock heading our way from abroad. Even though the recent CPI figure was interpreted by many as a bit on the high side, we still think that the outlook is for inflation to return to target over the next four to six quarters. The reasoning behind that is set out in the Statement. For our purposes here today, the point is that the flexibility to put interest rates down pre-emptively is earned by being prepared to put them up when a rise in inflation is on the cards. Policy has operated in such a fashion.  Another imbalance we have managed to avoid on this occasion is excessive investment. Here there is a distinct contrast with the United States, where business investment spending was exceptionally high by historical standards until 2000, and then slumped sharply. It is that item of spending which, more than any other component of aggregate demand, pushed the United States into recession. In Australia, business investment as a share of GDP peaked as far back as 1998, and has gradually declined for three years. While some people might look at this and say that that is a terrible outcome, I tend to look at it and say that it won’t fall further. Indeed, with investment at historically low levels, a rise is more likely than a fall in the next couple of years. The forward-looking data provided by the ABS survey say the same thing.  To the above we could add that the Australian share market was never characterised by the extent of excesses seen elsewhere, and that household and corporate balance sheets are, by and large, in pretty good shape – though households are now carrying a good deal more debt than they did in the past. Prior financial excesses would be highly likely to play a part in worsening any downturn if and when it occurred; having avoided the worst of such excesses is a big help. We can further add that fiscal policy expansion during 2000 was remarkably well-timed from the perspective of stabilising the business cycle. Yet another factor is that Australia’s terms of trade have not slumped in the way they have so often done in the past; indeed, until quite recently the terms of trade had been rising. This is 
  of some importance in that it supports domestic incomes, at a point in the cycle when, historically, those incomes have been reduced by global price developments.  Then there is the exchange rate. The decline in the currency in the first half of 2000 was not well explained at the time, but there is no doubt it has conferred an advantage on Australian producers of tradeable goods and services. There is, however, more to the exchange rate story than that. A floating exchange rate system means that an adverse change in capital markets’ sentiment towards the country is not automatically reflected in tighter domestic financial conditions: the exchange rate can take at least some of the adjustment. That means that domestic demand is not crunched because of pressure on the currency. This particular piece of our economic structure helps the economy adapt to shocks in international capital markets more effectively than the alternative, of a fixed exchange rate, would allow. That flexibility is not without limit, of course, and needs to be complemented by an effective monetary policy strategy to provide an anchor for the system – which is where inflation targeting comes in.  So a number of factors have assisted the economy in coping with the external shock. Can this good performance continue?  To state the obvious, it depends how long the international economy remains weak. No economy can remain insulated from global problems indefinitely. But if the consensus view of global growth – that things will begin to improve as 2002 progresses – is correct, then Australia’s prospects are pretty good. The general effects of low interest rates will still be filtering through the economy for some time yet. Prospects for an upswing in business investment would be good in this scenario, which would help to counteract the impact on domestic demand of a waning in the housing cycle. The good growth seen in 2001 will help to put a floor under the labour market, and in due course, improved conditions abroad would offer better prospects for exporters. This does not rule out a temporary weak period for Australian growth at some point during this year, but if the world economy is improving, macroeconomic policies are supporting growth and investment is beginning an upswing, it would be unlikely that activity would fall away very sharply or for long.  None of this is assured, in large part because the global recovery itself, while apparently more likely than it was, is no sure thing. But then nothing is ever assured. What appears to have changed in recent months is that the balance of risks to global growth and to the Australian economy is no longer "tilted to the downside", in the way it was. It is still possible to conceive of a weaker outcome than the consensus expects – but for the first time in over a year, it is also just possible to conceive of the possibility that things could be stronger than generally expected.  Conclusion The year 2001 saw a major change in perceptions about the health of the world economy, with recessions or near-recessions in several major countries. As of early 2002, it appears that the point of deepest gloom is behind us, and that people are starting to think about the shape of a renewed period of expansion which will probably get under way this year. This improvement is not assured and there could be setbacks. But the position we are in now is, in most respects, decidedly preferable to that of a year ago.  For Australia, this is good news, even though the benefits of it will show up with a lag. The economy has held up quite well in the face of international weakness, and it should continue to do so, for some time at least. If the recent hopeful signs of a global pick-up do turn into a sustained period of expansion, even if only at a moderate pace, Australia will be well placed to continue turning in good macroeconomic outcomes over the slightly longer term.   
 BIS Review 39/2002 1 Joseph Yam: Complaints against banks and the role of the HKMA Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong Kong Association of Banks Half-Yearly Dinner, Hong Kong, 24 June 2002. *      *      * I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak to you at this half-yearly dinner, and I am grateful to the organisers for choosing an evening that does not happen to coincide with the quarter-finals, semi-finals or final of the World Cup. This has, I am sure you will agree, been an exciting tournament so far. One of its striking features has been the record number of yellow and red cards issued to players by referees for fouls, unsporting behaviour and other forms of misconduct. The reasons put forward include worsening behaviour on the playing field, stricter application of the rules by referees, and a greater tendency among players to complain about real or imagined grievances.  Whether all this is good or bad for the game is a matter of debate: it certainly makes for interesting television. But it is not just in the world of football that we see a rise in grievances and complaints. It is a phenomenon affecting many areas of life in Hong Kong, including the relationship between consumers and their banks. Complaints against banks are on the increase. We may take some comfort from the fact that, when set against the millions of banking consumer transactions that take place every day, they still form a very small number. There are also many ways of explaining the increase before we start to point to the possibility of declining standards of service. But the increase is a matter of concern to the HKMA, not least because, although we are subject to just as much public scrutiny as the football referees, we do not possess their almost unlimited powers of decision.  Around a year ago I spoke at your half-yearly dinner on the subject of consumer protection and the banking industry. In that speech I set out the various options identified by the HKMA for a more effective handling of consumer complaints against banks. Today I am going to address the same subject. You might be wondering whether I am running out of topics, or whether the HKMA has got stuck in a groove. But I raise the subject again for three reasons:  • First, while there has been some enhancement and standardisation of the procedures for handling complaints by the banks themselves, through the HKMA's guideline on the subject issued in February, and through the industry's own Code of Banking Practice, the basic question of what to do with complaints that are not resolved by individual banks remains unanswered. Other than the courts, there is no external dispute resolution mechanism for bank customers in Hong Kong. • Secondly, the number of complaints against banks received by the HKMA has increased almost twofold in the first five months of this year compared with the same period last year. There has been an enormous surge in complaints since the last quarter of last year. This rapid growth in the number of complaints could indicate that the quality of customer service is deteriorating. Whatever the reason, it is posing an additional burden on all concerned. • And thirdly, the HKMA is finding it difficult to cope with this situation. We are having to divert staff resources from other important tasks at a time of retrenchment. Worse still, the fact that the HKMA has no explicit statutory responsibility to resolve consumer complaints has caused disappointment to some complainants. I am pleased to see that debate on this issue has revived recently, with the further discussion of consumer protection in the banking sector by the Legislative Council Financial Affairs Panel earlier this month. I should like this evening to contribute to that debate in two ways:  • First, by setting out what I understand the powers of the HKMA to be - and not to be - under the Banking Ordinance in relation to dealing with consumer complaints against banks; and • Secondly, by summarising, in the light of the recent debate, what I believe should be the next steps in improving the handling of complaints. The Banking Ordinance is a complex statute of some 200 pages and it has been much amended since its original enactment in the 1960s. The mandate of the HKMA is, however, set out very plainly in section 7(1) of the Ordinance, which states that: 
 2 BIS Review 39/2002 "The principal function of the Monetary Authority under this Ordinance shall be to promote the general stability and effective working of the banking system." We pursue this mandate through licensing criteria and ongoing supervision of banks. We complement this supervisory work with a variety of initiatives under the banking reform and other programmes, the ultimate intention of which is to promote general stability and effective working of the system. For example:  • First, the deposit insurance scheme, now at the detailed planning stage, will promote the general stability of the system by protecting individual depositors up to a certain limit. • Secondly, the Commercial Credit Reference Agency, which is expected to be launched as a voluntary, market-based scheme in the not-too-distant future, will promote the effective working of the system - and the larger economy - by helping banks channel lending to creditworthy small enterprises. • Thirdly, public consultation by the Privacy Commission will soon commence on broad proposals for the sharing of positive consumer credit data - a facility which, when and if it is introduced, will help in addressing an issue of concern to banking stability: the dramatic rise in consumer defaults and personal bankruptcies. All of these measures have implications for individual customers of banks, but their rationale derives from the MA's principal function: to promote the general stability and effective working of the system. The important thing to note about this "principal function" of the MA under the Banking Ordinance is that it relates to general, "macro", systemic issues, to the safety and soundness of banks and the system as a whole, not to the relationship between individual consumers and their banks. The HKMA's involvement in promoting and encouraging proper standards of conduct and sound and prudent business practices under section 7(2) of the Banking Ordinance is only incidental to its primary function of promoting the stability and effective working of the banking system. Nevertheless, even in the absence of an explicit legal mandate for consumer protection, the HKMA has become increasingly involved in this area, particularly in helping to develop the Code of Banking Practice and in enforcing banks' compliance with the Code.  One recent real-life example of this is a quite appalling case of mistaken identity that recently came to our attention. The debt collection agency of a certain bank was pursuing debts against an innocent and entirely unconnected third party who happened to be living in the last known address of the real defaulter. The agent did not identify itself and the bank for whom it was acting when collecting debt. It kept on pestering the innocent third party for one month until after the Police had found out which bank it was acting for and a complaint was lodged to the HKMA against that bank. But the explanations given by the bank, both to the complainant and ourselves, about how the mistaken identity could have arisen and about what measures would be taken to prevent this sort of thing from recurring, were not satisfactory. Without going into details, these explanations raised more questions than they answered. This, in our view, gave rise to general supervisory concerns both about the bank and its business practices, and about practices relating to debt collection generally. We therefore took this matter up with the Code of Banking Practice Committee, and the industry associations have since reminded their members to improve monitoring of the performance of debt collection agencies. We have also tightened up our own monitoring of this issue, as you are aware through our letter issued at the end of last month.  More than half of the complaints we receive are about debt collection: not all are necessarily as extreme as the case I have described, but many, in our view, raise similar supervisory concerns. Taking action on the question of bad business practices in the use of debt collection agencies was, in my view, clearly within the MA's powers under section 7(2), since it could threaten the reputation not only of the bank concerned but also of the banking system as a whole. However, it would be stretching these powers too far to apply them to the "micro" region of individual consumer complaints about the cost or quality of banking services. We frequently receive complaints about fees and charges made by banks which appear unreasonable to the complainant - for example the imposition of charges on dormant or small deposit accounts. Our practice with such complaints is to refer them to the bank concerned and to ask it to reply direct to the complainant. As long as we are satisfied that the transparency standards in the Code of Banking Practice have been met, then we take the view that fees and charges are commercial decisions and we do not intervene.  In handling complaints about bank services, the HKMA's role is limited to ensuring that the process by which the complaints are handled by AIs is fair and efficient. We have a very limited role in dispute 
 BIS Review 39/2002 3 resolution. Even if we wanted to intervene formally in such cases, it is difficult to see how, legally speaking, we could do so. The sanctions available in section 52 of the Ordinance - and the triggers specified for these sanctions - make it clear that intervention by the MA against an AI must be a response to issues affecting the health of the AI as a whole, or the interests of its depositors or creditors as a whole, or the broader public interest. The Ordinance confers no powers to arbitrate disputes, to name and shame, or to require banks to pay compensation or rectify mistakes. There are no penalty kicks or yellow cards or red cards available under the Ordinance. To use the powers or sanctions available under section 52 to settle a consumer complaint would be rather like sending off the whole team for a simple case of offside.  Needless to say, the present arrangements give rise to a certain amount of frustration. The complainants naturally assume that the body that supervises banks - the HKMA - can sort out their complaints against banks and recover financial losses. Not surprisingly, not every complainant who discovers that we cannot do this is satisfied with the kind of explanation of our legal powers that I have given to you this evening. Some get angry, and persist with their complaints. A few have taken the matter to other authorities. We have diverted staff resources to the time-consuming task of dealing with the rising number of complaints. But there is a limit to what we can do without affecting our main responsibilities under our mandate.  Clearly, something needs to be done. What are the options available? What are the steps to be taken? An obvious solution is to tackle the problem at its source by reducing the grounds for complaint. This requires the banks to maintain and improve the quality of their service and to improve their complaint-handling procedures so that customer dissatisfaction is dealt with quickly and decisively. Initiatives by the banking industry in co-operation with the HKMA have been taken over the past year to promote this process. They include the major revisions to the Code of Banking Practice, setting out basic standards for personal banking services - and on issues such as debt collection - and placing an emphasis on transparency. They also include monitoring of compliance with the Code by the HKMA and specific guidance from the HKMA on the handling and processing of complaints. In view of the recent surge in number of complaints, both the HKMA and the industry associations have written to AIs to urge that sufficient resources be devoted to handling of complaints and to remind them to step up monitoring of the performance of their debt collection agencies.  We believe that these initiatives have been of some help in promoting higher standards and consistency in the handling of complaints. We shall supplement these initiatives as appropriate. But, no matter how high the quality of service, or how smooth and efficient the handling of dissatisfied customers may become, there will always be complaints and misunderstandings. In fact, quite often the more easy it is to complain, the more the complaints - even at times when the general quality of service may be improving. Higher expectations on the part of the public, a greater complexity of services and products all contribute to a greater volume of complaints. Less positively, a more difficult economic environment contributes to friction between banks and their customers, for example in the greater incidence of default on debt on the one hand and in the greater tendency among banks, in times of tighter margins, to go after that debt. Whether in good times or bad, a certain volume of complaints is a healthy phenomenon because it encourages improvements in service where complaints are upheld, and improvements in transparency where misunderstandings occur. On a subject so important as the way in which banks handle people's money, there will always be complaints, and we need to continue to develop our machinery for dealing with them.  Let me deal quickly with the options identified by the HKMA in its survey last year which, if I read it correctly, the debate within the industry and the community is ruling out. The first option of these is the establishment of a separate banking ombudsman along the lines of the practice in some other jurisdictions. This is, in some senses, a Rolls Royce solution in that it would provide a separate agency, to process and resolve complaints, with powers to arbitrate in complaints and award compensation. It would, however, be a costly solution, and it would take a considerable time to implement. Under such a system, the process of handling complaints would probably also be quite resource-intensive, and it is by no means clear that it would be able to address the full range of complaints being made. I think the consensus at present, as reflected in the recent discussion at the LegCo Financial Affairs Panel, is that neither the current volume and nature of complaints nor the deficiencies in existing arrangements would justify the creation of such elaborate machinery.  The second option would be to give the HKMA a clear mandate to arbitrate and resolve consumer complaints and the powers to impose sanctions. This option could go some way towards addressing the current gap between the expectation of bank customers and what the HKMA can do for them under its existing powers. However, I think there is a consensus that this is not the right time for the 
 4 BIS Review 39/2002 HKMA to be given such a role. It would require a considerable increase in resources and some form of cost recovery from the banking industry, and it would also require addressing concerns about conflict of interest between different branches of the organisation - a problem that is not insoluble, but which would nevertheless require some careful thought. This, at least for the time being, does not seem to be the preferred option.  The weight of opinion seems, then, to fall on the third option, which is to rely mainly on the industry itself to ensure that complaints are properly handled. There are three things which banks can do in helping to promote self-regulation:  • First, AIs should strictly follow the Code of Banking Practice, which is issued by their own industry associations. They should comply not only in form but in substance as well. For example, in relation to debt collection, it is not enough that they have incorporated the relevant provisions of the Code into the service agreement with their debt collection agents. They should also pro-actively check that their agents are actually following these provisions when collecting debts. • Secondly, AIs should ensure that all complaints are dealt with fairly and thoroughly. Again it is not enough that there are efficient complaint handling policies and procedures in place. It is more important that such policies and procedures are conscientiously implemented by their staff. Where a complaint is justified, AIs should be prepared to offer the complainant restitution or compensation. • Thirdly, AIs should ensure adequate levels of transparency in the provision of banking products and services. This is very important given the proliferation of more innovative and sophisticated products in the retail banking market. AIs must let their customers know the true cost of credit and ensure that all advertising and promotional materials do not contain misleading information. Self-regulation would not be a success without the involvement of the industry associations. Over the past six months, the industry associations have taken on a much more active role in developing the Code of Banking Practice. They have set up the Code of Banking Practice Committee, which has so far been effective in enhancing the role of the industry in self-regulation of market conduct. The Committee has responded effectively and promptly to public concerns about banks' business practices by providing appropriate guidance on interpretation of the Code or even amending relevant provisions of the Code.  The question of the industry associations' involvement in resolving customer disputes, whether or not these are related to the Code, is more controversial. Although the HKAB Ordinance does provide the Association with certain powers in relation to conduct regulation, the principal concern is whether such an industry-run scheme would have the necessary credibility, since banks would effectively be policing themselves.  The rapid growth in number of complaints is a cause of concern but not a cause for alarm. The current framework of self-regulation by the industry has worked reasonably well in the past and there is no reason why it cannot continue to do so with a bit of help from banks themselves. We should monitor the situation carefully before rushing into other costly options. Meanwhile, the banks must help by tackling the problem at source: through being careful to avoid giving grounds for complaint and through dealing with any complaints that do arise fairly and promptly.  All of this does not rule out a role for the HKMA. How best can we participate? I believe we should continue to play a support and resource role, in the further development of tools, such as the Code of Banking Practice and guidance on procedures, for the handling of complaints, and a monitoring role in ensuring that the system of self-regulation developed by HKAB and its members is working effectively. We can also help from an educational point of view by clarifying the options that members of the public have should they wish to complain about banks and by disseminating information on this through leaflets, our website, and other tools. A part of this clarification must set out the limits on what the HKMA can and will do in the taking on of banking consumer complaints: we are currently working on such a clarification.  Self-regulation in the market, with support and guidance from the regulator, is, in my view, a sensible and appropriate way forward for a market economy such as Hong Kong. I am therefore very pleased that the general consensus seems to point in this direction. Whether this approach succeeds depends very much on the effort and energy put into it by the banking sector. It will also be influenced by trends in complaints over the coming months - rising, falling or otherwise - in the light of the many factors that 
 BIS Review 39/2002 5 give rise to complaints. The HKMA, in partnership with HKAB, will be monitoring developments, and I note that the Legislative Council Panel will also be revisiting this issue in six months time.  Let me conclude with one point, which I hope has become clear through the discussion of this issue. The outcome of this discussion may come as a disappointment to those who say that the HKMA has an evil plan for taking over the world by grabbing powers and responsibilities whenever it can. The fact is that, although we are not technically a "statutory" body, what we can and cannot do in pursuit of our policies is strictly controlled by legislation, which is a matter ultimately for the Legislative Council to decide.  I have, I hope, shown that this legislation, as it now stands, does not permit us to do many of the things that many complainants would expect or wish us to do. In setting out the various alternative approaches to complaint handling as objectively as we can, we have, I hope, made it clear that the HKMA does not seek, or even welcome, an expansion of its powers to satisfy these expectations. On the contrary, at a time of continuing challenge and shrinking resources, we think it sensible to concentrate our energies on our core responsibilities. We therefore welcome the present consensus on this issue and, together with HKAB and other parties, shall do our best to ensure that it works.  
 BIS Review 39/2002 1 Bruno Gehrig: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Prof Bruno Gehrig, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002. *      *      * Developments in the financial markets From a Swiss vantage point, the situation on the financial markets in the first half of 2002 was predominantly influenced by the exchange rate development of the Swiss franc. The appreciation against the euro, which set in after 11 September 2001, has been arrested but has failed to bring about a sustained correction of the exchange rate. Moreover, the US dollar, too, has declined since April. At the beginning of June, it had fallen to its lowest level against the Swiss franc in two-and-a-half years. There are several reasons for the decline of the US dollar – by approximately 7% against the euro and the Swiss franc since the end of March, by approximately 6% vis-à-vis the yen – : imponderables of global political significance, growing doubts concerning a sustained upswing in the United States and – exacerbated by the collapse of Enron – the scepticism of investors with respect to the future development of yields. The record US current account deficit is increasingly being financed by means of short-term capital flows from abroad, which, by their very nature, are volatile. Against this background, high-risk investments generally showed a weaker trend. Equity markets and the US dollar lost in value while the gold price, bonds and the Swiss franc moved up. As may repeatedly be observed in uncertain times, higher demand for Swiss francs resulted from the greater attraction exerted by our currency on foreign and particularly also on domestic investors. One of the reasons for this is the extremely high international net creditor position of our country (139% of GDP). In times of instability, Swiss investors reduce the risks by investing a larger part of their holdings (or the yields thereon) in the home currency or by hedging their foreign-currency balances to a greater extent than previously. Both strategies strengthen the demand for Swiss francs. With interest rate differentials between Swiss franc and foreign currency investments having widened since spring, the «price» to be paid by investors for the «safe haven» offered by the Swiss franc has, however, risen. The yield differential between long-term investments in euros and those in Swiss francs again amounts to almost two percentage points; since the start of the year alone it has increased by approximately 40 basis points. Interest rates, which have reached a relatively lower level in this country, to some extent mitigate the economic burdens associated with the appreciation. They have probably also contributed to the slight recovery of the euro vis-à-vis the Swiss franc in the past few days. In the first half of 2002, capital market rates were influenced by economic expectations in the United States. The positive economic data in March triggered a vigorous rise in long-term US interest rates by approximately 50 basis points within a very brief time. With economic indicators below expectations since April, long-term yields fell back to their mid-2001 level. The expectations reflected in the futures markets concerning the development of money market rates – and therefore also monetary policy – have undergone a marked downward adjustment, notably for the US dollar, but also for the euro and the Swiss franc. Hopes of a vigorous and rapid economic recovery have given way to a more realistic assessment. The SNB as asset manager In the context of its statutory mandate, the National Bank manages sizeable assets (table 1). In May 2002, their market value exceeded Sfr 100 billion. The free assets (Sfr 21 billion) are to be withdrawn from the National Bank and allocated to other purposes. Mr Blattner will provide details on the management of the free assets. The monetary assets (Sfr 86 billion) serve monetary purposes. Claims from repo business (Sfr 16 billion) reflect our money market activities on the assets side of the balance sheet, while Swiss franc securities (Sfr 5 billion) are available for absorption repos if necessary. Foreign exchange reserves (Sfr 41 billion) are at the centre of our activity as asset managers. At the end of 1997, the leeway 
 2 BIS Review 39/2002 previously granted solely for money market investments was legally extended. This provided a possibility to spread fixed-interest investments more evenly across various maturities and currencies and to widen the range of instruments. Among the currencies (graph 1), the US dollar and the euro predominate with shares of 42% and 46% respectively. The maturities of the investments extend over the entire interest rate curve, with the average maturity being around five years. In the debtor categories, government paper predominates, accounting for a share of more than 50%. The rest comprises claims against international organisations and banks or bank-like borrowers with an above-average rating. Aside from these traditional bonds, US mortgage-backed securities were introduced in 2000, a new investment category which represents an ideal addition to the portfolio. In the context of the primary requirements specific to a central bank – extremely high liquidity, investment focus on the major currencies US dollar and euro, a mainly passive investment style – risk/return considerations are of prime concern. The goal is to achieve the highest possible return by means of all available concepts and techniques of modern asset management with adequate risk control. The investment strategy is developed by inhouse investment specialists. It is mostly implemented internally by a team of eight portfolio managers. We resort to external asset managers for the investment of approximately Sfr 4 billion (global bonds and mortgage-backed securities). Our entire investment activity is systematically monitored by risk specialists. In 2001, a yield of 5.2% was achieved on foreign exchange reserves. The average yield in the past four years was 6.3%. A comparison with similar investments – for example, with the average yield on Swiss investment trusts and investment funds for foreign currency bonds – shows that this is a remarkable result. Gold holdings (Sfr 21 billion) and Swiss franc assets (Sfr 5 billion in securities, Sfr 16 billion in repos) also contribute to the earnings from monetary assets. The overall yield is largely determined by gold price and exchange rate fluctuations, while interest rate and credit risks play a lesser role. In the past year, overall aggregate income on monetary assets amounted to approximately 4.5%. Other than in earlier years, the price of gold contributed to a positive yield. Still, the gold price is subject to strong fluctuations and its development is difficult to foresee. Moreover, as in the past, unfavourable currency movements are to be expected. These influences were clearly at work during the past year. The appreciation of the Swiss franc has had a noticeable adverse effect on yields. In the first quarter, the soaring gold price led to a yield of approximately 3% on monetary assets. In the second quarter, considerable losses resulted on the currencies; these losses have already cancelled out a part of the positive overall yield from the first quarter. This illustrates the strong yield fluctuations to which our assets are exposed. With the current composition of monetary assets, average returns of close to 3% per annum are to be expected in the long term, however accompanied by high annual fluctuations. These are liable to result in a negative overall yield in about three out of ten years. Due to this fluctuation risk, but mainly because of the currency reserves required for the conduct of monetary policy, the National Bank has to rely on adequate provisions. Part of the earnings are to be allocated to provisions in order to enable these to grow in step with the Swiss economy. The remainder is available for distribution to the Confederation and the cantons. Currently, the provisions are well funded. Due in part to the high yields on foreign exchange reserves in the last few years, provisions exceeded the level aimed at by around Sfr 13 billion at the end of 2001. This cushion makes it possible to increase the distribution to the Confederation and the cantons over the next eleven years as agreed. With a view to the future, various decisions relating to investment strategy are beginning to take shape, aside from the transfer of the free assets. Based on the consultation procedure it is becoming clear that the revision of the National Bank Law will again extend the leeway for investment. Particular attention is devoted to corporate bonds, a significant investment segment. Moreover, it must be examined whether and to what extent equities can improve the risk/return features of monetary assets in a meaningful way. In addition, the allocation of monetary assets to the various investment sectors must be optimised on an ongoing basis. Such questions are studied and clarified internally. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 3 Table 1 Structure of the SNB's assets (May 2002, in CHF billions) Monetary assets   Foreign exchange reserves 41  Reserve position in the IMF 3  Gold holdings 21  Swiss franc securities 5  Claims from repo transactions (net) 16 Total monetary assets 86 Free assets   Gold holdings 13  Investments 8 Total 107   Graph 1  
 BIS Review 39/2002 1 Willem F Duisenberg: The euro as a catalyst for integration and competition in EMU Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 30th Economics Conference "Competition of Regions and Integration in EMU", Vienna, 13 June 2002.  *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Here in Vienna, exactly one hundred years ago, Joseph Schumpeter embarked upon his university studies at the School of Law and Political Science. He was a promising young student with ambitions in academics, politics and business. Already, at the age of 22, he had published his first works and would soon become one of the youngest holders of a doctorate, the youngest private teacher and the youngest professor in Austria.  Joseph Schumpeter has become known as one of the foremost representatives of the famous Austrian School of Economics. He has influenced economic thought, in particular, by introducing innovation as a source of economic dynamics. According to Schumpeter, economic development was a dynamic process, a disturbance of the economic status quo. The real challenge for capitalism, therefore, was to create and destroy economic structures in a process he called "creative destruction" This, he maintained, was the essence of economic development, a process defined by the implementation by the entrepreneur of new production combinations. I believe that Schumpeter would be very interested in the topic I want to discuss today. My speech is about the euro as a catalyst for integration and competition in EMU, or, in other words, about economic growth and adjustment in the euro area. Both high, sustainable economic growth and the ability to adjust smoothly to changes in the economic environment require further economic integration and competition. This, in turn, is closely linked to the process of structural reform, which, to use Schumpeter's words, can be seen as a necessary precondition for a dynamic economic process, a disturbance of the economic status quo. The introduction of the euro acts as a catalyst for this dynamic process of structural change.  In my speech today I will address the following topics. I will first talk about the link between European integration and the euro, and then argue why an increasingly competitive and dynamic society raises the need for further structural reforms. However, reforms are also important for the smooth functioning of a monetary union, a point I will discuss next. Finally, I will assess the progress that has been made with the structural reforms in the euro area so far and discuss how the single currency has already benefited the euro area's economy, acting – as formulated in the title of my speech – as a catalyst for integration and competition. A single currency for a single market A natural starting point for my topic today is the adoption of the Single Market Programme in 1985, paving the way for the famous four "liberties" established in the European Treaties: the free movement of goods, services, labour and capital.  After the adoption of the Single Market Programme, it became increasingly clear that the potential of the internal market could not be fully exploited while the relatively high transaction costs linked to currency conversion and the uncertainties associated with exchange-rate fluctuations persisted. Indeed, the single currency should be seen as a necessary complement or, in fact, the crowning achievement of the Single Market.  That said, we have not reached the end of the development of the Single Market. Instead, I see the euro as facilitating further economic integration. For example, countries with the same currency tend to trade more with each other than they would with countries with different currencies. In addition, a single currency fosters the formation of a single financial system. By increasing price transparency, reducing transaction costs and fostering competition, the euro acts as a powerful catalyst to the economic integration process in the euro area. Last, but not least, our common currency is also a powerful symbol for all citizens of the euro area that integration has reached a new level. As we approach the first summer holiday season since the introduction of euro notes and coins, increasing 
 2 BIS Review 39/2002 numbers of people in Europe will, themselves, experience the practical advantages of a single currency. The impetus the euro gives to economic integration and growth should not only be regarded as an opportunity for Europe, but also as a necessity in a world of innovation and globalisation. Over the last few decades, the world economy has become ever more integrated. We have witnessed a strong expansion of international trade and capital flows and an increase in competition. Behind these changes there are several underlying factors. Among the most important is rapid technological progress, leading to dramatic reductions in transportation costs and an unprecedented increase in information processing capabilities. Policy measures have also supported the globalisation trend, with the loosening of restrictions to trade and the liberalisation of capital movements. This panorama shows that we live in a dynamic and competitive world, where the ability to innovate and adjust to changing economic circumstances has become even more important than before. In this respect, Schumpeter's thoughts haven't lost anything of their relevance. On the contrary; in a dynamic, ever-changing economic environment, entrepreneurs have to be all the more innovative and sensitive to new opportunities. The regulatory framework formed by the laws, rules and regulations that influence economic behaviour, should thus provide the right incentives for innovation, dynamism and economic growth. The EU Heads of State and Government have recognised that, in order to improve the functioning of the Single Market and to enhance the economic growth potential of the EU, its regulatory framework has to be modernised and reforms are needed. Somewhat more than two years ago, the Lisbon European Council formulated a strategic goal for this decade, namely "to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world". The Lisbon strategy established a comprehensive reform agenda which aims to overcome existing fragmentation and inefficiencies in many different areas. This has provided a major political impetus for further progress in the field of structural reform that I very much welcome. The European Council aims to increase the potential GDP growth rate to around 3% per year, an objective which can only be achieved if steady progress on a broad range of reforms is made. Whether or not this objective is met hinges partly on the capacity to improve mobilisation of available labour resources. In this regard, one of the explicit objectives set at the Lisbon summit is to raise the EU-wide employment rate to 70% of the working age population by 2010.  In order to achieve the Lisbon objective, it is crucial that progress is systematically controlled and evaluated. In this context, the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for the Member States and the Community play a particularly important role. This is the overall framework for the co-ordination of economic policies, in particular, those related to fiscal and structural policies. In order to fulfil this role, the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines have, in recent years, been enhanced in several ways. They have become more operational through the use of more concrete recommendations in both the general and country-specific parts. Moreover, within the overall process of policy co-ordination, increased emphasis is being placed on implementation. To this end, the European Commission has introduced a comprehensive implementation report that assesses the extent to which EU Member States have followed the policy recommendations. I fully support these changes. As you know, the most recent Spring meeting of the European Council, the second "follow-up" meeting to Lisbon, took place in Barcelona earlier this year. The conclusions of the Barcelona Summit demonstrate that a strong political will and thorough preparation of the technical details are needed if the European Union is to meet the ambitious economic, social and environmental objectives that it set for itself at the Lisbon Summit. The successful introduction of the single currency is the best proof that these ingredients are indispensable. The main point now is that the relevant Council formations, the European Parliament and the Member States take the necessary steps to rigorously implement the structural reform agenda agreed in Lisbon and confirmed in Barcelona.  Why are structural reforms important? Structural policies cover a wide range of areas and instruments. Among the most commonly discussed are microeconomic regulations implemented in product, labour and financial markets. Among other things, such regulations encompass competition policies, entry barriers, tax and benefit systems, state aid, employment protection rules, education and training, as well as incentives given to research and development. They are important for two main reasons since they enhance the economic growth 
 BIS Review 39/2002 3 potential and facilitate the adjustment to economic change. Let me say a few more words on these two reasons. First, structural policies are just one of many factors determining the rate at which the economy can grow, although there are many other factors which influence the rate of economic growth. Some factors, such as changes in demand conditions, have temporary effects on economic growth, whereas others, such as the rate of growth of the working age population and capital stock, as well as the increase in productivity, have long-lasting effects. It is this latter type of factor, however, that determines the potential growth rate of an economy. These components, in particular the growth of employment and productivity, can be influenced by structural policies. Changes to tax and benefit systems, for example, can help to mobilise the unused labour potential in the economy by making it financially more attractive to accept a job. This could lead to a better use of the supply side potential of the economy. The third factor, productivity growth, can be influenced in several ways: by increasing competition, facilitating investment, encouraging enterprise and innovation and improving the workforce's skills. Structural policies have particular importance for monetary policy. They allow the economy to grow at a higher rate, on a sustained basis, without creating inflationary pressures. However, structural reforms are not only important for economic growth, they also increase adaptability to economic shocks. Adaptability concerns the economy's ability to adapt and respond to changing economic conditions. It is the ability to shift resources from areas in recession to booming areas, something which is key to the successful functioning of a monetary union. Under EMU, member countries are unable to use country-specific monetary and exchange rate policies to address country-specific shocks. The adjustment to such economic fluctuations will therefore have to take place through other adjustment mechanisms. Without price and wage flexibility and mobility of production factors, economic shocks would lead to lower economic growth and higher unemployment. Let me say a few more words on the important role of these adjustment mechanisms in a monetary union.  The theory of optimal currency areas Ever since the idea of EMU was launched, a discussion has ensued as to whether the whole or part of Europe would be an optimal currency area. The optimal currency area theory defines a set of mechanisms that might be set in motion when a participating country or region, in a monetary union, is hit by an asymmetric shock. First, adjustment to the shock might come from domestic price or wage changes, thereby altering the real exchange rate without changing the nominal exchange rate. Secondly, migration of production factors might act as an adjustment channel. These flows of labour and capital are facilitated by a high degree of economic and financial integration of the countries participating in the union.  In addition to this, the theory of optimal currency areas has also something to say on the similarity of shocks affecting countries or regions in a monetary union. In this respect, the degree of trade and financial integration are often considered. Trade and financial integration may tend to lead to more similar economic developments in the respective countries or regions in a monetary union, reducing the likelihood of asymmetric shocks and increasing the economies' abilities to adjust to these shocks.  So far the theory, let me now move on to the practice. I will now focus on two adjustment mechanisms: price-wage flexibility and factor mobility. A host of empirical studies on these mechanisms has been undertaken for the euro area. How well does the euro area measure up against these two criteria?  Price and wage flexibility There is broad agreement that price flexibility is low across euro area countries in comparison with the United States. In the euro area, price flexibility for goods and services is hampered by trade barriers, continuing state aid to several sectors and, more generally, a lack of competition in sectors that have been dominated by monopolies or state owned enterprises. Low wage flexibility is also an important factor behind the lack of price flexibility in the euro area. Many studies indicate that in comparison with the United States, real wages are relatively inflexible in Europe. More specifically, I mean that the downward responsiveness of real wages to the level of unemployment is more limited in Europe than in the US. There are, however, notable differences across countries in the euro area.  Let me also mention the potential links between the flexibility of product and labour markets. Reforms in one area are likely to have effects across markets. For example, reforms leading to more flexible 
 4 BIS Review 39/2002 product markets might improve the performance of the labour market. If regulations on setting up a business are loosened, employment creation is also likely to increase. Similarly, labour market reforms might also have an impact on product markets. For example, labour market reforms may improve the extent to which differences in skills or productivity are reflected in wage differentials, which could affect prices. More generally, more flexible labour markets allow companies to adjust to economic changes with greater ease. Factor mobility Let me now turn to the second adjustment mechanism, the mobility of factors of production. Changes in price levels, in product and labour markets, can also be triggered by a migration of factors of production. If a country or region is affected by a negative output shock and markets do not clear instantaneously, unemployment will rise. Workers will, therefore, tend to migrate to other regions. The same might be true for capital: if a negative output shock made capital obsolete and reduced profitability, investors would tend to move their funds to other regions. This adjustment mechanism has two limitations. First, the migration of labour and capital involves transaction costs. Moreover, it is doubtful whether this mechanism is very efficient when a country or region is hit by a temporary shock. Therefore, factor mobility seems a suitable adjustment mechanism only in case of a permanent shock and if prices or wages are rigid.  Several studies have found that labour mobility within the United States is two to three times higher than in Europe. This result is confirmed by the persistence of regional unemployment differences in Europe.  Overall, it can be concluded from empirical studies that the degree of wage-price flexibility and factor mobility is relatively limited in the euro area. The lack of adjustment mechanisms in the euro area should, however, not be exaggerated. Euro area countries are highly integrated both in terms of trade and financially. As I have just explained, a high degree of trade and financial integration may lead to more similar economic developments across euro area countries.  In addition, the optimal currency area properties are likely to evolve over time. The irrevocable fixing of exchange rates and the introduction of the single currency may lead to a convergence in the production and export structures of economies in the euro area, thereby reducing the risk of future asymmetric shocks. This argument is often referred to as the "endogeneity" of the optimal currency area hypothesis. Hence, according to the endogeneity literature, the euro area could gradually become more of an optimal currency area, after the introduction of the euro. More generally, it has to be borne in mind that all empirical studies on whether the countries that have entered the euro area constitute an optimal currency area are based on historical data. These data refer to regimes with flexible or fixed-but-adjustable exchange rates. In short, the regime shift to a monetary union may have an impact on economic structures and may alter some of the conclusions drawn on the basis of these historical data.  Progress made with structural reforms in the euro area Some people say that central bankers are professional sceptics whose job it is to point to economic risks and weaknesses. Having listened to me so far, I can imagine that you may find some degree of truth in this. Let me tell you, however, that the euro area has recently seen many changes and innovations that go in the right direction. And I am pleased to be able to tell you that many of these changes are directly, or indirectly, related to the euro. Let us have a closer look at three areas of change: financial markets, product markets and labour markets. Financial markets The first area I want to discuss are financial markets. There is ample evidence that financial markets have some way to go before national demarcation lines will effectively disappear. Henceforth, there is still a significant potential for further financial market integration in the euro area. Financial market integration has been driven by global developments, such as advances in information technology, falling communication costs and standardisation of products. It has also been supported by European Commission initiatives.  A main policy initiative that has contributed to financial market integration is the Financial Services Action Plan. EU Heads of State and Government have agreed to implement the Financial Services 
 BIS Review 39/2002 5 Action Plan by 2005, at the latest, and to achieve fully integrated risk-capital and securities markets by 2003. The groundwork for the latter was prepared by a Committee of Wise Men called the Lamfalussy Group. On wholesale markets, measures to facilitate raising capital on an EU-wide basis, through common rules concerning prospectuses, is targeted for adoption in 2002. In addition, legislative proposals on financial statements for listed companies and a common legal framework for a single market for securities and derivatives are close to being adopted. We, at the ECB, fully support these initiatives. I would like to stress, however, that the successful and timely implementation of the Financial Services Action Plan will be very difficult without the continuing commitment of the Member States.  The integration of financial markets would not only facilitate cross-border capital flows towards their most productive uses, but it could also serve as a catalyst for structural reform in other markets. For example, the impact of product market reforms, aimed at easing the restrictions on creating a business, are likely to be reinforced if a well-functioning risk capital market, which efficiently channels the necessary funds from investors to beginning entrepreneurs, is in place. The euro has made a spectacular impact on financial markets in the euro area. Concrete examples of its impact are the integration of the money market, the explosive growth of the euro-denominated corporate debt market and a wave of consolidation among intermediaries and exchanges. These are very fundamental changes. The surge of euro-denominated corporate debt, for example, has helped to finance the wave of mergers and acquisitions in the European corporate sector and shows how a larger and deeper single financial market can help to strengthen Europe's competitiveness.  Product markets Let me now turn to product markets. The pace of liberalisation has differed considerably across countries and sectors in the euro area, leaving ample room for further reforms. Whereas the integration of goods markets is relatively advanced, shortcomings still exist with regard to the integration of service industries. Most of the barriers to integration in the service sector appear to be due to national regulations, for example administrative procedures for setting up subsidiaries in other euro area countries. Regulatory barriers along these lines reduce competition in services, thus keeping prices above the level that would be expected in a fully integrated market. More progress has been made with regard to the integration of goods markets and regulatory reforms in network industries. Here too, positive macroeconomic effects can be discerned. Owing to an increased number of competitors, prices in some network industries, such telecommunications, have started to decline, in particular in those industries and countries which liberalised earlier. The initiatives in the telecommunication sector show how reforms that succeed in increasing competition in previously sheltered sectors considerably enhance productivity and lower prices. As network industries provide inputs to the rest of the economy, this may also increase the rate at which the economy can grow without creating inflationary pressure. Nevertheless, an important unfinished agenda remains to be tackled in almost all network industries. In order to reap the full economic benefits, it is important that reforms in network industries are accompanied by an appropriate regulatory framework which ensures non-discriminatory access to the bottleneck infrastructure and more generally, a "level playing field" for all market participants. The quality of the regulatory framework has a considerable impact on the extent to which potential price falls due to structural reforms in network industries will be achieved. Another instrument available to reduce distortions to competition is state aid policy. State aid subsidies weaken the incentives for companies to improve their efficiency, enabling the less efficient to survive at the expense of the more efficient. Although there are still substantial differences between euro area countries, the overall trend is towards a reduction in state aid levels. Another positive development is that the transparency of state aid policies has improved as a result of the publication of a new state aid register and a state aid scoreboard by the European Commission. The impact of the euro on these processes, which has led to more competition, cannot be overestimated and goes far beyond the mere abolition of intra-European exchange rates and the introduction of common notes and coins. The single currency opens up the euro area product markets further and will be a major impetus to competition and integration by increasing the transparency of prices across borders. Investment will also benefit as euro area companies no longer have to insure against exchange rate movements within the euro area and there are indeed indications that direct investment into the euro area has strongly increased since the start of EMU. Overall, the euro will give new impetus to the initiatives taken in the 1980s to establish a truly integrated internal market. 
 6 BIS Review 39/2002 Labour markets Progress with labour market reforms has become evident from the increase in employment-intensive growth in the euro area. It is very interesting to note that job creation has held up reasonably well over recent years. During the first three years of EMU, some 6 million jobs have been created in the euro area versus 3.5 million in the US. The unemployment rate in the euro area has declined from almost 11% in 1997 to slightly more than 8% in 2001 (which is still too high). On the supply side, the employment rate, particularly in the case of women, has increased considerably, along with the proportion of part-time jobs and temporary contracts in total employment. Euro area average participation rates are, nevertheless, still below those of the US or the Scandinavian countries.  The explanations for this job-rich growth lie in structural changes in the labour market and wage moderation. Government policies have generally improved labour market performance in euro area countries. A number of countries have lowered marginal tax rates in order to make their tax systems more employment-friendly. Many countries have targeted tax cuts at the lower end of the labour market in particular. These measures have contributed to a higher demand for low-skilled workers. Nevertheless, marginal tax rates still remain high in some countries. Some progress has also been made with the introduction of part-time or more flexible working contracts and practices.  In addition to government policies, there are signs of a gradual change in labour market behaviour related to the wage formation process. Discipline seems to have improved in that field over the past decade. Such a change, resulting from lower inflation expectations, is important. Furthermore, there seems to be a growing awareness that, in a single currency environment, the price increases and loss of competitiveness generated by excessive wage settlements cannot be compensated by an exchange rate depreciation and may directly result in a loss of jobs.  Looking ahead, it is crucial that social partners continue to adhere to moderate wage developments, since this is one of the prerequisites in fostering employment and maintaining a favourable outlook for price stability in the medium term. In this respect, there is some cause for concern with regard to ongoing wage negotiations. The wage formation process also seems to have undergone changes. In a majority of euro area countries, there are signs of a gradual trend towards more decentralised bargaining and more flexibility at lower bargaining levels. This seems to happen, mostly informally, through clauses that allow firms to deviate from the sectoral or central wage agreements according to the financial situation of the firm or sector. This is encouraging. The outcomes of wage bargaining should allow not only for appropriate wage developments in the overall economy, but also for adequate wage differentiation across sectors, regions and firms. This will make it easier to account for local conditions, such as unemployment, productivity or profitability differentials across sectors, regions and firms. In short, labour market reforms have, in general, been going in the right direction in recent years and the benefits of these positive developments are clear. However, progress has been rather uneven across countries and areas. In many areas important reforms have not yet got off the ground. For instance, few changes have been made regarding employment protection policies in euro area countries, which remain amongst the strictest in the industrial countries. Furthermore, in almost all euro area countries, reforms targeting unemployment benefit systems have only made slow progress. At the same time, significant mismatches between labour demand and supply are still present along a number of dimensions. All this shows that large structural problems remain and need to be solved.  What needs to be done to speed up labour market reforms? This is a difficult question, not least because the euro area labour markets are still very heterogeneous. Each country should identify the root causes of its labour market deficiencies and implement appropriate corrective measures. However, there are some areas of reform that apply to many, if not all, euro area countries. Improved job mediation, education and training, to mention just a few examples, all help towards making the matching process more efficient. In addition, euro area countries need to ensure that tax and benefit systems make work pay. Reforms to tax and benefit systems should increase work incentives, profitability and competitiveness and consequently labour supply and demand. At the same time, it is important to ensure that tax-benefit reforms are undertaken without jeopardising the long-term sustainability of public finances. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 7 Conclusion Ladies and Gentlemen. Joseph Schumpeter taught us that economic development consists of the continuous introduction of new combinations of products and means of production. He taught us that this process involves the incessant mutation of the economic structure from within, destroying the old and creating a new. In today's dynamic, ever-changing economic environment, entrepreneurs have to be all the more innovative and sensitive to new opportunities. The regulatory framework has to be designed in such a way that it allows this to happen by providing the right incentives for innovation, dynamism and economic growth. Today's dynamic society also requires an increased ability of markets to adjust smoothly to changing economic circumstances. This is all the more true of a monetary union, where member countries are no longer able to use country-specific monetary and exchange rate policies to address country-specific shocks. In such an environment, other adjustment mechanisms are needed such as price and wage flexibility and factor mobility. Structural reforms can contribute to a better functioning of these adjustment mechanisms by fostering integration and competition. The relationship between integration, competition and the single currency works in both directions. The euro itself has already contributed to more integration and competition and will continue to do so in the future. Its impact is most clearly visible in financial markets, where a single money market has been created and a deep, liquid bond market has encouraged a surge in debt issuance by the corporate sector. In product markets, the euro has an important impact on the cross-border transparency of prices, acting as a catalyst for trade. Finally, with regard to labour markets, the wage formation process shows signs of increased flexibility and labour market reforms are starting to go in the right direction. Overall, the single currency contributes forcefully to more integration and competition, acting as a powerful driver for the further enhancement of the Single Market and creating an environment which – I am sure – Schumpeter would have enjoyed.  Thank you very much for your attention. 
 BIS Review 38/2002 1 Tony Latter: Hong Kong's currency board today - the unexpected challenge of deflation Speech by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the conference on "Alternative exchange rate regimes in the globalised world", organised by Eesti Pank to mark ten years of the currency board in Estonia, Tallinn, 11 June 2002. *      *      * The conquest of inflation Those of us here today who once studied economics almost certainly did so in a period of at least mild, if not quite rapid inflation. And those of us who are central bankers have for the majority of our working lives been struggling to cope with inflation. So it's hardly surprising that back in 1983, when the Hong Kong authorities pegged the Hong Kong dollar to the United States dollar, we didn't seriously contemplate any deflationary scenario. The US inflation rate in the early 1980s was averaging some 4% pa and, not possessing any special forecasting capability in this field, we must have reckoned that it would remain near that figure. In addition, the textbooks would have told us that structural and developmental factors would tend to make Hong Kong's inflation rate somewhat faster than that of the US - as indeed it was for the ensuing fourteen years. Neither a significantly lower rate of US inflation nor a situation where Hong Kong's rate was significantly below the US rate would have been considered at all likely. Yet Hong Kong now finds itself with a consumer price level that is 12% below the peak of four years ago, and with a GDP deflator some 15% below its peak and 22% lower relative to that of the US than it was four years ago. What is the explanation, and can one live with this? There is general consensus, supported by both recent IMF analysis and research conducted within the HKMA, that Hong Kong's deflation is predominantly cyclical. I shall return to Hong Kong in a minute, but let me first dwell for a moment on the global slowdown in inflation. Over the past four years the rate of consumer price inflation has averaged 2.5% in the USA, only 1.7% in Euroland, minus 0.3% in Japan, and minus 0.3% in Mainland China. In six other economies of east and south-east Asia taken together, the inflation rate fell to 2.7% on average in these four years as against 4.4% in the preceding four.1 This widespread slowdown in inflation, and in some cases the emergence of deflation, is not just a cyclical phenomenon. There are, I believe, some more fundamental institutional and structural factors which have been contributing. Underlying forces a. Successful central banks  First of these is the commitment of monetary authorities to combatting inflation and their evident success in doing so (or even over-achievement in some instances). With so many of them represented here today, I do not need to elaborate further. b.  The supply side - history repeats itself  Second is the argument that the world is merely reverting to its more natural historical state of declining price levels, following the interruption of the second world war and ensuing decades.2 The current deflationary tendency is, on this view, being driven not only by the IT revolution but also by the evolution of China and some other emerging economies as a huge competitive and price-reducing force in world markets, in a manner reminiscent of the productivity surge and market opening which                                                       1  Average for Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand, weighted by nominal GDP. Indonesia is excluded because of its considerable institutional and political instability in the period - it suffered particularly intense inflation in 1998-99. 2  I am grateful to Eisuke Sakakibara for a lucid exposition of this point in an address last month to the Hong Kong Foreign Exchange and Market Practices Committee. The 69th Annual Report of the Bank for International Settlements (pages 77-81) provides an interesting snapshot of the topic, as seen three years ago. 
 2 BIS Review 38/2002 produced falling price levels in other parts of the globe in the closing decades of the nineteenth century. Allow me to digress for a moment into this history. As illustrated in the accompanying charts, in the thirty years 1865-95 consumer prices are estimated to have fallen by 48% in the United States and 27% in the United Kingdom - average compound rates of decline of about 2% and 1% respectively.3 This is generally regarded as having been a supply-side-driven phenomenon arising from rapid productivity growth alongside abundant labour supply, aided by and the opening-up of new markets globally. Real GDP growth averaged 5-6% (boosted by immigration) in the USA and 1?% in the UK in that period. Subsequently, modest inflation took over, but inflation did not reach a serious scale until the first world war.4 The inter-war years were rather different from the late nineteenth century episode. There was a mixture of deflation and inflation - but with the former being more the result of monetary policy mistakes, such as those associated with the Great Depression, than of supply-side forces such as were so plainly evident half a century earlier. Inflation did not really become re-established on a significant scale until the second world war, after which it persisted for most of the remainder of the twentieth century. Most recently, the potential problems posed by deflation, particularly in a financially developed world where debt and balance sheets interact, have become apparent, most notably perhaps in Japan. All in all, there is perhaps a mixed message from these historical examples. It may be possible to live comfortably with a modest pace of deflation, especially if it reflects benign supply-side influences. Nevertheless, monetary policy might usefully be engaged to avert it. c.  Globalisation and the pervasiveness of the law of one price  Returning to the factors behind current price trends, there is one aspect of globalisation which may be especially relevant. This is the rapid expansion of the range of globally traded output (in contrast to efficiency gains within some pre-defined range), with resultant implications for prices. In the past it was common to observe more rapid domestic inflation in economies enjoying faster productivity growth, as wages rose and the prices of non-tradables accelerated, dragging up the consumer price index. This mechanism, based on an assumed clear analytic distinction between price behaviour of tradables and non-tradables, may still be at work, but surely it is not as powerful as it used to be. The range of tradables is expanding relative to that of non-tradables. While it has long been acknowledged that progressively more goods are becoming tradable because of, for example, advances in freight transportation, the revolution in respect of services may now be more significant. Thus, many services which were in the past produced only in the country where they were consumed can nowadays be out-sourced offshore or accessed from somewhere else in the world at the click of a mouse - back-office processing, multi-functional call-centre services, legal advice, logistics management, design services for everything from clothes to buildings, and even certain forms of medical consultation or education, to name but a few. Moreover, buyers of services increasingly elect to travel elsewhere to consume them. Thus the international price elasticity of a wedding ceremony, a game of golf, hospital or health spa treatment, or conference facilities is ever rising. Soon there will remain only very few location-specific activities - heritage tourism perhaps, but even that is not immune from the pressure of the law of one price, if one considers the competing heritage sites around the world. I see some evidence in Hong Kong of the impact of this process of more broad-based globalisation, and I am sure it is happening elsewhere too. Liberalisation of trade policies and the achievements of the WTO will also have contributed. Thus, deflation is being driven in part by the expansion and intensification of competition across an ever larger range of sectors and countries. This may explain why some price surprises on the macro-policy front in the recent past have been on the downside, but if central banks can digest this ingredient there is no reason why they should be more than temporarily knocked off course by it.                                                       3  For the UK, the peak-to-trough comparison would be 1873-95, during which the average compound deflation rate was 1.7% pa. 4  My thanks to HKMA colleagues Daryl Ho and Lu Dai for researching the historical data. 
 BIS Review 38/2002 3 Hong Kong In Hong Kong, other contributors to deflation over the past few years have been the general strength of the US dollar and the process of price equalisation across the border with the Mainland, although both the IMF and we in the HKMA have found that this latter effect is rather weaker overall than a few well publicised examples might lead one to believe.5 Hong Kong's deflation, of some 12% in CPI terms over four years, seems, however, to be considerably more than could be accounted for by the above list of essentially non-cyclical factors. We therefore infer that much of it has been cyclical. To what extent has the currency board been responsible for this cycle? About half of the fall in our CPI can be attributed to a collapse of property prices, which feed through both directly and indirectly to the CPI. This in turn was largely the result of the bursting of a previous asset price bubble. This is the part of our deflation which may appear most obviously to be linked to domestic monetary conditions rather than to any global cyclical factors. However, although it is clear that monetary conditions in Hong Kong were, as a consequence of being tied to those in the US through the currency board mechanism, looser during the mid-1990s than one might ideally have wished, and although empirical research suggests that there is a relationship between the property cycle and interest rates, this relationship is not found to be a particularly robust or powerful one. Moreover, there were other factors contributing to the developing property price bubble in the mid-1990s, such as the strong overall performance of the economy, linked to rapid development in Mainland China, some euphoria ahead of the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997, demographics, and the impact of local land release and public housing policies.6 The cessation or reversal of such influences helps explain the subsequent downturn. All in all, therefore, there is quite a range of factors which have come together to produce deflation in Hong Kong. There would be little point in asking precisely how much of deflation can be blamed on the currency peg since, before answering, one would need to specify what sort of monetary policy the authorities would have pursued instead of a currency board. In the absence of a liquidity trap (possibly a significant proviso in this age), it should be possible to choose a policy which could succeed in the narrow objective of eliminating deflation, at whatever cost or benefit in terms of other policy objectives. But the currency board regime rules out such a choice, and in this sense it cannot escape from being ascribed some significance in the explanation of Hong Kong's price deflation. Does price deflation matter? In addressing this question, some attention tends to focus on the fact that negative inflation may in certain circumstances imply undesirably high real rates, and that, in particular, it rules out negative real interest rates (at least when measured simplistically by adjusting nominal rates for immediate past price movements), which may be deemed appropriate during a period of deflation. But it is not obvious that real rates of themselves have much of an influence on the intertemporal consumption decision - for example, there is little evidence of people having abstained from purchasing electronic goods over the past several decades despite fairly certain knowledge that prices would be lower tomorrow, and there is a limit to the extent that one can delay buying food or clothing. And, as regards the investment spending, it is not the real interest rate calculated by reference to the CPI which is relevant, but the user cost - the nominal interest rate relative to the expected future net yield from the asset in question, adjusted for depreciation. Prices of different asset classes adjust according to market forces and the user-cost arithmetic, which may not be particularly sensitive to changes in the broader price level per se. In this light, it is at least questionable whether mild overall deflation would be a material impediment to investment decisions. What might be more significant than impact of deflation via the interest rate is the effect of the deflationary process on real incomes and profits. If prices are driven down by competitive forces, profits are squeezed, which may impact adversely on future investment. It may serve as a harsh signal of the need to restructure or diversify. At the same time, if nominal wages remain unchanged, workers will have a gain in real income. We witnessed this in Hong Kong, but it did little to sustain consumption                                                       5  See Philip Schellekens, "Deflation in Hong Kong SAR", IMF Working Paper, forthcoming; and Jiming Ha and Kelvin Fan, "Price convergence between Hong Kong and the Mainland", HKMA Research Memorandum, forthcoming. 6 For a full analysis see Wensheng Peng, "What drives property prices in Hong Kong?", HKMA Research Memorandum, forthcoming. 
 4 BIS Review 38/2002 because of caution over job security. After a while, both nominal pay began to adjust downwards and unemployment began to rise. Although it may still be true that many of those in work are better off (having suffered reductions in pay of less than the amount of price deflation over the four year period), many others have lost their jobs or have had to settle for lower-paid positions. Meanwhile, the reduction in real profits corresponding to the buoyancy of real wages may have dampened investment spending, although supporting empirical evidence is scarce. Overall it has, in practice, proved difficult to identify what impact deflation of goods and services prices, of itself, may have had on activity. In general, however, because the degree of downward wage flexibility in Hong Kong is probably greater than elsewhere, the economy is believed to be better able than others to cope with this type of deflationary pressure and to avoid severe distributional disequilibria. Deflation of asset prices is a rather different issue. We have certainly experienced some negative wealth effects, particularly on household expenditure, as a result of the sharp drop in property prices. One factor enabling Hong Kong to live with deflation perhaps better than some other economies is the resilience of the banking system and its ability to cope with debt deflation. A long tradition of fairly conservative prudential oversight of the banks has left them strong enough to weather the recession. Although we have demonstrated that we can live with deflation, a modest positive rate of inflation might nevertheless be preferred to our current modest negative rate. And it would certainly be desirable to avoid gyrations of property prices of the sort which have brought such a sharp deflation there in recent years. However, we do not regard the exchange rate as a viable instrument for trying to dispel deflation. We would not consider it worthwhile sacrificing our long track record of disciplined monetary stability for that purpose. Conclusion - lessons from the 1990s Allow me to set my concluding remarks in the contest of the specific question posed for this panel, namely "Fix versus float - what have we learned from the 1990s?" My answer falls into two parts. First, the 1990s served to confirm what had already become apparent from our experience with a currency board in the 1980s, namely that a currency board can be a viable and, arguably, optimal regime for certain types of economy, but not all. The necessary conditions for success include sufficiently flexible costs and prices, a sound banking system, adequate fiscal discipline and the requisite foreign exchange reserves to back the monetary base, preferably free of other encumbrance. Not all these desiderata were satisfied in one instance of a 1990s' currency board, which has since passed into history. The second lesson concerns the novel feature to emerge late in the 1990s and persist through to the current decade - namely deflation. Society globally has been re-learning how to live with this, after a gap of a lifetime. It seems perfectly possible to live with modest deflation, as our ancestors did, once you have adapted to it. We are reasonably confident that the US economy, to whose monetary stance we in Hong Kong are tied, will not develop in such a way as to make our problem - if that is indeed what it is - any worse. While a floating regime plainly provides greater flexibility to attempt to influence the price level (although such attempts may not always succeed), Hong Kong sees no reason to abandon its monetary regime, which has served the economy well for almost twenty years.  
 BIS Review 38/2002 5     Source: International historical statistics: Europe 1750-1993 / B. R. Mitchell, London: Macmillan Reference; New York, N.Y.: Stockton Press, 1998  
 BIS Review 38/2002 1 Nout Wellink: The role of national central banks within the European system of central banks- the example of De Nederlandsche Bank Introduction by Dr Nout Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, to the paper ‘The Role of National Central Banks within the European System of Central Banks: The Example of De Nederlandsche Bank’, Oesterreichische Nationalbank Conference ‘Competition of Regions and Integration in EMU’, Vienna, 13-14 June 2002  *      *      * Introduction I would first like to thank the Oesterreichische Nationalbank for inviting me to this conference and take up the challenge of discussing the role of national central banks in Europe. Clearly, this role underwent a fascinating metamorphosis with the introduction of the single currency. Suddenly, a strong, European dimension was added to these institutions that were traditionally largely confined to national boundaries.  Consequently, the national central bank in Europe is of a peculiar sort and has a double identity. On the one hand, it is deeply rooted in national tradition and sovereignty, which reflects specific national tasks and responsibilities. On the other hand, it is part of a system of central banks responsible for a fully supranationalised monetary policy and related, common tasks.  Let me now briefly outline my paper on the role of national central banks in Europe. First, I will shortly discuss the general framework of the European System of Central Banks. Subsequently, I will touch on the System tasks and related national responsibilities. Here, I will specifically spend some time on financial stability and supervision. Clearly, this policy area has seen some major developments recently, both on the national and European level.  The European System of Central Banks What exactly is the European System of Central Banks? What explains its unique institutional and operational set-up? These are crucial questions in analysing the role of national central banks or, for that matter, understanding monetary union in general. Nevertheless, the questions are seldom asked, let alone answered. Since the Second World War, European integration has been a co-operative effort in which common objectives in principle override the size and power of the individual participants. The European System of Central Banks is a both a product and a reflection of this European Community of Member States. Hence, the fundamental notion underlying the System is a joint and equal responsibility to carry out the tasks assigned by the Treaty. In this set-up, the ECB operates as the legal entity that links the spokes of the system and thus makes the joint responsibility for tasks possible. The Governing Council is the highest decision-making body of the ECB, consisting of executive board members and governors of the national central banks. Apart from the fundamental notion of joint responsibility, two guiding principles of the Treaty determine the operational side of the System. First, subsidiarity prescribes that the responsibilities lie at the lowest possible level. In the context of the European Community, this principle respects national sovereignty and reflects the heterogeneity of its Member States. Second, the Treaty prescribes an efficient allocation of resources. In other words, the System should be effective at the least cost. In practice, there may be trade-offs between the principles of subsidiarity and efficiency, but gross inefficiencies should, of course, be avoided.  Tasks of the European System of Central Banks Now, with this basic System framework in mind, let me turn to the actual tasks of the national central bank that follow from the System. In the paper, I cover the tasks of deciding on and executing monetary policy, foreign reserve management, the collection and production of statistics, external relations, and the operational aspects of payment systems and banknotes. Given time constraints, I will limit myself to the conduct of monetary policy. 
 2 BIS Review 38/2002 The fundamental notion of joint responsibilities adds value in the sense that it offers checks and balances in the monetary policy process. For example, the participation of NCB-governors increases accountability and the quality of decision-making. Indeed, given their joint responsibility for price stability, all national central banks have not only the right, but also the obligation, to fully prepare their governor in his or her capacity as an ECB-Council member.  Although fundamental to the System, the notion of joint responsibility allows for institutional flexibility when it comes to the effectiveness of monetary policy – as this clearly lies at the heart of monetary union. Let me first of all emphasise that the present size (18 members) of the Governing Council has never been a stumbling block for effective, and where necessary, rapid decision-making. Nevertheless, there is the perception that, with further EMU-enlargement, the size of the team could hamper the effectiveness of monetary policy.  That is why the Treaty of Nice goes as far as to offer the possibility to restrict the number of votes in the Governing Council on monetary policy. Clearly, on the basis of the fundamental notion on which the System is built, all governors will remain equally involved in future monetary policy decisions. However, they may not all have a vote at the same time. Moreover, the participation of NCB-governors will continue to offer checks and balances and enhance the quality of decision-making. Let me turn to the guiding principle of subsidiarity. Clearly, the principle implies that, to a large extent, the spokes of the System take care of both inputs and outputs. Given the heterogeneity of the euro area, this bottom-up approach to System tasks makes sense. Thus, in dealing with economic, structural, or even linguistic differences and national preferences, the spokes are better positioned in the operation of monetary policy. The same goes for managing payment systems or the collection of statistics – tasks that I will leave aside for the moment. Moreover, governors and their respective central banks bring in specific local knowledge and enhance healthy competition within the System – for example in the area of research.  Of course, as explained, we should be conscious of potential trade-offs between subsidiarity and the guiding principle of efficiency. As such, there is no denying that efficiency gains can be achieved in the production and distribution of banknotes. We need to pursue these possibilities.     Financial stability and banking supervision – national tasks of NCBs This brings me to the central bank tasks that fall outside the exclusive domain of the European System of Central Banks. For the Dutch central bank, these tasks take up around half of its staff and relate to international financial relations, advising the government, financial stability and banking supervision. Under the subsidiarity principle, these responsibilities lie close to the sovereignty of the nation state. Nevertheless, there are clear links and synergies with the tasks of the European System of Central Banks – which, in fact, is an important reason for national central banks having these tasks.  Let me limit myself here to financial stability and supervision – given their importance in recent European discussions. According to the Treaty, the European System of Central Banks as a whole shall contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by competent authorities in the field of prudential supervision and financial stability. The collective responsibility to contribute to these policies follows from the financial stability task of the national central banks. This involvement in financial stability is a natural reflection of other tasks, including monetary policy, payment systems and – to varying extent – banking supervision. Monetary policy relies on financial stability in order to be effective. In addition, in exercising oversight over national payment systems, central banks guard against systemic risks that could be transmitted via these systems. There are therefore clear synergies between financial stability and other tasks. Central to these synergies is the wealth of knowledge on the financial system through the central bank´s active presence in financial markets. Again, the structural differences in financial systems across the euro area mean that the financial stability task is more appropriately located at the national level, although communication and co-ordination across borders are increasingly important.  Whereas all national central banks have a financial stability task, not all have direct competence in the field of prudential supervision. The choice to delegate the supervisory task to the central bank is, of course, based on national circumstances and preferences. However, the important synergies between the financial stability and supervisory tasks should not be ignored. I will come back to this issue when I discuss the supervisory arrangements in the Netherlands. In general, it is important to stress that on both a national and European level the national central banks remain involved in discussions on 
 BIS Review 38/2002 3 prudential supervision. This is essential for the proper execution of their financial stability task and, as such, enables the System to contribute to the smooth conduct of supervisory policies. Recent developments in Europe regarding supervision Recently, the perception of increased cross sector and cross border financial integration has resulted in demands for enhancing the supervisory structure in Europe. I fully subscribe to the ambitions to speed up the regulatory process of supervision in Europe. Moreover, the convergence of supervisory practices would serve a level playing field in European financial markets. Last year, a European committee under chairmanship of Mr Brouwer – director at the Dutch central bank – made several recommendations on this point. As I explained, the involvement of national central banks will continue to offer welcome expertise in assessing the supervisory needs and challenges of financial integration. Concerning topics directly related to financial stability and systemic risks, the national central banks will be at the frontline of European discussions, together with their counterparts from the ministries of finance. However, I would warn against the suggestion of introducing a single European supervisor. It is a misconception to expect that a top down approach to the design of supervision in Europe would promote financial integration. Clearly, that would simply ignore the structural differences on the national level. Indeed, the practice of EMU has shown that a critical mass in integration is needed before institutional convergence (i.e. the introduction of the Euro) can work as a catalyst. Likewise, I would warn against the suggestion that from a financial stability perspective, the number of supervisors should be consolidated. Here again, the principle of subsidiarity allows for the necessary checks and balances, which would be lost if we had one supervisory giant in Europe. Supervisory reforms in the Netherlands This brings me, as promised, to the supervisory arrangements in the Netherlands. In relative terms, the consolidation and integration of the Dutch financial sector are well-advanced. First, our experience shows that the future challenges to cross border supervision may not be merely European, but rather of a global dimension. Moreover, in the face of horizontal integration, the division of supervisory tasks in the Netherlands has recently been streamlined along functional lines. Thus, the organisational links between the Dutch central bank (as banking supervisor) and the insurance supervisor have been strengthened. This allows for an integrated approach to prudential supervision. On the other hand, issues related to the conduct of business and consumer protection have been concentrated in the Financial Markets Authority. These recent reforms in my country subscribe to the basic principles of effectiveness and subsidiarity I referred to earlier. Thus, there was no case in terms of efficiency or effectiveness to reallocate the supervisory task already assigned to the central bank. Here, the synergies with the task of financial oversight have been acknowledged. Moreover, there is the link to our role as lender of last resort. With the supervisor in-house, a quick and effective assessment can be made of the nature of crises – including whether they involve liquidity or solvency difficulties. Consequently, the central bank has good insights into the risks for the financial system at large. Finally, the necessary checks and balances – in particular regarding supervisory autonomy and accountability – were retained.  Conclusion  Let me conclude. It is likely that the European System of Central Banks will be continuously evolving in the interplay between hubs and spokes – exploiting efficiency gains to the extent that the principle of subsidiarity allows. However, the federal shape of the System and the firmly rooted national component of central banks reflect the main driver of European integration – the nation state. In short, that implies that, with anything short of political union, the fundamental principle of collective responsibility of the System remains in place. All central banks have to be fully involved if we are to fulfil this collective responsibility.  Moreover, the unique structure of the European System of Central Banks and the double identity of its participants add important value. The monetary policy process gains from the individual expertise, knowledge and networks of the national central banks that improve the quality of decision-making and offer checks and balances. The System set-up also enables great synergies with the execution of 
 4 BIS Review 38/2002 national central bank tasks. I referred in this respect to the national responsibilities for financial stability, and – in case of the Dutch central bank – the task of supervision.  I am convinced that, based on the fundamental notion of collective responsibility and the guiding principles of subsidiarity and efficiency, the System will continue to generate good joint and individual policies, provide proper checks and balances and even enhance the European integration process in general. As such, the national central bank might even contribute to loosening the roots of its very existence - when the nation state would dissolve into political union. But even then, differences of structure, culture and language will remain, and there will be a need for similar, regional bodies to keep monetary union operational. Referring to the theme of this conference, perhaps future generations will then witness the birth of a new entity – the regional central bank. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 1 Susan S Bies: Bank performance and corporate governance Remarks by Ms Susan S Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the 112th Annual Meeting of the Tennessee Bankers Association, Hot Springs, Virginia, 11 June 2002. *      *      * Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to speak to members of the Tennessee Bankers Association today. I have really enjoyed getting to talk to many old friends. Some of you have asked if I have had any surprises in my new role as a Governor of the Federal Reserve Board. I must say the biggest surprise is the amount of reading that I do. I haven’t read so much on so many different topics since I was in graduate school! Not only do I get to discuss economics and monetary policy, but also bank regulation and operations issues. Even though I have experience at a Federal Reserve Bank and at First Tennessee Bank for a total of twenty-six years, I find that wearing the hat of a central banker makes me consider issues facing the financial industry in new ways. I hope that over the years I can continue to meet with groups like yours so that I stay up to date on issues important to bankers. In my comments today, I will address: first, the financial performance of U.S. banks, in particular, of community banks; second, the improvements that banks large and small are making in measuring and managing risk; and, third, the responsibilities of directors and senior managers in corporate governance. In my view, these topics are integrally linked and, in light of current questions of confidence in America’s corporations, quite timely. Fourth and finally, I would also like to mention the proposal the Federal Reserve has issued for comment on changes to the discount window. Financial condition of U.S. banks Last year was exceptional in many respects, with the United States slipping into what appears to have been a mild recession, and with the terrorist attacks in September. In response, the Federal Reserve reduced interest rates at every meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee in 2001 and an additional three times between meetings, for a total of eleven rate cuts accumulating to 475 basis points. The Federal Reserve has now moved from a policy bias to address weakness, to one where the risks of inflation and weakness are balanced. Credit quality deterioration is concentrated in larger corporations, with several filing for bankruptcy. Serious concerns have arisen about the integrity of corporate management and financial reporting. Argentina’s economic difficulties reminded us, yet again, that exposures to emerging economies could present substantial risk. Given these events, the U.S. banking system has remained strong, possibly in large part because the recession in this country seems to have been relatively mild and short-lived. More directly, the strength seems also to reflect improvements in risk management at many banks and a greater awareness throughout the industry that institutions should promptly address problems as they emerge. This time both the banking industry and the regulatory agencies appear to have done just that--acted promptly--and without going too far and unnecessarily constraining credit. Much of the weakness among banks recently has been concentrated in large regional and money center banks, rather than in smaller institutions. Bank earnings reached a record level in the first quarter of 2002, with one of the highest quarterly return-on-assets ratio ever reported of 1.33 percent. Net interest income was the driver of stronger revenue, despite lower commercial loan volume. Loan loss provisions were significantly above the first quarter of 2001, although below levels of the fourth quarter. Higher charge-offs were concentrated in commercial loans at large banks and in credit card specialty lenders. What areas may present heightened risks to community banks today? First, for most of the past decade, community banks--particularly those in the asset range of $100 million to $1 billion--have actively expanded their commercial real estate lending. Since the early 1990s, larger community banks have expanded their commercial real estate portfolios from 13 percent of aggregate assets to 22 percent. To date, these credits have generally performed well, and my comments are not intended to suggest a material concern. These credits, however, account for most of the group’s increase in nonperforming 
 2 BIS Review 37/2002 assets over the past year. Given the checkered history of commercial real estate lending and its increased relevance to many community banks, this portfolio must be monitored and managed carefully. We have often seen the cyclical nature of commercial real estate and its links to the general level of economic activity. The loss of anchor firms such as K-Mart, for example, may reduce the market value of certain shopping centers and the consumer traffic and the financial strength of nearby businesses as well. The second area of potential risk relates to interest rates. For the industry overall, the Federal Reserve’s rate cuts last year may have proved to be a mixed blessing. Lower interest rates undoubtedly eased payment pressures on many borrowers and prevented further deterioration in the quality of bank loan portfolios. Liability-sensitive banks saw their funding costs fall faster than loan and investment yields, and more than half of all banks had a wider net interest margin in the first quarter of 2002 than in 2001. However, lower interest rates will begin to narrow net interest margins for some institutions. Rates paid on deposits are close to their effective floors, and yields on loan portfolios are lower because of a record volume of refinancings and the falling prime rate. Many banks responded to the low rates by sharply reducing their investments in Treasuries and shifting funds into mortgage-backed securities, as they searched for higher yields. Given the historically low interest rates at which recent mortgages have been originated or refinanced one might expect that these loans would be much slower to prepay than previous ones. As a result, the effective maturity, or duration, of bank securities portfolios--and of many loan portfolios, as well--has been extended. Clearly, I am not about to forecast interest rates, something I’ve already learned that central bankers never do. Nevertheless, the interest-rate environment could present banks with a greater challenge later this year. Even stable rates could present increased risks, if savings and money market deposit account deposits flow out of banks as quickly as they came in last year. We should all ask ourselves how long depositors would be content earning the currently low rates as equity markets improve or interest rates rise once again. At some point, even loyal customers--those on fixed incomes, in particular--may blink and take steps to improve their returns. Turning to the longer-term outlook, what are the prospects for community banks? They have historically had higher profitability, as measured by the return on average assets, than large regional and money center banks and, on an individual-institution basis, have enjoyed relatively strong asset and deposit growth. A study recently published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin examined growth rates during the past fifteen years for large and small banks. Adjusting the data for mergers and acquisitions, the authors found that small and medium-sized banks--defined as those below the 100 largest--grew faster than the larger banks in virtually every year between 1985 and 2000. Moreover, the smallest banks, those below the 1,000 largest in terms of assets, grew the fastest of all in both deposits and total assets. The banks did this the old-fashioned way, by earning more on assets than larger institutions. Although small banks have paid higher average deposit rates than the large banks have paid, their net interest margins were still much higher, and by a growing differential in recent years. Measured by return on assets, small banks have done as well as or better than large banks in all but a handful of years over the past decade and a half. Managing risks The health of financial institutions today also reflects the improvement in risk management process that has been ongoing at banks for years. Increasingly, the entire risk management process has become more quantitative, reflecting not only the enhanced ability and lower costs of collecting and processing data but also improved techniques for measuring and managing risk. Larger banking organizations quantify a borrower’s probability of default, the bank’s loss given default and its likely exposure at the time of default--practices upon which we are trying to construct new international capital standards. The greater use of credit scoring has, it seems, improved risk management as well. Such tools should perform even better after the effects of the most recent economic slowdown are incorporated. Consumer credit models were developed after the 1990-91 recession, and so their reliability in predicting credit quality in the current slowdown is yet to be determined. Further, we are already observing increases in delinquencies in subprime lending. Since many of these borrowers did not have 
 BIS Review 37/2002 3 significant access to credit in previous recessions, their ultimate default rate will also help to validate the strength of the new statistical models. Community banks have greatly improved their management of interest rate risk in recent years. Information developed from models that are used to identify sensitivity to market changes in the mix of loans and deposits are now part of asset/liability committee meetings at community banks. As a result, managers can better anticipate changes in net interest income and respond appropriately to their unique competitive conditions. Community bankers are also developing new revenue streams that will help to manage risk by diversifying sources of earnings. In addition, the fee income streams help to increase the cross-sell ratio with key customers. This in turn should improve customer loyalty, another factor that should help manage risk by stabilizing revenue. Providing the personal touch has served community banks well, but conducting sound market research and pricing to reflect competition, customer value, and risk are becoming more important for success. The Arthur Andersen matters and other corporate events currently being addressed provide good risk management lessons for bankers as they try to increase earnings by cross selling more products. When line officers are compensated on sales and cross selling, a strong, independent quality assurance or risk review function becomes even more essential. For public accounting firms, strong quality assurance functions are needed to protect the core business integrity of attestation services when the firm is trying to win consulting contracts. In banks, where credit is still the dominant risk exposure, the chief credit officer should make sure unacceptable credit risks are not taken to win fee income business whose net revenue may not cover credit exposures. Corporate governance Another critical element of risk management is effective corporate governance. As bankers and bank directors, you have specific responsibilities to manage the risks at your financial institution and effectively oversee the system of internal controls. Not only are the activities of banks central to credit intermediation, in this country banks fund those activities in part with federally insured deposits. These deposits are the lowest cost source of funds for bankers because of the government’s guarantee. Bank directors are not expected to understand every nuance of banking or to oversee each transaction. They can look to management for that. They do, however, have the responsibility to set the tone regarding their institutions’ risk taking and to oversee the internal control processes so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They also have the responsibility to hire individuals who they believe have integrity and can exercise a high level of judgment and competence. Interagency policy holds boards of directors responsible for ensuring that their organizations have an effective audit process and internal controls that are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses. The reporting lines of the internal audit function should be such that the information directors receive is impartial and not unduly influenced by management. Internal audit is a key element of management’s responsibility to validate the strength of their internal controls. If internal audit is outsourced, best practice is to not use the same firm for the external audit engagement. Internal controls are the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the level of risks they need to accept to run their businesses, and assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Staff areas such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal, independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and the board of directors. Both executive management and the board should be engaged enough in the process to determine if these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas they are designed to review, and that the senior officers in those roles can speak freely on issues that need to be addressed. Audit committee members should have regular time in meetings to talk with the outside auditors without managers present. Best practices for audit committee processes have been laid out many times, including in the 1980s by the Treadway Commission and in 2000 by the Blue Ribbon Committee. Beyond that, boards of directors and managers should periodically test where they stand on ethical business practices. For example, they should ask, “Are we getting by on technicalities, 
 4 BIS Review 37/2002 adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating others and ourselves based on our contributions to the organization, or are we taking advantage of our positions?” My intent today is to remind everyone of the importance of maintaining sound ethical practices to help protect the reputation of your bank. As recent events have demonstrated, if we fail to do so the market will enforce the discipline. And that discipline can be harsh. Quality of accounting practices The current framework of financial reporting in the United States effectively represents the performance of most corporations most of the time. Indeed the high quality of accounting standards in this country is one critical reason why capital markets are so efficient. But the lessons of the past few months remind us that accounting rules can be bent. For six years I was a member of the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial Accounting Standards Board. This is the rulemaking body that deals with divergence in practice. The EITF’s role is to provide timely financial reporting guidance where divergence in practice is developing. In the time I served on the EITF I came to understand that professionals could and did disagree on the best accounting standard to apply to a new type of transaction. That is at the very heart of the struggle to keep accounting standards current. The rapid pace of business innovations makes it impractical to have a rule in place to anticipate every business transaction. Rather, the more complex and dynamic the world of business becomes, the more important it is that accounting be based on strong principles that are sufficiently robust to provide the framework for proper accounting of new types of transactions. Further, we need to insist on higher professional standards and not permit financial officers and auditors to benefit from “gaming” the rules-based accounting standards that are increasing in complexity, particularly in the United States. The core of these basic accounting principles should be professional standards followed by every corporate accountant and every outside auditor that would insist that they can answer “yes” to these questions: “Does the accounting method selected faithfully represent the economics of the transaction? Does the disclosure provide the user of financial reports with sufficient information to discern the nature of the significant transactions and risks of the organization?” But rules alone do not guarantee good financial reporting. For Enron and other recent examples, weak corporate governance practices apparently permitted sham transactions and misleading financial reporting to occur. Outside auditors erred in trying too much to please a paying client. They forgot that their professional role is to provide assurance to users of financial reports that the quality of financial reporting meets the expectations of the marketplace. Some observers have asserted that new accounting standards are needed. I do not know the specifics of many of the irregularities that have recently come to light. But judging from the publicly available information, I believe that what we need most is to restore the integrity of corporate accountants and the quality of the audit process rather than extensive new accounting standards. One reason that accounting in the United States has become so rule-based is that we tend to add new accounting standards when abuses occur even when the abuses resulted from accounting and audit failures. Discipline against auditors should occur when accounting standards have been manipulated. The present industry-driven process clearly has not worked and a new oversight process is needed to ensure audit quality. Given human nature, we must expect that rules will sometime be broken. But we can expect oversight boards to enforce penalties appropriate to the situation that will discourage others from breaking the rules in the future. Corporate boards and accounting officers need to shoulder their responsibilities too. The surprises that typically occur at banks are due to the nature of risk exposures and the quality of risk management practices. In addition to applying sound accounting treatments, managers must ensure that public disclosures clearly identify all significant risk exposures--whether on or off the balance sheet--and their effect on the firm’s financial condition and performance. I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard accounting framework or exactly the same for all--otherwise we would be certain to create statistical artifacts and implications of safe harbors. Rather, we should insist that each entity disclose what it believes its stakeholders need to evaluate its risk profile. The uniqueness of risks and business lines in complex organizations means that disclosures--to be effective--should be different for each bank. That is the approach being taken in developing the Basel II Capital Accord. Disclosure rules that are built too rigidly while risk 
 BIS Review 37/2002 5 management processes continue to evolve may make them less effective in describing the risk profile of a specific organization. But if bankers do not voluntarily improve disclosures, rules will be written. Proposed changes to Federal Reserve discount window operations As you probably know, the Board of Governors recently requested public comment on a proposal to revise the Federal Reserve’s discount window programs. Before I get into details, I’d like to emphasize that implementation of the proposal would not entail a change in the stance of monetary policy. There is nothing in the proposal that would necessitate a change in the target for the federal funds rate or the level of interest rates more generally. The Board is proposing the establishment of a new type of discount window credit, to be called primary credit, which would replace adjustment credit, currently the Federal Reserve’s main lending program. Primary credit would be available for very short terms as a backup source of liquidity to depository institutions that are in generally sound financial condition. There would be no prohibition on lending the proceeds of a primary credit loan to other depository institutions. Unlike adjustment credit, which currently is extended at a below-market rate, primary credit would be extended at a rate that would be above the usual level of short-term market interest rates, including the federal funds rate. By restricting eligibility to generally sound institutions and by eliminating the incentive for institutions to borrow to exploit the below-market discount rate, the primary credit program should considerably reduce the need for Federal Reserve discount officers to review the funding situations of borrowers. And since only sound institutions will be using primary credit, banks should be less concerned that their use of the window would signal incorrectly that they were experiencing significant funding difficulties. As a result, the Federal Reserve expects that institutions will be more willing to use the window. This increased willingness, and the ability of institutions to resell the proceeds of discount window loans, should improve the functioning of the window as a safety valve for the reserve market and for individual institutions. The interest rate for primary credit would be set through a procedure identical to that currently used for the basic discount rate. That is, the boards of directors at Reserve Banks would set the rate, subject to review and determination by the Board of Governors. In the proposal, it is envisioned that the interest rate on primary credit would initially be set 100 basis points above the target federal funds rate. If adopted, this program would align our lending practices to those of other major central banks. The Board also is requesting comment on the seasonal credit program. The seasonal credit program was established in 1973 to address the difficulties that relatively small banks with substantial intra-yearly swings in funding needs faced because of a lack of access to the national money markets. However, funding opportunities for smaller depository institutions have expanded significantly over the past few decades as a result of deposit deregulation and the general development of financial markets, calling into question the continued need for the seasonal program. The Board is seeking specific comment on whether small depository institutions still lack reasonable access to funding markets and on the continued need for the seasonal lending program. The Board would also like comment on the method for setting the seasonal credit discount rate, which is currently the average of the federal funds rate and a certificate of deposit rate, well below the proposed primary credit rate. We would value your comments on all aspects of the proposal. The ninety-day comment period ends August 22. Information on where to address the comments, and more information on the proposed revision, can be found on the Board of Governors’ website. Conclusion In closing, I commend you and the industry, generally, for successfully dealing with the challenges of 2001. The industry has demonstrated that it is fundamentally sound and well positioned. Bankers should support the development of risk management processes for those types of risk that are most relevant for their particular institution. Sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure, consistently applied, have long been at the heart of efficient markets. Though the quality of bank accounting and control systems is strong, bankers should heed lessons to be learned from Enron and other breakdowns in accounting and audit processes. Strengthen corporate governance where needed to prevent such abusive practices from occurring at your institutions. 
 6 BIS Review 37/2002 As bankers and bank regulators, we are responsible for conducting our affairs with competence and integrity. Let’s take the opportunity times like this present and make our banking system even stronger. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 1 Bruno Gehrig: Global economic trends and their implications for financial market infrastructures Speech by Prof Bruno Gehrig, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 11th International Securities Services Association (ISSA) at the UBS Executive Development Center, Wolfsberg, 12 June 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is an honour and a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to give the opening speech at the 11th ISSA Symposium. I am delighted that you have chosen Switzerland as a venue for your conference and hope that you feel comfortable and relaxed in this beautiful spot on the Lake of Constance. I gladly accepted your invitation although I am not an expert in your professional field. But I was, and still am, using your services rather intensively: in the 1980s as Head of Securities Sales and Trading at UBS, later on as CEO of an asset management bank, and now as investor of the currency reserves of the Swiss National Bank (SNB). I would like to use the time allocated to me to reflect on global economic trends and their implications for financial market infrastructures. Afterwards, I will outline the consequences these changes have on oversight authorities, which face similar challenges as you in your capacity as commercial service providers. Global economic trends What are the global economic trends that we all perceive in our daily business? Let me focus on some of the most prominent ones: the alleviation of barriers to trade in goods and financial assets, and factors affecting the overall demand and supply of securities. Alleviation of barriers to trade in goods and financial assets Barriers to trade in goods, services and financial assets have been progressively lifted during the last few decades, leading to a growing interaction among national economic systems. This growing interaction and connectedness is what people commonly refer to as globalisation. Countries participating in this process have seen their domestic financial markets become more integrated with markets abroad. Two factors shape and characterise this process. First, technological innovation has sharply reduced transportation and telecommunication costs. Some figures taken from an IMF study illustrate this impressive change1. Table 1 Communication and computer costs, 1960-2000  Cost of a 3-minute phone call, New York to London (in 2000, USD) Price of computers and peripheral equipment relative to GDP deflator (year 2000=1000) 1960  60.42  1,869,004 1970  41.61  199,983 1980  6.32  27,938 1990  4.37  7,275 2000  0.40  1,000 Source: IMF.                                                       1 P. Masson (2001): “Globalization: Facts and Figures”, IMF Policy Discussion Paper 01/04, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
 2 BIS Review 37/2002 In only 40 years, telecommunication costs shrank by a factor of about 150, while computer costs became around 1900 times cheaper. As a consequence, information is now disseminated almost in real-time and at low cost. Second, financial crises have become more frequent. Most of the time, they are driven by rapid inflows and outflows of capital. We still vividly remember the crises in Mexico, Asia, Russia and Argentina. Obviously, these crises have not been restricted to the financial sector, but have had a profound impact on the real economy as well. The lifting of restrictions to cross-border holding and trading of financial assets has unleashed massive capital flows. According to World Bank figures, global debt and equity flows (excluding foreign direct investment) expanded by more than five times since 1991, from USD 794 billion to USD 4.3 trillion2. Without doubt, this development reflects a long-term trend. More and more investors decide globally and on the basis of risk-adjusted expected returns. Taking place in a system of increasingly integrated capital markets, capital allocation has become more efficient. The other side of the coin, however, is the increased volatility on financial markets. Indeed, portfolio investments, in particular those in markets with relatively high liquidity, have become more erratic, as fund injections and withdrawals respond very quickly to new information. According to the IMF, assets managed by institutional investors on mature markets are estimated at about USD 30 trillion in 1998. Thus, any shift in such a huge portfolio is very likely to exacerbate economic cycles and will possibly lead to contagion among financial markets. The impact of portfolio re-balancing will be all the more powerful as macroeconomic policies seem to be unsustainable and as financial institutions show fundamental weaknesses, often with regard to financial strength, supervision and transparency. Experience has shown that enhanced financial integration has, on the whole, resulted in higher growth and greater convergence among economies. Admittedly, not all sectors have gained in this process; there have also been losers in practically all countries involved. Nevertheless, the benefits of liberalisation have exceeded its costs. The call for a return raised by some voices therefore seems inappropriate. On looking ahead, the path and success of the liberalisation process will depend on how the effects of inequality gaps within and between countries, and the effects of increasing volatility on financial markets, are dealt with. Securities: demand and supply Integrated capital markets operate primarily on the basis of supply of, and demand for, securities. This has not always been the case. Bank deposits and loans used to play a much more significant role. Yet with deregulation and the rise of institutional investors, securities have become the central tool of capital allocation. The United States’ strong net import of capital illustrates this fact. Let’s have a look at some figures taken from an IMF report3. The net foreign purchase of US long-term securities almost doubled between 1995 and 2000, rising from USD 232 billion to USD 456 billion. Taking a closer look reveals some interesting facts. During the same period, the net foreign purchase of corporate bonds and stocks increased by 3 and 15 times, reaching USD 182 and 175 billion respectively. The net foreign purchase of corporate securities amounted to 30% of the entire net purchase of US long-term securities in 1995. In 2000, it accounted for about 80%. During the same five-year period, the net foreign purchase of agency bonds increased by 5 times, while the net foreign purchase of US government bonds shrank massively due to a strong supply reduction as well as the investors’ move towards higher-yielding financial assets. One major consequence is that demand for securities issued by the corporate sector has been increasing impressively over the last few years. This strong demand reflects diversification needs and the enhanced capacity of investors to apply sophisticated portfolio management strategies. In addition, there has been a clear trend towards collateralisation of financial claims as a risk mitigation technique. Indeed, collateral is widely used today in the underlying and derivative markets for financial assets, including gold. Collateralised transactions have also gained momentum in payment systems with the                                                       2 World Bank (2001): “Trends in private capital flows” (Table 2.3), Global Development Finance, Chapter 2. 3 D. Mathieson and G. Schinasi (2001): “International Capital Markets: Developments, Prospects and Key Policy Issues”, World Economic and Financial Surveys, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 3 purpose of not only reducing credit risk, but also facilitating access to liquidity through readily available collateral. Table 2 Net foreign purchase of US long-term securities  Government bonds Government-sponsored agency bonds1 Corporate bonds Corporate stocks Total 1995  134,115  28,729  57,853  11,240 231,937 1996  232,241  41,723  83,743  12,511 370,218 1997  184,171  49,853  84,358  69,597 387,979 1998  49,039  56,802  121,930  50,020 277,791 1999  –9,953  92,200  160,392  107,522 350,161 2000  –53,790  152,841  182,403  174,890 456,344 1  Includes bonds issued by U.S. government corporations and federal agencies. Source: IMF. Central banks around the world have been a driving force behind the trend toward collateralisation. First, they have been relying increasingly on repo transactions to implement their monetary policy. Like many of its peers, the Swiss National Bank, which traditionally operated exclusively on the basis of foreign exchange swaps, now steers the liquidity supply primarily through repo transactions. Second, central banks typically grant intraday credits, which are relevant for smoothing settlement in payment systems, against collateral. Intraday repos have been available from the Swiss National Bank since 1999, on demand and at zero interest. The trend toward collateralisation creates additional business opportunities for providers of financial market infrastructure, but it also increases their systemic relevance. Indeed, since the linkages among cash, securities, and derivatives markets have become so close, a failure - either by a provider itself or by a major participant - is very likely to cause disturbances affecting different markets at the same time. In addition to collateralisation, the appetite for securities has been forcefully stimulated by the changing needs of private and public wealth owners: the ongoing institutionalisation of the savings process, the facilitation of direct market access through internet technology, the disintermediation of the banking system due to credit risk considerations and the relative decline in attractiveness of bank deposits. On the supply side, the corporate sector has been increasingly relying on bond financing rather than on traditional bank borrowing. In the US, private debt securities amount to about USD 7 trillion. The ratio of bank credits to GDP has remained more or less stable at around 10% for the last 50 years, while the ratio of bond financing to GDP has risen sharply from 15% in 1985 to 25% in 2000. Bond financing within the European corporate sector has also caught up, strongly supported by the inception of the euro at the beginning of 1999. In short, the supply of securities is bound to grow further; cyclical ups and downs are likely, but the trend will point upwards. Notwithstanding obvious differences between economies, it is generally true that the corporate sector will make further progress in exploiting the potential advantages offered by open capital markets. The European corporate bond market seems an especially interesting case. Since the inception of the euro, it has staged an impressive take-off, even though its institutional, legal and accounting environment is still far from optimal. Central bankers have good reason to welcome such developments. Not only because they probably make the saving-investment process more efficient, but also because they allow for a better distribution of credit and market risk which should - if anything - enhance the stability and robustness of financial systems. 
 4 BIS Review 37/2002 Financial processes and markets will continue to become more and more internationalised with obvious impacts on securities operations, liquidity and collateral management procedures. What kinds of challenges will this create for market infrastructures on the one hand, and for oversight authorities on the other hand? Let me address these two questions in the following. Implications for financial market infrastructures A first requirement for financial market infrastructures is that they must be capable of coping not only with an increase in cross-border securities operations, but also with their time-critical nature. Therefore, particular efforts should be made to ensure intraday finality, to shorten settlement cycles, to co-ordinate operating hours among the individual systems and to standardize communication procedures as well as message formats. As you know better than I, this is easier said than done, since we still rely heavily on technologies and systems that are tailored to domestic needs and peculiarities. The current coexistence of several non-interoperable platforms implies an extensive amount of costly manual intervention. A second requirement - which is linked to the first one - relates to the objective of reducing clearing and settlement costs, especially the costs of cross-border securities operations. As discussed in the Giovannini report4 mandated by the EU, domestic clearing and settlement arrangements within member countries seem to have reached a level of cost efficiency, which is - by and large - comparable to what DTCC (Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation) in the US has achieved. By contrast, the whole cross-border domain is far from being cost-efficient, mainly due to fragmentation in terms of market infrastructures and practices, as well as differing legal, tax and accounting frameworks. The obvious question is, therefore, how to realise efficiency gains in the cross-border context. One way - and probably the most appealing one - is to consolidate market infrastructures. Within the European Union, there are currently more than 20 Central Securities Depositories. Although consolidation seems unavoidable, it is less clear how to achieve it and which model best suits integrated financial markets. Should priority be given to vertical or to horizontal integration? On the one hand, vertical integration presents some advantages. Since trading, clearing and settlement occur within the same organisation, this reduces legal and operational risks. On the other hand, vertical integration may entail cross-subsidies, which disguise the effective costs of trading, clearing and settlement. In addition, this model may also tend to rely on rents, as it is impossible for users to switch between providers. Horizontal integration, however, allows users to select between interlinked providers, exposing them to ongoing competition. Yet the feasibility of this model depends on whether there is a cost-efficient way for users to route transactions to their preferred provider. In any case, the emergence of poles around Euronext and Deutsche Börse shows that the consolidation process has begun. From a Swiss perspective, both SWX and SIS are engaged in the race - not really as hunters, given their relative size, but as partners with proven technology and know-how. Financial market infrastructures are also subject to higher competitive pressures. The driving forces behind these pressures are, without doubt, technological innovation and the expected profits resulting from the achievement of economies of scale and, possibly, economies of scope. Three kinds of competitors can be distinguished. First, competition among exchanges, clearing and settlement organisations within and across countries has increased. Indeed, for trading, clearing and settlement, physical location has become less and less relevant. As you are confronted with these pressures in your daily business, you certainly know better than any central banker what I am referring to. Second, non-financial institutions may provide trading, clearing and settlement services to financial markets. More precisely, I think here not only of alternative trading systems, but also of outsourcing partners such as payment and securities processing centres. Third, and maybe less visible, but of growing significance, are competitive pressures exerted by large custodians, especially by global custodians. Indeed, global custodians not only rely on a worldwide network of sub-custodians offering easy access to all markets, but they also develop in-house clearing and settlement procedures with very competitive costs. Without any doubt, financial market infrastructures are facing great challenges in terms of higher technical requirements, the necessity to achieve efficiency gains, and higher competitive stakes. I believe that market forces - rather than political pressure - should drive the consolidation process. The                                                       4 The Giovannini Group (2001): Cross-Border Clearing and Settlement Arrangements in the European Union, Brussels. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 5 many changes taking place also challenge oversight authorities. It is their task to analyse the systemic implications of what goes on particularly at the cross-border level, and to make sure that these changes will enhance, and not endanger, the soundness of the financial system. Let me address these issues in the concluding part. Implications for oversight authorities I begin by quoting Alexandre Lamfalussy, Chairman of the Committee of the Wise Men, which, more than a year ago, published the famous report on securities regulation within the EU5. Lamfalussy was very clear when he asserted that “the current [securities] regulatory system is not working”6. Indeed, unclear and sometimes even contradictory regulations or inconsistent implementation of regulations among countries impair the creation of a single capital market within the European Union. Starting from this premise, I would like to specify what kind of challenges oversight authorities face and share with you some ideas on what the role of an institution like the Swiss National Bank should be. But first of all, I would like to clarify a fundamental point. Some people claim that the oversight authorities’ objective of promoting the stability of the financial system hides an undue interventionist activism. Well, these claims are beside the mark. Let me quote Andrew Crockett, BIS General Manager and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum7: “[…] systemic stability is critically determined by the collective behaviour of individual market players. […]. And supervisors need to analyse the interaction between individual incentives and systemic outcomes.” In other words, systemic stability depends on how negative externalities, which are not priced or internalised by the market, are dealt with. Thus, we should not waste our time discussing whether regulatory intervention is necessary or not, but rather how oversight authorities, focusing on systemic risk, should shape the process. Keeping this in mind, the challenges oversight authorities face are numerous and well-known. The Giovannini Group lists no less than 15 barriers to efficient cross-border and settlement procedures within the European Union. These barriers are categorised according to their technical nature, their fiscal implications and their legal aspects. A remarkable feature of this report is the distinction between what market forces can achieve and what regulatory authorities should do. In particular, there are several issues that cannot be tackled by the private sector, e.g. the harmonisation of the legal, regulatory, taxation and accounting frameworks. A first challenge is the need for global oversight. This need arises from several factors. In terms of the so-called horizontal approach, trading, clearing and settlement of securities operations already occur in different institutions located in several different jurisdictions; virt-x and SIS-clear are just two examples. For the time being, cross-border infrastructures deploy their activities in complement to domestic systems, but it is very likely that they will play a significantly more powerful role in the future. Oversight authorities tend to prefer a pragmatic approach, where one regulatory authority takes on the role of a lead overseer and consults with other relevant authorities. Such a model has already been put in place among central bankers in the context of the Continuous Linked Settlement system. A second challenge that oversight authorities face lies in the risk dimension of cross-border securities operations. Indeed, whereas the nature of the risks remains basically the same, both the probability of occurrence of an adverse event and the risk exposures themselves have clearly increased. The added dimension of cross-border activities lies in spill-over effects due to direct links between systems. Credit, liquidity and operational risk events occurring in one jurisdiction may indeed trigger a systemic crisis by spilling over to foreign financial markets. These kinds of linkages among different systems explain why oversight authorities have recently focussed not only on payment systems, but also on securities clearing and settlement systems. A problem that is potentially relevant in systemic terms is the availability of intraday liquidity in foreign currencies, which is typically restricted, if not non-existent. This restriction hampers liquidity management in an integrated multi-currency environment. Nowadays, there is a much more urgent need for market participants to make time-critical payments than previously. Moreover, they must be                                                       5 The Committee of Wise Men (2001): Final Report of the Committee of the Wise Men on the Regulation of European Securities Markets, Brussels. 6 A. Lamfalussy (2001): “Reflections on the Regulation of European Securities Markets”, Société Universitaire Européenne de Recherches Financières, SUERF Study N° 14, Vienna. 7 A. Crockett (2002): Introductory speech at the Third Joint Central Bank Research Conference on Risk Measurement and Systemic Risk, Basel. 
 6 BIS Review 37/2002 able to react simultaneously in several currencies even in troubled circumstances. Their liquidity management could be facilitated and strengthened significantly if they were able to obtain short-term liquidity in the required currency through a cross-border collateral pool. Such a collateral pool would boost the ability of the large market participants to react, thereby reducing the system’s vulnerability to disturbances. In addition, this would result in efficiency gains, as maintaining a pooled collateral portfolio would certainly be less costly than keeping several currency-specific portfolios. In view of the manifold legal and technical obstacles, one is tempted to deem such a collateral pool a vision. However, visions can come true: take CLS, the Continued Linked Settlement system, which will go into operation in the near future. Central banks and the private sector must direct their joint efforts at researching the feasibility of a collateral pool, as does the Payments Risk Committee in New York8. A third challenge relates to in-house clearing and settlement mechanisms at global custodians. This commercial function has undergone a remarkable process of concentration in the last few years. Some of these service providers have become very significant for the stability of the system as we have seen after September 11 of last year. Independent of specific events the question arises whether regulatory control has kept up with this development everywhere. From an organisational point of view, it is problematic that custody activities lie in a grey area between banking supervision and system oversight. In some countries - such as Switzerland - where the tasks deriving from banking supervision and system oversight are performed by separate authorities, the regulatory framework risks being incomplete or at least suboptimal unless the two authorities succeed in establishing a strong cooperation link. This aspect seems all the more important as global custodians tend to become direct competitors to traditional financial market infrastructures. In view of these challenges, there is good reason to critically reassess rules and regulations related to securities clearing and settlement as well as to the way oversight responsibilities are implemented in practice. A predominantly national approach does not serve market needs any longer. And an essentially sectoral solution, where payment system regulators and securities regulators do not cooperate in an integrated way, is inappropriate. Indeed, all official and private sector initiatives that can give an impetus to this debate are highly welcome. The CPSS-IOSCO Recommendations for Securities Settlement Systems, the ISSA Recommendations 2000, and the Group of Thirty’s ongoing work all contribute to improving our understanding of the challenges we face. And it is only when issues are really understood that appropriate responses can be formulated and implemented. In Switzerland, as in several other countries, supervision of the securities clearing and settlement system is still work in progress. A draft of the revised National Bank Law has been submitted and will be discussed by Parliament in the near future. The revised law will presumably enter into force around 2004. It is intended to explicitly vest the responsibility of overseeing payment systems as well as securities clearing and settlement systems in the Swiss National Bank. The revised law will thus formally express that an efficient and secure financial market infrastructure is imperative for the implementation of monetary policy and for the stability of the financial system. The inclusion of clearing and settlement systems follows from the obvious fact that, given their linkages, these infrastructural functions are of considerable systemic importance. This is all the more true since the SNB has, for a few years now, implemented its monetary policy exclusively through repo transactions. The SNB can fulfil this expanded mandate only by closely cooperating with other authorities. Domestically, the SNB will work hand in hand with the Federal Banking Commission (FBC). The SNB will focus on systemic issues, while the FBC - our bank supervisor - will deal with institutional aspects. This job-sharing is based on the premise that each authority will be able to make use of its comparative advantage. Internationally, market developments foster cross-border cooperation between oversight authorities. For instance, institutions such as Sega Intersettle (SIS) through “The Settlement Network” are heavily involved in the current reshaping of Europe’s financial market infrastructure. However, as the legal reform is not yet in place, there are many open questions as to what exactly the modus vivendi of the oversight function should look like. We will address them step by step in a pragmatic way. Many issues such as the set-up of mechanisms for information sharing, the need for on-site examinations, or the disclosure of oversight proceedings have still to be discussed and clarified. We are in the process of defining basic principles and implementation tools pertaining to our new oversight responsibilities.                                                       8 The Payments Risk Committee was established by the Fed New York in 1993 as a means to integrate the input of leading US commercial banks in discussing and implementing recommendations for improving the quality of risk management in payment and securities settlement systems. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 7 Conclusion I would like to conclude my speech with a fundamental remark. In the field of financial market infrastructure, there is no alternative to close cooperation between private market players and oversight authorities. On the one hand, it makes sense in this field as well to rely on market forces to stimulate, as energetically as possible, an eagerness for progress and innovation. On the other hand, we have to take into consideration that there are economic forces working in this area that limit the free play of market forces and require oversight authorities to take on a more active role. First, clearing, settlement and payment systems entail network characteristics with potentially negative externalities not internalised by individually optimising market players. It is thus the aim of oversight authorities to take into account the financial infrastructure as a whole, thereby focussing on the links between all components. In other terms, some of these systems are “too interlinked to fail” and must therefore be overseen with special care. Second, since clearing, settlement and payment services are based on production processes with very high fixed costs, there is a risk that consolidation may lead to a monopolistic market result. Oversight authorities must therefore also make it their goal to prevent potential abuses of market power. Against this background, a trust-based cooperation between financial service providers and oversight authorities remains the key to a continued successful development of an efficient and secure financial market infrastructure that meets the fast-changing needs of the future. 
 BIS Review 36/2002 1 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 6 June 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Papademos, the new Vice-President of the ECB, and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. The Governing Council undertook a comprehensive examination of monetary, financial and economic developments and considered the evidence that has become available since its last meeting on 2 May 2002. Notwithstanding the recent decline in inflation, the outlook for price stability in the medium term remains less satisfactory than expected a few months ago. However, the economic outlook is still subject to uncertainty. Further evidence is needed before we can fully assess the upward risks to price stability over the medium term. Against this background, the Governing Council decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. Starting with the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 decreased to 7.4% in the period from February to April 2002, down from 7.6% in the period from January to March 2002. While the high annual growth rate of M3 still partly reflects the portfolio shifts to liquid positions which occurred last autumn, and there was some normalisation in the development of M3 in early 2002, this trend towards moderation has recently been interrupted. In addition, annual rates of growth of loans to the private sector have stabilised over recent months. As regards the second pillar, our expectations for a gradual recovery in real GDP growth in the euro area have been confirmed by Eurostat’s recently published first estimates for real GDP growth. These preliminary estimates show an improvement of quarter-on-quarter growth rates from –0.3% in the last quarter of 2001 to moderately positive rates in the first quarter of this year. Moreover, business and consumer confidence has strengthened again more recently, as reflected in the data published by the Commission. Looking ahead, available forecasts all point to a continued strengthening in both domestic and foreign demand, relating to a more favourable external environment, sound domestic fundamentals and the absence of major imbalances within the euro area. Overall, they suggest that real GDP growth in the euro area should again be in line with potential growth later this year, with a further increase expected in 2003. Despite this rather positive outlook, the assessment of the short-term dynamics of real activity is still surrounded by uncertainty. Moreover, future oil price developments and economic imbalances elsewhere in the world economy remain elements of risk. Turning to price developments, Eurostat’s early estimate indicates that annual HICP inflation fell from 2.4% in April to 2.0% in May. However, this decline is mainly due to a base effect relating to the spike in HICP inflation in May 2001. Moreover, in the first months of this year HICP inflation excluding the more volatile items of energy and unprocessed food prices has remained stubbornly high, reflecting in particular trends in services prices. While a further decline in the annual inflation rate is possible in the short run, the medium-term outlook remains less satisfactory than expected a few months ago. Over recent weeks the exchange rate of the euro has appreciated. This will contribute to containing inflationary pressures, but it is still too early to assess the impact of exchange rate developments on the outlook for prices. As stated on a number of occasions, the less satisfactory picture in the short term is due partly to a sequence of adverse but rather specific shocks to prices, including recent oil price increases. In principle, such shocks should unwind over time and therefore not affect the medium-term perspectives for price stability as long as past upward tendencies in prices do not become entrenched. The outcome of recent wage negotiations in some regions of the euro area is a cause for concern, especially in view of the negative impact this could have on continued employment creation. High wage increases must not spread across the euro area given that inflationary pressure, which would have unfavourable consequences for competitiveness, employment growth and consumption, is to be avoided. At this juncture it is therefore particularly important for monetary policy to remain vigilant with regard to the further evolution of the key factors determining the outlook for prices. 
 2 BIS Review 36/2002 Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, it is vital that all Member States maintain a medium-term perspective in compliance with the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. Maintaining such a perspective will lead to a successful transition to budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus and to a smooth functioning of automatic stabilisers in all member countries. Let me therefore reiterate that the Member States concerned must honour the commitments made to achieve balanced budgets by 2003-4. Moreover, governments are encouraged to push ahead with reforms relating to the size and structure of public expenditure and revenue, which will also create room for further tax cuts and absorb the fiscal costs of population ageing. This reform agenda, as well as the urgent structural reforms relating to product, labour and financial markets, will be addressed in the forthcoming Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. Overall, such reforms reflect the key challenge for the euro area to expand its potential for non-inflationary growth and to reduce its high level of unemployment. The Governing Council calls upon Member States to make faster progress in accelerating and deepening structural reforms in order to provide economic agents with the proper incentives to enhance efficiency and entrepreneurship and to progress towards a knowledge-based economy as proclaimed in the Lisbon agenda and confirmed in Barcelona. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
  Susan S Bies: Lessons to be re-learned from recent breakdowns in corporate accounting Remarks by Ms Susan S Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Institute of International Bankers, New York, 10 June 2002. *      *      * Good afternoon. Thank you for the invitation to speak today with members of the Institute of International Bankers. My remarks will not be in the traditional “what have we learned from...” format, but rather the more realistic what we should re-learn from Enron and other recent, well-publicized breakdowns in accounting, auditing, and corporate governance. As a regulator dealing with these types of issues, I find I draw on my experience in bank financial management and accounting. I also want to continue to meet groups like yours so that I can stay aware of current issues facing bank managers. I am going to touch on three broad areas in addressing issues arising from recent breakdowns in corporate accounting: the current state of accounting and auditing in the United States, the role that bankers should play as users of financial information, and good corporate governance practices that bankers should apply within their own organizations. Let me be clear about my premise. The root causes of the breakdowns in corporate financial reporting that have been widely disclosed in the past few months are ineffective corporate governance, financial reporting, and risk management practices. The lessons we can re-learn from recent events should not be news to anyone. Rather, recent events should serve as a wake up call to corporate boards, management, and auditors to follow through on their fundamental and traditional professional and ethical standards of conduct and control processes. The issues are not new, but the scope and frequency of breakdowns are of concern. As news reports and congressional testimony on various aspects of these breakdowns occur, corporations and auditors should address the issues raised so that they do not compromise the reputation of their organizations. Accounting practices in complex organizations First, let me address the state of accounting and audit practices. Mergers and business innovations have increased the scale and scope of large organizations. Further, significant developments in financial theory and technology have led to the development of financial instruments that facilitate the separation and reallocation of risks to parties more willing and able to bear them. A byproduct of these developments is that it has become ever more difficult for outsiders to understand the financial positions of complex organizations. The current framework of financial reporting in the United States effectively represents the performance of most corporations most of the time. Indeed the high quality of accounting standards in this country is one critical reason why capital markets are so efficient. But the lessons of the past few months remind us that accounting rules can be bent. For six years I was a member of the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial Accounting Standards Board. This is the rulemaking body that deals with divergence in practice. The EITF’s role is to provide timely financial reporting guidance where divergence in practice is developing. In the time I served on the EITF I came to understand that professionals could and did disagree on the best accounting standard to apply to a new type of transaction. That is at the very heart of the struggle to keep accounting standards current. The rapid pace of innovations that I just mentioned makes it impractical to have a rule in place to anticipate every business transaction. Rather, the more complex and dynamic the world of business becomes, the more important it is that accounting be based on strong principles that are sufficiently robust to provide the framework for proper accounting of new types of transactions. In the course of their work, financial officers and auditors face conflicts between the needs of the client, which is the management and board of the corporation that engages them, and the professional ethical standards that outside parties--investors, customers, and creditors--expect from them. While auditors are engaged by boards of directors, the users of the auditors’ opinions are these third parties. 
  If outsiders did not need independent assessments of standardized financial information, companies could design their accounting systems in any way they desired to support their business objectives. But the effective functioning of U.S. capital markets requires that basic information on the financial condition and performance of the organization be prepared and presented in a consistent way so that outsiders using the information can compare different companies. Thus, we need to insist on higher professional standards and not permit financial officers and auditors to benefit from “gaming” the rules-based accounting standards that are increasing in complexity, particularly in the United States. The core of these basic accounting principles should be professional standards followed by every corporate accountant and every outside auditor that would insist that they can answer “yes” to these questions: “Does the accounting method selected faithfully represent the economics of the transaction? Does the recognition, measurement and disclosure provide the user of financial reports with sufficient information to discern the nature of the significant transactions and risks of the organization?” But rules alone do not guarantee good financial reporting. For Enron and other recent examples, weak corporate governance practices apparently permitted sham transactions and misleading financial reporting to occur. Outside auditors erred in trying too much to please a paying client. They forgot that their professional role is to provide assurance to users of financial reports that the quality of financial reporting meets the expectations of the marketplace. Some observers have asserted that new accounting standards are needed. I do not know the specifics of many of the irregularities that have recently come to light. But judging from the publicly available information, I believe that what we need most is to restore the integrity of corporate accountants and the quality of the audit process rather than extensive new accounting standards. One reason that accounting in the United States has become so rule-based is that we tend to add new accounting standards when abuses occur even when the abuses resulted from accounting and audit failures. An example of this that bankers can relate to is FAS 115--accounting for investment securities. When this standard was developed, the perceived abuse was a handful of banks selling securities from their investment portfolios to take gains into income, while leaving underwater securities in the portfolio. Such “cherry picking” was an abuse even under the old standards, which said investment portfolios were not to used as trading accounts. Discipline against the few offending banks and their outside auditors would have provided a warning to other organizations. Problems cannot be solved without addressing their root causes. At times new rules just create more work. It may appear the problem is solved because “something” was done. But unless the root cause is addressed, the problem will recur at a cost to the private sector of additional regulatory burden. And let me remind you again that one of the root causes of recent events is the outside auditor failing to serve both the board of directors and interested third parties. Discipline against auditors should occur when accounting standards have been manipulated. The present industry-driven process clearly has not worked and a new oversight process is needed to ensure audit quality. Achieving sound accounting and disclosure practices in complex banking organizations Corporate boards and accounting officers need to shoulder their responsibilities too. Bankers have a unique perspective on this. Bankers are heavy users of financial reporting information, whether they are making a business loan, underwriting a debt issue, or managing assets in a trust account. Thus, bankers should consider the perspectives of both preparer and user when supporting alternatives for accounting and disclosure. Banks are becoming complex organizations themselves. Investors are finding it harder to understand the quality of financial performance and risk exposures at banks. Thus, bankers should be leading the development of more transparent financial reporting and disclosures. Generally Accepted Accounting Standards tend to be focus on point-in-time information. The movement to more fair-value accounting can mislead users of information when gains and losses are not realized. These point-in-time snapshots fail to convey information to readers of financial statements that helps them understand the quality of earnings. 
  The surprises that typically occur at banks are due to the nature of risk exposures and the quality of risk management practices, including use of off-balance sheet vehicles. To keep both boards of directors and investors aware of these unseen risks, bankers should turn to their internal control and reporting systems. Banks are taking a leading role in the evolution of risk management, and this discipline can provide a framework for better disclosure. In addition to applying sound accounting treatments, managers must ensure that public disclosures clearly identify all significant risk exposures--whether on or off the balance sheet--and their effect on the firm’s financial condition and performance, cash flow and earnings potential, and capital adequacy. Equally important are disclosures about how risks are being managed and the underlying basis for values and other estimates included in financial reports. A sound risk management system should continually monitor risks in a changing business climate--including credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks. Disclosures consistent with the information used internally by risk managers could be very useful to market participants, as would information on the sensitivity to changes in underlying assumptions. Companies should do more than meet the letter of the standards that exist; they should be sure that their financial reports and other disclosures focus on what is really essential to help investors and other market participants understand their businesses and risk profiles. I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard accounting framework or exactly the same for all--otherwise we would be certain to create statistical artifacts and implications of safe harbors. Rather, we should all insist that each entity disclose what it believes its stakeholders need to evaluate its risk profile. The uniqueness of risks and business lines in complex organizations means that disclosures--to be effective--should be different for each bank. That is the approach being taken in developing the Basel II Capital Accord. Disclosure rules that are built too rigidly while risk management processes continue to evolve may make them less effective in describing the risk profile of a specific organization. But if bankers do not voluntarily improve disclosures, rules will be written. Financial institutions should continue improving their risk management and reporting. When they are comfortable with the reliability and consistency of the information in these reports, they should begin disclosing this information to the market, perhaps in summary form. Not only would this disclosure provide more qualitative and quantitative information to the market, but also the resulting discussion about risk management practices would help the market assess the quality of the risk oversight and risk appetite of the organization. Banks also should consider the way they communicate information about their financial health to their customers. Bankers know that if their reputations are placed at risk it can lead to significant loss of business and even liquidity runs. While customers continue to shop at K-Mart despite its bankruptcy, some bank customers leave when the hint of impropriety or losses occurs. At the same time, few bank customers can interpret financial reports of corporations, especially banks with complex operations. This is the dichotomy faced in always looking for more disclosures. Information overload can overwhelm some readers of financial reports. As with any form of corporate communication, bankers may want to tailor various disclosures to different audiences. Banking supervision and accounting and disclosure The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets. The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well. The January 2001 proposal to amend and augment the Basel Capital Accord, called Basel II, seeks to strengthen the market’s ability to aid bank supervisors in evaluating capital adequacy. The proposal consists of three pillars, or tools: risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III). This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach for many years to come. The goal in the Basel process is to develop a risk-sensitive framework that provides appropriate incentives to banking organizations to maintain strong capital positions and sound risk management systems. The history of the 1990s, which includes episodes of global financial instability spreading from small countries through international capital markets and banks, underscores the need to maintain adequate capital in internationally active banks. 
  Basel II would also improve risk disclosure by many banks worldwide. The proposal recommends specific disclosures to better convey an institution’s capital adequacy and risk profile. The incentives in Basel II should greatly diminish the opacity that cloaks many international financial institutions and help bring about a convergence of international norms on banking disclosure. I believe that counterparties will expect, indeed force, greater disclosure. But Basel II will not be effective until the end of 2006. Recent history certainly teaches us that understanding what drives a counterparty’s financial performance and its risk appetite is necessary now for accurately pricing any transaction or even for deciding whether to engage in a transaction. Improve your organization’s disclosure with every financial report--and begin now. Corporate governance As bankers, you and your directors have specific responsibilities to manage your risks and effectively oversee the system of internal controls. Not only are the activities of banks central to credit intermediation, in this country banks fund those activities in part with federally insured deposits. These deposits are the lowest cost source of funds for bankers because of the government’s guarantee. Bank directors are not expected to understand every nuance of banking or to oversee each transaction. They can look to management for that. They do, however, have the responsibility to set the tone regarding their institutions’ risk-taking and to implement sufficient controls so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They also have the responsibility to hire individuals who they believe have integrity and can exercise a high level of judgment and competence. All the banking agencies have issued guidance describing the proper roles of bank officers and directors regarding policies, procedures, information systems, and controls. For example, the banking agencies hold boards of directors responsible for ensuring that their organizations have an effective audit process and internal controls adequate for the nature and scope of their business. The reporting lines of the internal audit function should be such that the information provided to directors is impartial and not unduly influenced by management. Internal controls are the responsibility of line management. Line management must determine the level of risks they need to accept to run their business, and assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Staff areas such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal, independently review, test, and monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and the board of directors. Both executive management and the board should be engaged enough in the process to determine if these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas they are designed to review, and that the senior officers in those roles can speak freely on issues that need to be addressed. Audit committee members should have regular time in meetings to talk with the outside auditors without managers present. Best practices for audit committee processes have been laid out many times, including in the 1980s by the Treadway Commission and in 2000 by the Blue Ribbon Committee. Beyond that, boards of directors and managers should periodically test where they stand on ethical business practices. For example, they should ask, “Are we squeaking by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating others and ourselves based on our contributions to the organization, or are we taking advantage of opportunities and abusing our positions?” The Arthur Andersen matters and other corporate events currently being addressed also provide lessons for bankers as they try to increase earnings by cross selling more products. When line officers are compensated on sales and cross selling, a strong, independent quality-assurance or risk review function becomes even more essential. For public accounting firms, strong quality assurance functions are needed to protect the core business integrity of attestation services when the firm is trying to win consulting contracts. In banks, where credit is still the dominant risk exposure, the chief credit officer should make sure unacceptable credit risks are not taken to win fee income business whose net revenue may not cover credit exposures. If the financial and reputation integrity of the corporation are to be protected, decentralized processes demand a system of strong, independent internal controls. When revenue and risk come into conflict, 
  the board of directors and executive management must decide where to draw the line. They should be able to rely on the independent control processes to alert them when exceptions to accepted standards occur. My intent today is to remind everyone of the importance of maintaining sound ethical practices to help protect the reputation of your bank. As recent events have demonstrated, if we fail to do so, the market will eventually enforce the discipline. And that discipline can be harsh and sometimes indiscriminate. Investors and customers act decisively, once confidence is lost. Conclusion Sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure, consistently applied, have long been at the heart of efficient markets. The issues currently being identified as breakdowns in these basic functions should serve as wakeup calls to managers, boards of directors and auditors. We need to be sure that the responses to these issues focus on the root cause of the event and do not create more regulatory burden and leave the root cause unaddressed. We also need to have realistic expectations. Financial reporting and corporate governance are still effective at most corporations. Given human nature, we must expect that rules will sometime be broken. But we can expect oversight boards to enforce penalties appropriate to the situation that will discourage others from breaking the rules in the future. The complex nature of organizations--and constantly changing services, customers, and business conditions--suggests that market participants need additional types of information. Leading firms have been developing comprehensive risk management processes for internal decisionmaking that can provide the framework for more meaningful disclosures. Regulators should encourage financial firms to develop these new approaches and, in these early stages, give them the flexibility to choose the most appropriate format for disclosure. In doing so, they will enhance the quality of information available for effective market discipline and banking supervision in ways that strengthen the financial system. Though the quality of bank accounting and control systems is strong, bankers should heed lessons to be re-learned from Enron and other recent events. They should strengthen corporate governance to prevent such abusive practices from occurring at their institutions. 
  Svein Gjedrem: Inflation targeting in an oil economy Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at Sparebanken Møre, Ålesund, 4 June 2002. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. *      *      * Norway is unique in being both a fully developed economy and a major oil exporter. Last year, Norway was the world’s third largest exporter of oil. In the future, we will become an increasingly important exporter of natural gas. The present value of remaining petroleum reserves has been estimated at NOK 2 200bn, or roughly 1½ times our current GDP. The bulk of Norway’s petroleum wealth will be extracted over a period of 40 years, from 1990 to 2030. New technology has had a significant impact on our future production potential. In spite of rapid production growth, the estimated present value of our petroleum wealth has increased some 35-40 per cent over the last ten years, measured in real terms. As an example, the registered oil reserves in the Ekofisk field are larger today than when the field started production 30 years ago. Revenues from the petroleum sector have generated a fiscal surplus of some 10-15 per cent since 2000. A similar surplus is generated on the current account, reflecting capital outflows to the Government Petroleum Fund. Even in 1998, when the oil price fell to 10 USD/barrel, Norway had a fiscal surplus of some 4 per cent of GDP. The existence of abundant natural resources can be a mixed blessing. Experience elsewhere suggests that the sudden occurrence of major income flows tends to undermine future production potential. In the long term, it is difficult to ensure an efficient distribution of wealth between and within generations without triggering rent-seeking behaviour among households and firms. In the short term, the volatility in income flows and in terms of trade poses a challenge for monetary and fiscal policy. The mixed blessing of national wealth is not a new problem. Vigilant observers were already aware of this in the 17th century. In modern economic language, the Moroccan ambassador to Spain pointed to the problem of deteriorating competitiveness 300 years ago (see Chart 2). The main long-term challenge to economic policy is how the returns on petroleum wealth can be phased into the economy without a deterioration of our future growth potential. Even with our substantial petroleum reserves, human capital is by far our most important resource. It accounts for over 80 per cent of Norway’s national wealth (present value of future labour). Income from oil and gas is transferred to financial assets through the government budget. These transfers are large in terms of GDP, but still minor compared with our human capital. Oil and gas reserves account for about 7 percent of national wealth today, whereas in 2030 these reserves will be reduced to only 1-2 per cent. To meet these challenges, the Norwegian Government Petroleum Fund was established on 22 June 1990. Its main objective is to manage assets and distribute wealth between generations. It also serves as a buffer against shocks: changes in petroleum revenues are absorbed by the Fund, not by the domestic economy. This reduces the need for structural adjustments and thus promotes exchange rate stability. The Fund invests only in foreign markets. Investments are spread between equities and fixed income instruments, as well as across countries. The net annual inflow to the Fund equals the net fiscal surplus plus the return on the Fund’s capital. In March 2001, a broad majority in the Norwegian parliament (the Storting) adopted a new set of guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. According to the new guideline for fiscal policy, petroleum revenues are to be phased in approximately in pace with the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. 
  The guideline makes fiscal policy predictable and anchors it in a long-term strategy. It also makes policy robust to changes in oil prices and ensures that petroleum wealth will be of benefit both today and in the future. The guidelines imply that the structural non-oil budget deficit will equal 4 per cent of the total value of the Fund. The non-oil deficit is thus financed by the return on the Fund, ensuring both long-term fiscal balance and a continued phasing in of petroleum revenues. The use of petroleum revenues will accordingly increase as long as the Petroleum Fund is expanding. Fiscal policy will contribute to stimulating aggregate demand in the Norwegian economy every year. This annual expansionary fiscal impact poses a challenge to stabilisation policy in general and monetary policy in particular. Underlying real expenditure growth has exceeded mainland GDP for the last 4 years. Nominal growth in 2002 is 7 per cent. (The deflator, mainly wages, is 4½ per cent). Measured as a share of GDP, public expenditure is growing rapidly. In 2002 alone, this share will increase by some 2½ percentage points. According to the Revised National Budget, an increase in expenditure of 7 per cent this year will lead to an estimated growth in public sector consumption of only 1½ per cent. The rest will be spent on government transfers and wage growth. This is consistent with close adherence to the new fiscal guidelines. The new guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy were introduced simultaneously, and are not independent of each other. Fiscal policy is geared towards the phasing in of oil revenues; monetary policy has been given a more explicit responsibility for macroeconomic stabilisation. Monetary policy is to be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Monetary policy affects the economy with considerable and variable lags. The key rate is set on the basis of an overall assessment of the inflation outlook two years ahead. If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. It is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. Up to March 2001, the Bank pursued exchange rate stability against European currencies. Implicitly, this meant that inflation in Norway had to be kept at the target for the euro area. From 1999 onwards, the ECB’s target was defined as an inflation rate below 2 per cent. Since the introduction of an inflation target, the underlying inflation rate has been around 2½ per cent. The rate of increase in the headline CPI has shown somewhat wider variations, but averaged 2¼ per cent in the 1990s. The use of oil revenues must be counteracted by a tight monetary policy. A tight monetary policy implies relatively high interest rates, a strong krone, or both. As fiscal policy creates demand for resources in public services and other sheltered sectors, industries exposed to foreign competition may be faced with difficulties finding labour and higher labour costs. The contest for resources is likely to lead to a real appreciation of the krone and a deterioration of competitiveness in our exposed sectors. The krone exchange rate has appreciated as a result of a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. Combined with low growth abroad and increased trade with low-cost countries such as China, this has led to a fall in import prices. The relatively high price increases of Norwegian products reflect high wage growth and a tight labour market. The krone exchange rate, measured against the trade-weighted index, has appreciated around 13 per cent in the last two years. However, the krone was exceptionally weak in mid-2000. The krone is 4-5 per cent stronger today than in the early 1990s, and about as strong as the previous high in early 1997. Thus, the recent strong showing of the krone is not without precedent. Changes in the oil price have time and again been an important factor behind exchange rate movements. Empirical evidence shows that the exchange rate is affected mainly by large fluctuations in the oil price. The krone tends to depreciate if the oil price is very low, as happened during the Russian crisis in 1998. On the other hand, the krone did not appreciate accordingly when the oil price surged from 1999 onwards. Hence, the relationship between the oil price and the exchange rate has not been evident for the last two years. Since late 2001, however, our currency may have been used as a hedge against the upside risk to the oil price, and this may have contributed to its appreciation. 
  Another factor behind the appreciation of the krone is the current low risk premium in global currency markets (measured by a global risk index, GRI). Since the beginning of this year, lower risk premiums have accompanied a stronger krone. Developments in the GRI were also an important factor during the Russian crisis in 1998-1999. When global risk premiums and interest rates are low, investors may turn to higher-yield currencies. There is also a tendency for more peripheral currencies to attract increased attention when volatility between the major global currencies is subdued and risk premiums are low. The interest rate differential has been an important explanation for the movements in the krone exchange rate, at least since the summer of 1999. A higher interest rate differential has accompanied a stronger krone. The krone has appreciated significantly since the beginning of this year, however, and apparently somewhat more than what can be explained by the interest rate differential alone. One explanation may be that market participants react to signs of pressure in the economy by adjusting their interest rate expectations in the longer term. This has an impact on longer-term interest rates. Thus, movements in the exchange rate may be a result of changes in forward rates, as well as current interest rates. Since early January, the 12-month money market differential appears to have followed the krone exchange rate more closely than the 3-month differential. The pressure on internal resources seems to have resulted in expectations of tight monetary conditions, which contributed to the recent appreciation of the krone. The nominal appreciation of the krone has been accompanied by a significant real appreciation of Norwegian labour. Measured in local labour costs, cost competitiveness has been deteriorating since 1997. For a time, profits in the exposed sector were not affected by the increase in labour costs, as the krone depreciated. However, this depreciation could not last, as it would have ignited domestic inflationary pressures. Tight labour market conditions warrant a relatively tight monetary policy. Norwegian interest rates are not very high, however, when our wage growth is compared with that of other countries. On the contrary, the recent appreciation of the krone will have a cushioning effect on inflation and thus on interest rates. Since 1998, the increase in labour costs has been between 5 and 7 per cent. This year’s wage negotiations were no exception. It now seems evident that wage growth will be significantly higher than our previous estimate of 5 per cent this year. The carry-over to next year is also substantial, especially in retail trade and the public sector. It is evident from this year’s wage negotiations that our labour market is tight. Norges Bank kept interest rates unchanged at the Executive Board meeting on Wednesday, 22 May. The Bank changed its stance on future inflation risks. The main reason was the higher-than-projected wage increases. According to the Bank’s assessment of the risks associated with the inflation outlook, the appreciation of the krone cannot fully counteract stronger wage growth, faster growth in consumption, a higher oil price and a somewhat more favourable global economic outlook.  
                                
                                        
                                      
                                         
                                         
               
 BIS Review 35/2002 1 Jaime Caruana: Asset price bubbles - implications for monetary, regulatory and international policies Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, 24 April 2002. *      *      * One of the central topics of debate among economists has traditionally been the reasons for economic cycles, the factors that may amplify or smooth them, whether the authorities should aim to iron them out and, if so, how this can be done. More recently, the role of the financial sector in the dynamics of economic cycles has emerged as a key question in this debate. I would like to focus today on some problems posed to regulators and policy-makers by asset price bubbles and the credit cycle, and to share with you some thoughts on a regulatory device we have recently introduced in Spain to deal with some of these problems: the so-called forward-looking provisioning, also referred to as the dynamic or statistical provision. The pro-cyclical behaviour of the banking sector, which is now generally accepted in the literature, is receiving increasing attention by academics, policymakers and market participants. There is a growing feeling that the financial sector contributes to the swings in real activity and may even intensify and accelerate them. Feedback effects between credit growth and rises in asset prices are increasingly evident, although not yet well understood. Transmission channels from the financial sector to the real sector are becoming more and more flexible, rapid and complex. This is particularly clear for industrial countries, whose financial markets are more sophisticated, but it is also affecting emerging markets, as a logical consequence of their rapid integration into global financial markets. I will focus on these issues in the first part of my speech, in particular on whether the recent behaviour of financial markets is exacerbating the volatility and cyclicality of the real economy. Insofar as this is the case, the next question we regulators should ask ourselves is whether this might be a result of the increasing weight of the financial sector in the economy or spontaneous financial market developments, such as new risk management techniques by market participants and/or a by-product of prudential regulations which might unintendedly amplify financial cycles. This debate has gained momentum recently in the context of the discussions for a new Basel Capital Accord. One of the issues identified in the discussions was precisely to what extent there are factors in the old or new regulations favouring excessive pro-cyclicality. But we should not overemphasise this point. It is true that a certain degree of cyclicality in risk management techniques and regulations is not only unavoidable but also sensible. We regulators ask banks to be more risk-sensitive and risk-sensitive usually means pro-cyclical behaviour. The second part of my address will deal with the forward-looking provisioning system recently adopted in Spain. The merit of this regulation is that it introduces incentives for better risk management by banks, while at the same time attenuating the cyclicality of the financial sector and, thereby, swings in the real economy. In my concluding remarks I will try to summarise the main lessons we have learned in discussing, designing and implementing the new system, with an emphasis on the broader economic view rather than on the purely supervisory one. Let me bring forward my main conclusion: there are regulatory mechanisms, like dynamic provisioning, that provide incentives for sound risk management and are anti-cyclical by nature and can therefore moderate cyclical swings. * * * * * Recent experience in a number of countries shows that credit expansion and asset price increases - and bubbles - are mutually reinforcing processes (see Graph 1). Asset prices may start to rise in an economy because new investment opportunities appear or simply because of overly lax financial conditions. When asset prices rise so does the value of collateral, which makes financing easier, increasing the demand for assets. That in turn pushes asset prices upward. In the downturn, as the value of collateral drops, financing possibilities decline, as does thus credit growth, a process often reinforced by financial institutions pursuing much more cautious credit policies as they are incurring losses or making smaller profits in this phase of the cycle. Tighter credit policies reinforce recessionary forces and provoke additional reductions in asset prices. 
 2 BIS Review 35/2002  This sequence affects different categories of assets (commercial property, residential property, equity), whose impact on the real economy and transmission channels differ. Commercial property seems particularly linked to the business cycle, while residential property has a larger impact on consumption. Equity prices are intertwined with business profits and investment but are also related to spending through wealth effects, depending on the role equity plays in the determination of financial wealth. This interaction between credit cycles and asset price bubbles poses a number of challenges for the authorities and regulators, both in the monetary policy and financial stability domains. In the upswing, inflationary pressures related to excessive credit growth are compounded by financial imbalances resulting from unwarranted optimism on the part of corporations and households and excessive risk-taking on the part of financial institutions. In the downturn, recessionary and deflationary forces are aggravated by credit contraction as a result of excessive risk aversion by lenders. The possible explanatory factors of this potential amplification of the cycle in the financial sector are many-faceted and complex. First, heightened competition in the banking sector and in financial markets leads in an upturn to riskier strategies that are only corrected when the rise in bad debts becomes evident in the downturn. Second, there seems to be a tendency for economic agents to overreact to changes in their environment, leading to over-optimism in times of plenty and over-pessimism in bad times. Third, herding usually reinforces existing trends and causes overshooting. Fourth, the use of common assessment and risk management tools by market participants, and finally an excessive and shortsighted focus on “shareholder value” may also amplify swings. Prudential regulations may also occasionally have proven conducive to an excessive emphasis on the short term when assessing risks. What can the authorities do to counter these tendencies? Debate among academics, policymakers and market participants has been intense in recent years, and is far from settled. This is an area particularly open to discussion, where new ideas and new evidence are forthcoming. Indeed, the way monetary stability and financial stability interact with each other seems a particularly complex topic, and the impact of specific measures on both fields is uncertain. As far as monetary policy is concerned, the debate on whether it should react to asset prices has been one of the most interesting of recent years. Insofar as asset prices contain useful information that helps predict future price -and output- developments, they should clearly be included in the set of indicators the central bank uses for decision-making. This is not, however, as easy as it may sound. First, because empirical evidence on the usefulness of asset prices in predicting future price and output developments is not conclusive. And second, because the integration of asset prices in macroeconomic models poses a series of practical difficulties. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 3 Going one step further, a related question is whether monetary policy should react directly to asset prices, over and above the impact of the latter on inflationary prospects. The argument would be that deflating an asset price bubble at an early stage contributes “per se” to long-term financial and monetary stability. Against this view, I tend to share the position of those arguing that asset price bubbles are very difficult to identify in practice and, even assuming that they were correctly recognised, there is a lot of uncertainty as to how asset markets would react to policy changes. Furthermore, this strategy may prove difficult to communicate to the public. As concerns financial policy, the regulators’ task of ensuring the long-term soundness of the financial system entails creating the right incentives for market participants not reacting in excess in a given cyclical position and avoiding excessive misalignments. To this end it is essential, first, to encourage better knowledge of the risks assumed, a long-term orientation to analyses and, consequently, more prudent management within financial institutions. Second, a greater heterogeneity among financial market players to avoid mimetic behaviour seems desirable, although this is something the markets would normally develop by themselves. Third, greater transparency and disclosure by the authorities and private institutions would help market participants to focus on fundamentals. Fourth, a better understanding and evaluation of liquidity patterns in financial markets is called for, on the part of both market participants and supervisors. Finally, the regulatory authorities should obviously not introduce rules promoting short-term strategies.   Let me focus now on the relationship between bank credit, loan losses and provisions for loan losses. There is ample international evidence on the cyclical pattern of credit, which is very strongly correlated to GDP growth, as shown in Graph 2 for the case of Spain (with an elasticity higher than one, meaning that when real product grows, credit tends to grow more, and when real product falls, credit likewise tends to fall even more). Demand and supply effects are difficult to disentangle in credit cyclical dynamics. On the one hand, more economic activity tends to cause more credit demand. At the same time, credit rationing tends to diminish when the economy is booming and tightens when the economy is in recession. Both demand and supply seem to account therefore for credit cyclical swings. Competition is a key factor in explaining credit supply dynamics. Strong competitive pressures may exacerbate the trend towards looser credit conditions in the upturn, because the fight for a market share coincides with the observation of low non-performing loans, leading towards an over-optimistic perception of low risk. The probability of losses exists from the moment the loan is granted, but it will only become apparent ex-post, with the emergence of default problems. Most credit risk mistakes are actually made during 
 4 BIS Review 35/2002 the expansionary phase, when optimism is prevailing, although only in the downturn will they become evident. Empirical estimates show that there is a strong correlation between credit growth and bad loans, with an average lag of around three years (see upper part of Graph 3). This means that a credit expansion process is likely to lead to some credit quality problems in roughly that time horizon. The average duration of the economic cycle (from boom to bust) is similar. This implies that if banks only look at contemporary bad loans to determine their credit risk policies, they will restrain credit and increase risk premia in the downturn. The higher cost of funding for bank-dependent borrowers will feed back to activity, reinforcing recessionary forces.  I turn now to provisions. In Spain, until year 2000, loan loss provisions were strongly pro-cyclical (as in many other countries), because they were largely linked to the volume of contemporaneous problem assets. This static provisions are backward-looking, they are based on past events. Only are accounted for loan by loan when borrowers fail to repay or in some cases when the situation of the borrower deteriorates significantly. As a consequence, the ratio of provisions to total loans fell therefore during periods of economic growth and tended to rise considerably during downturns (see lower part of Graph 3). As a result of this, the latent risk of loan portfolios was not properly recognised in the profit and loss account under the old system. In periods of economic expansion the fall in doubtful loans went hand in hand with the decrease in provisions, which in turn allowed bank managers to improve bottom-line profits. However, one can argue that there is something wrong in the level of profits shown if the latent credit risk in the loan portfolio is not properly taken into account. Intrinsically every loan has an expected (or potential) loss that should be recognised as a cost by means of an early provision. Otherwise, the picture of the true profitability and solvency of the bank over time could be distorted. More dangerously, the overvaluation of profits might lead to an increase in dividends that could undermine the solvency of the bank. Therefore, the acknowledgement of latent losses is a prudent valuation principle (similar to the mathematical reserves set aside by insurance companies) that contributes to correcting the cyclical bias that currently exists in the profit and loss account. The management of credit risk in the banking sector has perhaps something to learn from insurance practices. Theoretical papers on bank credit risk management also go in the same direction, stressing the importance of proper pricing (i.e. the interest rate charged should cover expected losses as well as the cost of holding capital for unexpected losses). Estimating expected losses when the bank assesses the borrower is the first step for sound risk management. Proper risk management is obviously a primary task of bank managers and shareholders. But we, as bank supervisors, should evaluate the effectiveness of a bank’s policies and practices for assessment of loan quality and provisioning practices. The ability of a bank’s loan review system to identify, classify, monitor and address loans with credit quality problems in a timely manner should be 
 BIS Review 35/2002 5 assessed by the supervisor on a regular basis as part of its risk-based approach. A misclassification of assets (and the corresponding under-provisioning) is always present in banks heading for profitability and solvency difficulties. Sound credit risk management practices at the banks’ level, including acknowledgement of expected losses in due time, collide to a certain extent with the current accounting framework. The problem stems from the fact that this framework does not support the notion of provisions on the basis of expected losses, with the result that the recognition of losses is frequently delayed. Some of the answers given by accounting-rules setters to this problem (i.e. full fair value accounting) may have other important drawbacks. I will touch upon this later. Let me briefly summarise the content of our dynamic provision. In December 1999, the Bank of Spain introduced a new solvency provision, the so-called statistical or dynamic provision, focusing on the statistical risk embedded in the unimpaired portfolio. It started to apply in July 2000. The main idea behind this provision is to try to capture, together with the other provisions of the Spanish system, expected losses. From the very moment that a loan is granted, and before any impairment on this specific loan appears, there is a positive default probability (no matter how low it might be) following a statistical distribution with an expected loss. The expected loss is known in a statistical sense but not yet identified in a specific loan operation or borrower. As the risk appears at the beginning of the operation, so does the statistical provision requirement. With this system, provisions run in parallel to revenues and are therefore distributed through the cycle allowing for a better mapping between income and costs in the profit and loss account. The statistical provision that we have established works in practice as an addition to the “old” existing provisions: when “old” provisions are well below expected losses, the “new” dynamic provision is added. In good years the net “specific” provisions are very low (or even negative, if there are substantial recoveries), so the new provision accumulates. But in bad years the “specific” provisions increase sharply, eventually exceeding the gross burden of the statistical provision. The net result is that with this system provisions are distributed over the cycle, providing a better recognition of expected losses. More specifically, the amount of the statistical provision is the difference between the measure of latent risk (i.e. expected losses) and the specific provision (that covering impaired assets). In good times the specific provision is low and the statistical provision is positive. However, in a slowdown, as the impaired assets rise, the specific provision requirements increase and the statistical provision becomes negative. This means that the statistical fund (accumulated in previous years) starts being used, its proceeds (the difference between the latent risk and the specific provision) being credited to the profit and loss account. Therefore, thanks to the mechanism of the statistical provision, the burden of credit risk on the profits of banking institutions is better spread over the cycle and more in accordance with the evolution of expected losses. The new scheme offers banks two options. First, to use their own internal measurements of the statistical credit risk and second, to use a standard method. The Bank of Spain expects that in the future an increasing number of institutions will be able to show robust computations, in the framework of an integrated credit risk management system. However, probably in the next year or two, most banks will use the standard method. In the standard system the supervisor sets the parameters. The portfolio is distributed in six blocks, according to the relative riskiness of the different assets, or off-balance sheet items with credit risk. A vector of coefficients (ranging from 0 to 1.5%) is applied to the exposures contained in the six blocks. The resulting figure is the estimated expected loss for the bank portfolio. The computation produces an aggregate annual gross burden (i.e. the expected loss) that, in relative terms, should equal the average annual net insolvency burden borne by the Spanish banking system in the last fourteen years. This time span covers more than a full economic cycle. You might note that the internal approach to calculate the expected losses or the latent risk squares perfectly with Basel II developments. The new provision has started with a vector of coefficients that will result in a burden lower than this average. This takes account of the improvements in risk management since the last cyclical peak (93/94), and facilitates acceptability of the scheme among institutions. Probably the scheme will be adjusted in the coming years, on the basis of the experience gained with its application. 
 6 BIS Review 35/2002 A limit of three times the annual gross burden has been put on the accumulated statistical provision, to avoid an unnecessary or excessive accumulation of funds in the event of a prolonged cyclical bonanza. At present, the impairment of assets and other credit risk is at an historical low in Spain; and it will remain so in the foreseeable future, due to good economic conditions. The new provision should thus accumulate a significant amount of funds, with a reasonable, acceptable impact on the bottom line of the profit and loss account. Those funds should allow extra solvency losses to be covered when the tide turns. Technically, the new provision is considered a value adjustment. In the published accounts it will be deducted from the book value of the credit items that produce it. It is not considered a reserve to be integrated in the regulatory own funds. The annual accounts shall report the various solvency provisions (or value adjustments), and their method of computation. The statistical provision is not a tax-deductible expense although banks can use an asset account of anticipated taxes (i.e. the impact on the profit and loss is neutral but still negative in terms of cash flows). Finally, given the considerable internationalisation of our banking system in recent years, it is important to keep in mind that the statistical provision is required on an individual level of all the members of a consolidated banking group. It is not possible to counter a positive statistical provision requirement in one bank with a negative one in another bank of the same group. This individual bank approach reinforces the statistical provision requirement and squares well with the fact that expected losses arise at an individual bank portfolio level. By now, you are probably wondering about the real impact of the statistical provision in the Spanish banking system. As far as the profit and loss account is concerned, the statistical provision for depository institutions represents around 12% of 2001 total operating margin. At the end of 2000 the statistical fund reached 15% of its maximum amount (remember there is a cap of three times the latent risk) and at the end of 2001 it stands at 27%. At current rates, the statistical fund will reach its peak at the end of 2004. As far as the cyclical behaviour of banks, it is too soon to say, but we tend to think that the anti-cyclical nature of the statistical provision is influencing bank behaviour. I must confess that gaining acceptance among banking institutions for our new provisioning scheme was not easy. Banks were reluctant to see their bottom line profits indented, arguing that the Spanish provisioning system was already demanding (tight asset classification rules plus on-site monitoring and enforcement by Bank of Spain inspectors, not to mention high solvency ratios by international standards). Apart from banks’ initial, and understandable, criticism, some other voices have been raised, although not very loudly, against dynamic provisioning. Some of them can be readily refuted. Others merit careful discussion because the alternatives they propose may affect financial stability. The most obvious criticism is that a system of dynamic provisioning smoothes bank profits. It is true that the statistical provision tends to smooth profits over the course of the cycle. But it is no less true that the current ex post provisioning system (i.e. setting aside a specific provision when the impaired asset appears) artificially increases the volatility of banks’ profits. And what is more important, this increased volatility in the latter case has less to do with economic fundamentals (I. e. expected losses) than with accounting rules. If expected losses appear from the beginning of the operation, banks should start to provision them at the very outset. This means an increase in provisions and a decline in bank profits during expansionary periods, just when credit risk expands the most. When the downturn arrived and expected losses turn into real losses, the impact of provisions on profits would be lower since a significant amount of the expected loss had been previously acknowledged. To the extent that the extra volatility of bank profits is the result of an insufficient recognition of expected losses, dynamic provisioning only restores part of the distortion created. From a prudential point of view, it is clear that dynamic provisioning limits dangerous capital erosions in times of plenty, requiring banks to provision expected losses and avoid paying out dividends (remember the insurance case). Some observers mention that there is no need for ex ante provisioning since future margin income is enough to cover expected losses. For supervisors, however, to rely on future margin income might be an overly adventurous stance. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 7 Let me expand more on this. First of all, experience has painfully shown us that the pricing of a loan is not always properly adjusted to the risk involved in the operation (even taking into account fees and future customer relationships). I have already talked about strong competition for market share or over-optimism. Secondly, even if the risk is properly priced, the proceeds from a high margin could have been paid out to shareholders by the time the impairment appears. Moreover, dynamic provisioning allows for a timely recognition of both the income and costs stemming from bank loan portfolios. An alternative to the current accounting framework is being promoted at some international fora. I am talking about full fair value accounting (FFVA), I would like underline the word “full”. It is quite clear to me that FFVA has, for the time being, insurmountable drawbacks for commercial banks both of theoretical and practical nature. I would place a big question mark over FFVA feasibility. Dynamic provisioning is a reasonable approach to the fair value of a loan without the numerous drawbacks of FFVA. The statistical provision does not increase volatility of profits and facilitates prudent risk management. To conclude, let me emphasise that this provisioning regulation in Spain was introduced for prudential reasons. It has three main advantages: First, it provides banks with incentives for better risk management (i.e. risk appraisal, pricing, internal models, etc.). Second, it reconciles good risk management with sound and prudent accounting practices. And finally, it is anti-cyclical in nature (therefore mitigating the tendency to reinforce cycles). Overall, these three advantages can be summarised as one: they reinforce the soundness of each single banking institution and of the whole system. My answer to the first question posed at the beginning of this speech is that, although risk management techniques may induce risk-sensitive behaviour, and risk-sensitive usually means pro-cyclical, that is not necessarily the case when some good regulatory practices, such as dynamic provisioning, are adopted, contributing to taming economic and financial cycles. Let me finish by adding a word of caution. Regulatory devices per se do not suffice to attain a safe and sound banking system. A proper risk management culture deeply ingrained in banks’ practices is also a necessary condition to reach that goal. Consequently, banks and regulators should work hand in hand to improve financial stability. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 1 I J Macfarlane: Overview of the Australian economy Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Sydney, 31 May 2002. *      *      * Mr Chairman, with the normal timetable interrupted by last November’s election, it is slightly over a year since we appeared before this Committee. Since it has been an extremely eventful year, I will have a fair bit of work to do today to fill the gap. Looking back over the Hansard of the last meeting in May 2001, I see that I was explaining why we had lowered interest rates three times (in February, March and April). At the time of our meeting, I was pretty confident that the Australian economy was on a recovery path after a short housing-induced setback in the second half of 2000, but none of us were sure about what was going to happen in the United States and the rest of the world. External events were seen to be crucial to our fortunes and to the evolution of our monetary policy. As it turned out, these events unfolded in two distinct phases: – Over the rest of 2001, the world economy continued to weaken. The United States had a mild recession, with consumer spending holding up and so preventing it from being as deep as earlier ones. On the other hand, the business sector had a pronounced recession judging from the fall in industrial production, business investment and corporate earnings. Most other major countries had negligible growth during the year, so that for the G7 countries as a whole, growth was virtually zero over the year. Even so, it looked for a time that it could have been much worse.  For most of last year, therefore, we were receiving gloomy news on the world economy. After a brief respite in mid-year, bad news began to re-emerge in July-August, so much so that we in Australia eased monetary policy on 5 September. Then the events of 11 September induced a new bout of gloom, and there was a real fear that the world economy would weaken further in 2002 and so experience a prolonged and deep recession. Monetary policy was eased virtually everywhere. In our case, even though our own economy remained in good shape, we eased in anticipation that the weakening prospects for the world economy would eventually flow through to the domestic economy. – The second phase began in the early months of this year, when it became increasingly clear that our earlier fears about 2002 were not going to be realised. The US economy grew more quickly in the final months of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002 than anyone had expected. In addition, we received better news from non-Japan Asia and Europe. It is now pretty clear that 2002 will be a year of recovery for the world economy, and the IMF is forecasting good growth through the year. The debate is no longer about whether there will be a recovery, but about whether it will be an average or below-average recovery. There is still a good deal of uncertainty about how robust the US recovery will be once the inventory correction has passed, i.e. in the second half of the year. Some of the bubble-type distortions have not been fully unwound so there is still a fair bit of caution around, including in the Federal Reserve Board. So we are in a world economy with a more comfortable outlook than a year ago, but with still some uncertainties remaining. What of the Australian economy? The story here has been much less exciting, but the results a lot more satisfying. As you know, GDP grew by 4.1 per cent over 2001, which was the highest among comparable OECD countries. We can now safely claim that the Australian economy has weathered a world recession without itself experiencing one. This is the first time in my experience that such an outcome has occurred, and it must give us confidence in the soundness of our economy. But before getting carried away, we should concede: • By the standards of earlier world recessions, last year’s was a mild and short one, and some observers may be reluctant to classify it as a fully-fledged recession. 
 2 BIS Review 35/2002 • We did not escape scot-free. If you average our growth in 2000 and 2001, it comes out at 3 per cent so we did experience a modest slowing. As well as good GDP growth, we have experienced quite good employment growth over the past year. It appears that the slowdown in our economic activity resulted in a trough-to-peak rise in unemployment from 6 to 7 per cent, and that half of the rise has already been whittled away so far in 2002. This is extremely good news because it is the first time for three decades that we have been through an international downturn that has resulted in the peak unemployment rate in Australia being lower than its predecessor. At this point in proceedings, I usually review the previous set of forecasts I gave the Committee and then present a new set for the period ahead. I will continue that tradition, but we should bear in mind there is a full year of new data available to us so there is more to review. Last May, when we had only two of the four quarters of 2000/01 available to us, I said we expected year-on-year GDP growth in that year to be about 2 per cent; in the event, it came in at 1.9 per cent. My forecast for year-on-year GDP growth in 2001/02 was 3 to 3½ per cent, and our current forecast (still with two quarters yet to come) is 3.6 per cent. So, even though there have been big swings in the international outlook in the meantime, the last 18 months seem to have turned out much as we expected (unlike the previous six months where the extent of the housing-induced setback took us largely by surprise). On the prices front, we still had not seen the GST bulge pass through the system when we met last May. The forecast I presented at the time was that when it had passed through, the rate of inflation measured by the CPI would settle at 2½ per cent. In fact, that was “spot on” for the four quarters to the September quarter of 2001, but by the December quarter inflation had risen to 3.1 per cent, and by the March quarter 2002 it was 2.9 per cent. So, on average, we slightly underestimated the rise in inflation. For the year ahead, i.e. 2002/03, we are forecasting the economy to continue growing at 3½ to 4 per cent as it completes the eleventh year of its expansion and enters the twelfth. The outlook for inflation over the same period could best be summarised as remaining near the top of our target range, although we expect it to go down slightly for a time, and then to come back up. This was the view expressed in our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy released earlier this month. In short, the outlook for economic growth and inflation is such that the economy no longer needs the boost provided by an expansionary stance of monetary policy. We took the first step towards returning monetary policy to a more neutral setting earlier this month, and, unless unforeseen developments intrude, we should continue the process as we go ahead, while all the time carefully examining incoming data, both from here and abroad, to ensure that developments remain on track. I will return to this theme later in my presentation, but before doing so I should examine the economic outlook in a little more detail. In looking ahead, we always have to ask ourselves where the balance of risks lies. Another way of expressing this is to ask: what is the main risk for the economy if we did not adjust monetary policy? In our view, the most important risk would be that the expansionary forces in the economy would increase to an excessive degree, bringing with it the likelihood that inflation would rise from its present position at the top of our target range to something in excess of it. In the process, we would also expect other imbalances to emerge which would ultimately bring the current expansion to an end. Of course, we cannot entirely rule out the alternative outcome whereby the economy slows and puts sufficient downward pressure on inflation that it threatens to fall below the bottom of our range, but we would put a low probability on that outcome. As has been the case now for some time, to the extent we can identify risks on the downside, they come mainly from abroad. Even though the US economy grew quickly in the first quarter of the year, the strength of its recovery is still uncertain, and there are risks to the world economy from the unstable political situations in the Middle East and Indian sub-continent. On the domestic front, the most easily identifiable area of spending that will exert a dampening influence later in the year is likely to be house-building, largely because so many houses will have been built that construction will not be able to continue at its former rate. But overall, barring some unforeseen international event, we find it hard to see serious risks on the downside for the Australian economy. We cannot rule out slightly below-average growth, but we would regard anything significantly more adverse as unlikely. Instead, conditions are much more conducive to stronger economic growth than last year. The turnaround in the world economy will mean that it will be a positive force for growth over the year ahead rather than a dampening influence. This should be good for exports, investment and confidence 
 BIS Review 35/2002 3 in general. As well, both consumer and business confidence have returned to quite high levels after a couple of setbacks last year. Business investment has been quite restrained over the past couple of years but is about to pick up according to the plans businesses supply to the ABS’s Capex Survey. This is not surprising given the relatively healthy profit situation, the high level of business confidence and the expected growth in spending. These more buoyant conditions may also encourage businesses to attempt to rebuild profit margins, which will be a factor underpinning inflation over the next year or so. Thus, we believe that if monetary policy maintained its present stance for too much longer, there is little risk of a serious slowdown, but a high risk that the economy in time would overheat. This provides the basis for our view that monetary policy should be returned to a more neutral setting. I think there is widespread agreement with this assessment of the situation, but inevitably there will be people who do not agree. One doubt you sometimes see expressed is the fear that any rise in interest rates will “choke off the expansion”. Not surprisingly, we feel that this fear is misplaced. At one level, it amounts to saying that the expansion is so fragile that it can only be continued if monetary policy is kept permanently at an expansionary setting. We also care about continuing the expansion, but feel that the least risky way of doing so is with a more neutral interest rate setting. At another level, the fear may be that we at the Reserve Bank will err on the tight side. Of course, that is possible, but our track record does not support this view. Over the past decade or so, the thing that stands out about our monetary policy is the fast rate of economic growth it has permitted compared with other comparable countries, not any tendency to over-achieve with inflation reduction. Where we differ from some observers is that we are mainly interested in the medium run, i.e. we want to sustain the expansion rather than to maximise its speed over the next year. We have been consistent in this approach for the best part of a decade, and it has served us well. I would now like to change to a subject that was highlighted by this Committee in its press release announcing today’s hearing, namely credit card reform. The Reserve Bank released its consultation document in December last year. In it, we proposed, subject to further consultation, three major changes to the four party credit card schemes that operate in Australia: – first, a new and transparent standard for setting the interchange fees on credit card transactions which would lead to a reduction in those fees, and thus in the merchant service fees paid by businesses; – second, the ending of the prohibition imposed by the card schemes that prevents merchants from passing the cost of accepting credit cards on to cardholders; and – third, the elimination of the restriction on entry to the credit card schemes that keeps out potential competitors that are not deposit-taking institutions. After we released our document, we allowed interested parties till mid-March to prepare submissions, and we have been going through those submissions thoroughly with them since then. We want to give each party every opportunity to put their view forward, even if it involves multiple meetings. We are still in this process and, when we have finished, we will release our findings sometime after the end of June. During this period, we at the Reserve Bank have not engaged in public debate on this subject, even though some of the other participants in the credit card industry have been quite vocal. We see our role during this stage essentially as the umpire adjudicating between the competing views of the financial institutions and card schemes on one side, and the consumers, retailers, billers, etc. on the other side. Of course, our umpire role should not inhibit the Committee from asking any questions it wishes to. 
 BIS Review 34/2002 1 Mark W Olson: The European Union’s financial services action plan Testimony of Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, 22 May 2002. *      *      * Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to speak today on matters relating to the operations of U.S. banking organizations in the European Union. This is a time of significant change within the European Union with the ongoing efforts to complete the single market in financial services. I join with my colleagues here today in welcoming the European Union’s plans to make its market more efficient and transparent. The United States has always been a strong supporter of European unity as well as market reforms that eliminate unnecessary regulatory burden and promote better functioning of markets and financial systems. The Financial Services Action Plan of the European Union includes proposals that are aimed at achieving these same goals. The FSAP involves a series of regulatory and legislative measures designed to achieve, among other things, a single wholesale European market; open and secure retail markets; and state-of-the-art prudential rules and supervision. To further these goals, a number of directives have been or will be adopted that deal with issues such as money laundering, investment services, implementation of new Basel capital rules and international accounting standards, and supervision of financial conglomerates. I will deal with the latter three areas later in my testimony. These directives, and all of the other measures being adopted in the FSAP, will affect U.S. financial services firms with operations in Europe. The FSAP is intended to modernize and enhance the efficiency and structure of the regulatory regime for financial services within the European Union. To the extent that the FSAP achieves these goals, U.S. firms are well-positioned to offer innovative and efficient services to customers throughout Europe. At the Federal Reserve, we follow with interest changes to foreign bank regulatory and supervisory systems and seek to understand how these systems affect the banking institutions for which we are responsible. This is especially important in the European Union, in which U.S. banking organizations have substantial operations. As of December 2001, 27 U.S. banking organizations operate in the European Union with aggregate EU assets of over $650 billion. Moreover, 66 EU banking organizations conduct commercial banking and other financial services in the United States with aggregate U.S. assets of over $1.7 trillion. These figures demonstrate that globalization is not a new concept or recent process. As U.S. industry has expanded its foreign operations, U.S. supervision has had to evolve to take account of the fact that our banks operate in many different legal and regulatory environments. We have strengthened existing cooperative relationships with bank supervisors in other countries and established new ones as U.S. banks continue to expand their operations into other countries. At the Federal Reserve, we conduct bilateral consultations with individual authorities and participate in international groups of financial services supervisors. We engage our EU counterparts both bilaterally and through these groups. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies participate regularly in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which was formed in order to improve communication and cooperation among supervisors of internationally active banks. Some of the key achievements of the Committee include the 1988 Basel Capital Accord, which created for the first time an internationally accepted standard for assessing levels of bank capital. The Accord replaced an uneven system of national standards and has allowed banks to expand internationally on more competitive basis. Similarly, the Committee adopted its Minimum Standards for Consolidated Supervision in 1992, establishing the principle that a bank should be subject to a supervisory regime in which its financial statements are consolidated and subject to review by home country authorities. Both the Capital Accord and the principle of consolidated bank supervision have become the internationally recognized standards that bank supervisors should aspire to meet. Nine of the member states of the European Union are also members of the Basel Committee and a representative of the European Commission participates as an observer. The Federal Reserve and eight of these nine EU countries, and a European Commission observer, also participate in the Joint 
 2 BIS Review 34/2002 Forum, a group established by the Basel Committee, International Organization of Securities Commissioners (IOSCO), and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). The Joint Forum discusses issues arising from the operation of financial services conglomerates and has developed principles appropriate to the supervision of entities that operate within financial groups. These group meetings, as well as many working group meetings on specific issues, provide regular opportunities for U.S. regulators to meet and discuss issues of common interest with European officials. In addition to regular meetings of international groups, the Federal Reserve has longstanding relationships with both national regulators in the European Union and staff of the European Commission. For internationally active banking organizations with operations in both the United States and the European Union, national supervisors may participate in joint examinations of particular institutions, confer with each other on specific issues and meet periodically to discuss an institution’s operations or financial condition. Ongoing communication is recognized as critical for effective supervision. Home and host countries’ interests are both furthered by dialogue and strong supervisory relationships. Regular contact with Commission staff goes back to the 1980s when the EU considered and adopted its Second Banking Directive, aimed at promoting the internal market by establishing the so-called “European passport” for banks chartered in the EU. Under the passport, a bank chartered in one EU country is entitled to establish branches in any other EU country under the authority and supervision of its home country rules. Since that time, several U.S. banks have taken advantage of this early EU regulation by establishing a local bank in a European member state, which then used the “passport” to establish branches in other EU member countries. European subsidiaries of U.S. banks are able to take advantage of the passport under the principle of “national treatment.” National treatment generally means that a country provides parity of treatment between domestic and foreign-owned firms, resulting in equality of competitive opportunity. National treatment has long been the prevailing practice with respect to foreign banks operating in the United States and this practice was incorporated into statute in 1978 with the enactment of the International Banking Act (IBA). This principle has also been incorporated in various trade agreements to which the United States is a party, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). The EU member states are also subscribers to the GATS and consequently to the national treatment principle it contains. Implementing national treatment can be difficult precisely because one country is trying to adapt its own legal and regulatory structure to a foreign firm that is incorporated in a different home country environment. This is a challenge the Federal Reserve has faced over the years as we seek to apply U.S. laws that were adopted for a system of bank holding companies to foreign banks that generally do not have a bank holding company structure. The United States also requires that a foreign bank be subject to comprehensive consolidated supervision by its home country supervisor before it can buy a bank in this country. Under this law, the Federal Reserve must evaluate supervision systems that are different from our own and yet ensure that we are fairly applying the principle of national treatment. U.S. private sector firms may be concerned about new regulatory and supervisory initiatives in the EU because such proposals may require changes in existing operations and/or reporting standards. There may also be a concern that initiatives designed for European firms or industries would not properly take account of home country supervisory structures or regulatory practices. Foreign banks have expressed similar concerns about U.S. regulatory initiatives in the past. At the Federal Reserve, we have found that our open and transparent regulatory process is crucial in helping us to understand how our proposals affect foreign banks and where problems arise, and gives us useful information for evaluating the merits of particular complaints. We have at times proposed regulations on which foreign banks and their governments, including the European Commission, filed adverse comments. These comments helped us to reevaluate our regulations and to determine whether our supervisory and regulatory objectives could be achieved in a different way, consistent with the principle of national treatment. With respect to the implementation of the FSAP in the European Union, the European Union has an obligation to ensure that the rules adopted are consistent with the principle of national treatment. It is our expectation that the European Commission and the member states will seek to do so. Federal Reserve staff has met with Commission staff to discuss a number of matters, including the application of the financial conglomerates directives to U.S. banking organizations. The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing the dialogue with the Commission on matters of mutual interest, both 
 BIS Review 34/2002 3 bilaterally and as part of financial markets discussions led by the Treasury Department. We understand that the Commission has begun to engage in industry consultation as part of the rule writing process and we endorse a process that allows all affected institutions, including those that are foreign-based, to participate actively in the process. The FSAP has a far reaching agenda. I will comment briefly on three issues of particular interest to U.S. banking organizations. With respect to the conglomerates directive, we understand that the impetus for the directive came from the Joint Forum’s principles for the supervision of financial conglomerates. The three parent bodies of the Joint Forum (the Basel Committee, IOSCO and the IAIS) were concerned that, although individual financial companies within a group might be subject to prudential supervision, the consolidated financial group might not be subject to appropriate oversight. This in turn could lead to relationships or transactions that could pose financial risk to the regulated parts of the group. The Joint Forum’s principles were developed to help assure that there are no material gaps in supervisors’ understanding of inter-affiliate relationships within a financial group that could ultimately result in financial instability. We understand that the EU financial conglomerates directive is concerned with this same issue. In the United States, U.S. banking organizations have long been subject to consolidated supervisory oversight. We believe that the Federal Reserve’s supervisory programs and practices for bank holding companies, including financial holding companies, are fully consistent with the requirements that are contemplated under the EU’s financial conglomerates directive. With regard to the capital adequacy directive that is being developed for credit institutions and investment firms in the European Union, we also believe that the ultimate product will not present difficulties for U.S. banking organizations. The European Commission is mindful of the work that is underway in the Basel Supervisors Committee to replace the existing Basel Capital Accord with a more comprehensive risk sensitive framework for assessing an organization’s capital adequacy. When the EU issued its capital adequacy directive for public comment in 2001, commenters raised concerns about the regulatory burden that would be imposed on institutions that would be subject to both the EU capital rules and the Basel capital rules at the national level. The EU committee responsible for the capital adequacy directive has recognized this potential burden and has taken steps to ensure that the EU directive is as consistent as possible with the final revised Basel Accord. Technical working groups of the Basel Committee have been communicating with the EU technical drafting groups with the objective of harmonizing the two frameworks to the fullest extent possible. The most sweeping changes in the Basel capital initiative are intended for internationally active banking organizations. The EU capital adequacy directive is intended to apply to a much wider range of institutions, both those with international operations as well as those that are purely domestic. Thus, the capital adequacy directive will likely address EU specific issues for smaller institutions. Internationally active European banks currently are subject to the Basel capital rules as they have been adopted in individual countries, as well as to the existing EU capital adequacy directive. Some differences between the two sets of rules do exist. Supervisors, however, are aware of these differences and continually strive to minimize the associated regulatory burden on institutions. Because the Basel revisions and the EU capital directive revisions are underway in tandem with similar estimated time frames for completion, there is a good likelihood that the final products will be substantively and significantly more consistent than the current Basel and EU capital rules. The FSAP also contemplates mandating adherence to international accounting standards. Currently, banking organizations in the European Union may prepare their annual financial statements in accordance with the accounting standards of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP), and/or national standards. The use of U.S. GAAP is usually limited to those banking organizations or other companies whose securities are publicly traded on U.S. stock exchanges and are registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In many cases, these companies will also provide separate financial statements based on their national accounting standards and disclosure rules. The European Union will require all EU companies listed on EU exchanges that are currently following national standards to follow IASB standards by 2005 and will require those EU companies that currently follow U.S. GAAP to adopt IASB standards by 2007. The EU is also working to adopt international auditing standards for external audits of EU companies, including banks. The IASB is now independent of the international accounting profession and independently funded. It has adopted many of the structural elements of the FASB in the United States, which are intended to promote an independent, objective standards-setting environment. Many senior American accounting 
 4 BIS Review 34/2002 experts serve on the IASB and its staff. IASB GAAP has many similarities with U.S. GAAP and the IASB plans to propose extensive enhancements to its standards later this year. The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets. The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well. The most recent proposal of the Basel Committee to amend Basel Capital Accord (called Basel II) seeks to strengthen the market’s ability to aid bank supervisors in evaluating banking organizations’ risks and assessing capital adequacy. It consists of three pillars, or tools: a minimum risk-based capital requirement (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III). This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach. The Federal Reserve and the other U.S. banking agencies are also actively involved in the efforts of the Basel Committee to promote sound international accounting, auditing, and disclosure standards and practices for global banking organizations and other companies. For example, an official of the Federal Reserve Board is a member of the Standards Advisory Council that advises the IASB and its trustees on its projects, proposals and standards. The U.S. banking agencies have been active in supporting the Basel Committee in its work with the IASB’s technical advisory groups to enhance the IASB’s standards for financial instruments and bank disclosures and the Basel Committee’s projects with other international groups to promote sound global bank auditing practices. In conclusion, I believe that the European Union should be encouraged to continue its program to strengthen and modernize the rules under which financial services firms operate in Europe. This can only increase competition, enhance efficiency and contribute to economic growth in the EU and globally. We are pleased that the European Commission is broadening its consultation and comment processes on proposals being considered under the FSAP. Supervisory and regulatory measures benefit significantly from an open and transparent process in which affected companies may participate. We would expect that the European Commission and member state national authorities will apply the FSAP’s measures to U.S. firms on a fair and national treatment basis. U.S. banking organizations are dynamic and more than competitive with the rest of the world. Accordingly, we are confident that U.S. firms will benefit from a strengthened and more efficient European market for financial services. 
  Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 21 May 2002 *      *      * I take pleasure in appearing before you today to continue our regular exchanges of views and to report to you on the ECB’s assessment of economic and monetary developments and on the decisions taken by the Governing Council. Moreover, I should like to take the opportunity to address in my introductory remarks two issues related to the growth potential of the euro area economy and to wage developments, which were raised, among other matters, in a letter that you, Madam Chairman, sent me recently as a follow-up to the presentation of the ECB Annual Report to this Committee by the Vice-President of the ECB. Economic and monetary developments The evidence which has become available since my last testimony to your Committee on 23 January 2002 has indeed made us confident that a recovery is under way in the euro area. At the same time, recent developments in consumer price inflation in the euro area have been less favourable than we expected, mainly due to specific and partly temporary factors. Related to this, the outlook for price stability appears to be somewhat less favourable now than it was at the turn of the year. However, there are still uncertainties on the strength of the economic recovery and they, in turn, imply the existence of uncertainties regarding the inflation outlook - and these uncertainties have not diminished since the Governing Council meeting on 2 May. Let me now elaborate on this assessment of the economic outlook for the euro area. Starting with the analysis under the first pillar of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, the annual growth rate of M3 remained high in the first quarter of 2002. The high annual growth rate still reflects the portfolio shifts to liquid positions which occurred last autumn, when the economic and financial environment was characterised by high uncertainty, and euro area investors showed a particularly marked preference for liquid holdings. At the same time, we saw some moderation in the short-term dynamics of M3 in early 2002. However, M3 growth has only recently started to decline and, for the time being, the reversal of the earlier liquidity build-up is proceeding only slowly. The persistence of excess liquidity could become a risk to price stability, particularly at a time of economic recovery in the euro area. In addition, it should also be considered that while the annual rate of growth of loans to the private sector continued to decline until March, there are also early indications that this decline may be coming to an end. Overall, the information from the first pillar therefore continues to deserve particular attention. As regards the second pillar, we are now certain that the trough in economic activity in the euro area was reached at the end of last year. The rise in business confidence in recent months is the most visible indication of the improvement in economic conditions. While the recovery is expected to initially proceed at a gradual pace, euro area real GDP growth rates should again be in line with potential growth later this year. These expectations for a rebound in real GDP growth in the euro area are shared by recently published forecasts of international organisations, which all paint a similar picture. A reversal of the past reduction in inventories, a process which is now under way, and higher export growth, driven by a more positive international environment, should contribute to the gradual economic upswing. Overall, domestic and external factors should foster the recovery. Sound fundamentals and the absence of major imbalances in the euro area which would require a long correction process support this positive outlook for the euro area economy. Yet, despite all these positive elements pointing towards an economic recovery, uncertainties remain about the strength of the current upswing. These are partly related to the development of oil prices and to the speed of the recovery of consumption. In addition, some risks to the economic recovery in the euro area are related to imbalances elsewhere in the world economy. Turning to prices, recent developments in consumer price inflation have been less satisfactory than was expected at the end of last year, when annual inflation rates were expected to decline to levels safely below 2% in 2002 and stabilise thereafter. At present, partly as a result of higher oil prices, 
  inflation rates during 2002 as a whole could turn out to be somewhat higher than we expected at the end of last year. For price stability to be maintained, it is essential that past upward shocks to inflation rates remain of a one-off nature and do not become entrenched in the expectations of economic agents. Recently published inflation forecasts, developments in indicators of inflation expectations, and recent trends in wages neither confirm nor contradict such an entrenchment. While we have to acknowledge that monetary policy cannot affect inflation developments over the short term, we are determined not to put our achievements at risk. It is therefore particularly important at this juncture to remain vigilant with regard to the further evolution of the key factors determining the outlook for prices. The rather protracted upward trend in services prices is, in this respect, one factor to be closely monitored. In addition, prospects for price stability depend largely on wage moderation. It is a mistake to believe that high wage rises per se will increase aggregate demand in real terms. On the contrary, excessive wage claims will increase costs and create inflationary pressures. By doing so, they risk reducing competitiveness, employment growth, and thus consumption. Wage moderation is a key factor not only to maintain price stability, but also to support job creation and economic growth on a sustained basis. In this regard, it is important to bear in mind that the key challenge to the euro area remains the improvement in conditions for an increase in productivity. This would further expand trend potential growth and thereby create, supported by wage moderation, the conditions for reducing the high level of structural unemployment in the euro area. In this respect, the speeding-up of structural policy measures which aim to increase productivity is of the utmost importance. For this purpose, the 2002 Broad Economic Policy Guidelines should set the conditions for stepping up the pace of economic reform. This requires an acceleration and deepening of structural reforms in the labour, product and financial markets in order to provide economic agents with the proper incentives. As regards fiscal policy, it is vital that that all Member States maintain a medium-term perspective in compliance with the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. In particular, it is of the utmost importance that those that have not already done so manage the transition to budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus in order to ensure the smooth and effective functioning of the Stability and Growth Pact in the future. Let me strongly emphasise that all the Member States concerned must honour the commitments made to achieving balanced budgets by 2003-04. Moreover, governments should pursue ambitious reforms with regard to the size and structure of public expenditure and revenue, also in order to create room for further tax cuts and to absorb the fiscal costs of population ageing. Monetary policy will best contribute to the long-term growth prospects for the euro area if it remains firmly focused on the maintenance of price stability. This will create a stable monetary environment for economic agents to operate in. At the same time, greater flexibility in labour, product and financial markets together with sound fiscal positions and wage moderation will support the objective of maintaining price stability and will create stable conditions to foster employment creation. Such an interaction of policies, in which policy actors, in accordance with the Treaty, consistently pursue their own assignments and responsibilities, is the best possible way to enhance the long-term welfare of the citizens of the euro area. I will be pleased to answer your questions now. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 1 Joseph Yam: The Asian crisis - lessons for the future Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the HKMA Fifth Distinguished Lecture: “The Asian Crisis: Lessons for the Future”, Hong Kong, 21 May 2002. *      *      * I am delighted to welcome all of you to this fifth HKMA Distinguished Lecture, and to introduce our speaker, Dr Stanley Fischer, and our discussant, Dr Stephen Grenville. The title of Stanley Fischer’s lecture is “The Asian Crisis: Lessons for the Future.” In a few weeks’ time we shall be marking the fifth anniversary of the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis - a day or so, incidentally, after we celebrate an entirely unconnected event, the fifth anniversary of the establishment of the Hong Kong SAR. Asia and the world have gone through many other ordeals since 1997, so that the crisis perhaps seems much further in the past than it really is. But its effects - both physical and psychological - are still with us. It is important that we continue to study the causes and effects and to see what lessons there are for the present. I have spoken at length on many previous occasions on the Asian financial crisis, and I intend today to sit back and listen. Let me, however, make three very brief observations. The first is that, five years on, very limited progress has been made in resolving one of the fundamental problems that helped make the crisis so devastating for so many economies: a deficient global financial architecture, which has been outgrown by the markets that use it. There have indeed been some reforms both internationally and in individual economies, and there is a much greater alertness to the threats to stability posed by volatile, high-velocity international capital flows. But much still remains to be done, and as capital flows get bigger, the risk of further crisis remains. Paradoxically, the risks are increased by a false sense of security brought on by two or three years’ absence of the kind of contagion that shook so many parts of the world in the nineties. The second observation is that, in the absence of international solutions, a number of economies in the region have adopted local approaches to the problem. Some have chosen to go slow or even step back from financial liberalisation through introducing or tightening restrictions and controls. While understandable - and in some cases effective as short-term measures - such an approach is regrettable because it shuts off many of the benefits, as well as the dangers, of globalisation. In Hong Kong, where controls of this kind are not practical because of the realisation that global links supply our lifeblood, we have taken a different approach. We have chosen to enhance policy credibility through greater transparency and through strengthening and tightening up our rule-based monetary system. My third observation is that those who said that the Asian crisis was the death knell of Asia as an economic force - and there were many of them - seem to have been wrong. There has been remarkable resilience, even in the worst-hit economies, and a will to reform and restructure that has helped put a number of economies back on their feet even during a time of global economic downturn. Progress has not been evenly spread throughout the region, and there are still causes for anxiety. But, as the world economy shows signs of recovery, the prospects for the region, if not dazzling, look somewhat brighter. It is now my great pleasure to introduce our speaker and discussant. From the late eighties until very recently, Stan Fischer has been very much at the centre of world economic and financial crisis - and its solutions - first at the World Bank and then as First Deputy Managing Director and subsequently Senior Adviser at the IMF. He has played a practical role - often a crucial one - in addressing, preventing and resolving crises, and he has written extensively on the subject. Asia, no less than other regions of the world, has benefited from his expertise, and we are very honoured to have him here to talk about the lessons that can be learned from the recent crisis. Steve Grenville served for 20 years with the Reserve Bank of Australia, and was Deputy Governor of that Bank from 1996 to 2001. Before joining the Reserve Bank, he served in the OECD in Paris, and before that he spent time with the IMF in Indonesia. He played a pivotal role during the Asian crisis, and was instrumental in Australia’s involvement in three of the larger support packages in the region. It is a great honour to have him here as discussant today. 
 2 BIS Review 33/2002 Stan and Steve are old friends of mine. I therefore think it is right for me to comment on the positions in which they now find themselves after careers totalling around 40 years in central banking, and to try to see if this sheds any light on the eternal question: “What happens to central bankers when they cease to be central bankers?” I speak from a position of intense personal interest because the recent resignation of Don Brash of the Governorship of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand leaves me - so I am told - with the doubtful distinction of being the longest-serving central bank chief in the region. Don Brash, who has a reputation for making original career choices, has reportedly gone into politics - a precedent which, let me stress, I have no intention of following. Stan and Steve have followed what the IMF would no doubt refer to as a “two-corner solution”. Since leaving the IMF earlier this year, Stan has firmly anchored himself to one of the world’s largest banking and finance groups as its Vice-Chairman. I will not name the bank here, because the HKMA is currently a tenant in a building that bears its name. To avoid giving the impression that the HKMA is a subsidiary of that bank, we have always tried to pretend that the building is called something else, by refraining from mentioning the name on our stationery, or to deliverymen or taxi-drivers, or to anyone else. It is sufficient to say that the bank in question is this year celebrating its 100th anniversary in Hong Kong. Steve has gone to the opposite end of the two-corner solution by entering the floating world of academics and consultants. Since leaving the Reserve Bank of Australia six months ago, he has taken up an appointment as Adjunct Professor at the National Centre for Development Studies at the Australian National University. He also works as an economic consultant, mainly, I understand, on Asia-related topics. Whatever corner Stan and Steve have chosen, the important thing is that they will continue to give their expertise to the region through organisations which, though very different, have an important presence in Asia. They are also here to share that expertise with us today. So without further delay, let me welcome them both and call first upon our speaker, Dr Stanley Fischer, to deliver the Fifth HKMA Distinguished Lecture. Dr Fischer, please. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 1 Guy Quaden: New views on firms’ investment and finance decisions Opening address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, for the National Bank of Belgium Conference, Brussels, 27-28 May 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I am really pleased to welcome you here at the National Bank of Belgium 2002 Conference. My wish, one of my wishes, since I have become Governor, and it is shared by the members of our Board, is to stimulate the scientific co-operation between the Bank and the academic community and more in particular the Belgian academic community in a modus operandi of mutual respect and independence. Two years ago, the National Bank of Belgium organised a conference on “How to promote economic growth in the euro area” to celebrate its 150th anniversary. On that occasion, I announced that the Bank would call an international conference every two years to encourage the debate between academics and professional economists working in central banks and in other policy making institutions. At that time, the Bank also decided that a joint research project between its own economists and Belgian academic researchers would precede the conference. The project started in March 2001 and ends with the current conference where the results of the research are presented. The Bank requested the Belgian academic community to express its interest in participating in the joint research project by submitting a proposal concerning the content of an analysis on one or several sub-items of the general project, preferably with an empirical content making use of available panel data from firms’ balance sheets and other sources. All in all we received nineteen proposals from the academic community. Since at this conference also foreign speakers are invited, we were forced to select a limited number among the proposals we received. This selection was based on a number of criteria but, especially, on their compliance and coherence with the overall research project. Allow me to explain the reasons that have led to the particular choice of the topic of the conference. Everybody will acknowledge that investment is a key variable in economics. Capital accumulation not only plays a pivotal role in determining the process of long-run economic growth, as was clearly evidenced by our previous international conference two years ago, but it is also an important driving force of business cycles. Although investment represents a relatively minor fraction of GDP, a major part of output fluctuations is driven by firms’ investment behaviour. For the conduct of monetary policy, it is, therefore, crucial to understand the mechanisms that drive an essential component of the interest sensitive expenditures, and more in particular, how monetary policy affects investment spending by firms. Given that investment is an important element in the complex transmission mechanism of monetary policy, and given the continuous change of economic behaviour and institutional structures, a continuous interest of the central bank in this kind of research can easily be motivated. Despite the best efforts of economists working in various research institutes and in central banks, it remains, however, imperfectly understood. This is, of course, to a large extent due to the volatility of investment itself, which is many times higher than that of GDP. By choosing it as the theme for its second international conference the Bank wants to encourage further research in this field of economics. In that respect, after the pioneering work of Dale Jorgenson, analysing the investment decision in a neo-classical framework, and who will speak about taxation issues today, two major strands in the literature have been developed, which examine the implications of capital market imperfections and uncertainty for investment behaviour. Our distinguished invited speakers, Lenos Trigeorgis, Jean-Bernard Chatelain, Charles Himmelberg and Julian Franks, will give an overview of these subjects in their contributions. The first strand shows that in the presence of information asymmetries firms with weak balance sheets may become financially constrained in the sense that their cost of external funds substantially increases or that they are unable to attract external funds. In these circumstances, the effects of a change in the monetary policy-controlled interest rate will not only be transmitted through an increase in the user cost of capital but also through their impact on the financial structure of the firm. Indeed, an increase in policy rates will result in larger interest payments, hence a worsening of the firm’s cash flow and its ability to self finance, and in a decrease in the value of assets that could be used as collateral for new loans. As a consequence, firms that are likely to be more exposed to problems of asymmetric information, will react more to a monetary tightening. Variations in the availability of credit as a result of changes in monetary policy may act as an important channel of transmission, since 
 2 BIS Review 33/2002 these financial frictions amplify the effect of changes in the policy-controlled interest rates. In order to assess the monetary policy stance it is important for the policy maker to know whether these frictions are present or not. A second recent strand in the theory of business investment addresses the impact of uncertainty on investment. The main insight from this literature is that a firm, being uncertain about the future and knowing that investment is a sunk cost, may choose to postpone investment in order to obtain further information about future market conditions. One can show that, in this case, the required rate of return to undertake the investment project increases. It is clear that, hereby, uncertainty introduces additional frictions in the investment decision process, which are likely to temper the effect of a change in the policy-controlled interest rates. Therefore, also in this respect, the monetary authorities need to evaluate the precise timing and magnitude of these frictions, which are caused by uncertainty. As to the requirement to use micro data, it is known that aggregation can blur identification of important parts of the behaviour of economic agents. So, studies at the aggregate level often fail to find an economically significant relation between investment and the user cost of capital, a relation of the utmost importance for the transmission of monetary policy. This failure is attributed in literature to the so-called simultaneity bias. Using micro data allows alleviating these problems. Moreover, micro data allow analysing important economic questions that cannot be addressed using aggregate data sets. This is precisely the case if one wants to identify the existence of financial frictions, because here the individual balance sheet position of the particular firm matters. Next, I want to review the importance of the launch of the euro and of the ECB’s price stability policy for investment behaviour. The introduction of the single currency three years ago provoked fundamental changes in the environment in which the public and the private sector operate. First, the most apparent change has been the elimination of exchange rate risks. Together with the lower transaction costs and more transparent markets, this has created new opportunities for companies within the euro area. Second, the euro has given impetus to the process of financial integration by enhancing the widening and deepening of the euro area financial markets. This evolution may appear to be beneficial for firms, which were or still are financially constrained and unable to execute all their investment plans. Especially young and risky firms often suffer from insufficient tangible assets, that might serve as collateral for external funds, and/or develop activities that are highly risky in terms of future returns. Since these are typically the enterprises which tend to bring new technologies to the market, financial market deepening, as triggered by the euro, may contribute to boost investment and economic growth. Although with the launch of the euro, the exchange rates of the currencies of the euro area countries became irrevocably fixed and the national currencies were only expressions of the same currency, for most residents of the euro area the euro only arrived with the introduction of the new euro banknotes and coins at the beginning of this year. Since the first of January, more than 300 million citizens in Europe share the same tangible currency. This event will further foster transparency and efficiency. Not only the mere launch of the euro, but especially the rigorous and credible pursuit of the ECB of its objective of price stability as assigned by the Treaty of Maastricht, can stimulate investment and contribute to sustained long-run economic growth. First, price stability allows changes in relative prices to be more easily observed, since they are not obscured by fluctuations in the overall price level. This enhanced transparency allows economic agents to make better-informed decisions, which result in a more efficient allocation of resources. Second, monetary stability also eliminates some of the uncertainties about the future which private decision-makers face in managing their businesses. If providers of funds are convinced that price stability will be maintained in the future, they will not require a “risk premium” to cover themselves against future inflation. By reducing such risk premia the real interest rate may fall, and monetary policy can give an incentive to invest. Finally, a credible policy of price stability also makes it less likely that firms will divert resources from productive uses to stockbuilding in order to hedge against inflation. In a high inflation environment there is, indeed, an incentive to accumulate real goods since they are expected to become more expensive in the near future. To sum up, the ECB’s monetary policy of maintaining price stability can affect expectations of market participants about future price developments when it succeeds in achieving a necessary degree of credibility. The continuous low inflation expectations reflect that the ECB has been successful in its task, and has created the basis for low long-term interest rates. These have had significant positive effects on the government budget in many countries and have stimulated investment. Stabilising expectations has also shown to be beneficial for the ECB itself, since it enhances the predictability of 
 BIS Review 33/2002 3 the conditional relationships between major macroeconomic variables and diminishes the uncertainties involved in the conduct of monetary policy. Before leaving the floor to our first speaker, Professor Dale Jorgenson I would like to thank all the invited speakers and discussants for accepting the invitation and for actively taking part in this event. I am also very grateful to the Belgian teams for their research effort in exploring the factors that drive business investment in Belgium. Finally, I want to thank all the participants whose large attendance today will certainly contribute to the success of the conference too. I hope that this conference will help us all to better understand the mechanisms underlying investment behaviour and to discover the policies needed to foster it. I wish you all a very productive conference. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s May report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 22 May 2002. *      *      * The Bank’s View2 The pace of deterioration in Japan’s economy has moderated, with production starting to pick up reflecting the increase in exports and progress in inventory adjustment. With regard to final demand, business fixed investment continues to decrease and private consumption remains weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is on a downtrend. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real imports) are increasing due to the recovery in overseas economies. Industrial production is starting to pick up, reflecting the increase in exports and also the further progress in inventory adjustment as a whole. However, firms are maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses given persistently strong excessiveness in employment. Therefore, employment and income conditions of households continue to worsen, reflecting the decrease in the number of employees and the faster pace of decline in wages. Turning to the outlook, with respect to domestic demand, business fixed investment is expected to follow a downtrend for a while, judged mainly from leading indicators and firms’ investment plans. Private consumption is also likely to remain lackluster mainly due to worsening employment and income conditions. In addition, government spending is basically projected to continue a downward trend. Meanwhile, as for exporting conditions, overseas economies, especially in the U.S. and East Asia, are likely to follow a recovery path. The worldwide inventory adjustment in IT-related goods has come to an end except for some goods such as networking equipment. Moreover, the yen is still lower than where it was last autumn. Under these circumstances, exports are projected to continue a moderate recovery. Industrial production is likely to follow a gradual uptrend supported by the increase in exports and also by the progress in inventory adjustment. This increase in production will help corporate profits to recover, particularly in the manufacturing sector, and is expected to gradually support domestic private demand such as business fixed investment. Overall, Japan’s economy is projected to stop deteriorating as a whole since an increase in exports and production will lead to an improvement in corporate profits and in turn, domestic private demand. However, in addition to the weak employment and income conditions, the pace of increase in exports and production is likely to remain modest on balance. Therefore, it will take a while for the positive effects, stemming from the developments in exports and production, to spread across the nonmanufacturing sector, small firms and households. With regard to the outlook for overseas economies, an essential element for exports, there are various uncertain factors including the U.S. economy, and the developments in crude oil prices and its effects on the global economy. Amid the persisting fragility and uncertainty of the economy, continuous attention should be still kept in mind that unstable movements in the foreign and domestic financial markets, including the foreign exchange market, would easily exert a negative influence on the economy. On the price front, import prices continue to rise mainly due to higher crude oil prices. Domestic wholesale prices are almost flat recently since the decline in machinery prices and the reduction in electricity charges are offset against the increase in import prices and the effects of the progress in inventory adjustment. However, consumer prices and corporate service prices continue to decline. As for the conditions surrounding price developments, past depreciation of the yen and the rise in crude oil prices are regarded as factors to support prices for the time being. However, since domestic demand is projected to remain weak for a time, the balance between supply and demand is expected                                                       1 This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on May 20 and 21, 2002. 2 The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on May 20 and 21 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 to keep exerting downward pressure on prices. Furthermore, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will restrain prices. In addition, the faster pace of decline in wages may also work as a factor to push prices downward, mainly in services prices which are sensitive to wage developments. Reflecting these factors, domestic wholesale prices, which tend to be greatly affected by the exchange rate and crude oil prices, are likely to be more or less flat for the time being. On the other hand, consumer prices are expected to stay on a gradual declining trend. As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is recently moving around 15 trillion yen as the Bank continues to provide ample liquidity to the money market. In these circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent. Moreover, interest rates on term instruments remain steady. Yields on long-term government bonds are moving in the range of 1.3-1.4 percent recently. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are contracting slightly. However, spreads between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds still remain wide. Stock prices are level on the whole and are basically moving in the range of 11,000-12,000 yen. In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated reflecting the overall downtrend in U.S. dollars due mainly to weak U.S. stock prices. With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming more cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming more severe. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings continues to be severe on the whole, but the environment for firms with high credit ratings is improving recently. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms are decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is decreasing somewhat. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued continues to decline, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level. The year-on-year growth rate of the monetary base in April increased further due partly to the continued high liquidity demand even after entering the new fiscal year, reflecting a system failure of a major bank group. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock (M2 + CDs) remained around 3.5-4.0 percent. Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy on the whole in terms of money market conditions. The deterioration in the financial position of firms is coming to a halt. However, the stance of investors toward firms with high credit risks remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Villy Bergström: Forecasts and business cycles Speech by Mr Villy Bergström; Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to the Elmateriel Leverantörernas förening (Association of Swedish Electrical Installation Material), Stockholm, 15 May 2002. *      *      * Monetary policy no exact science During the 1990s many central banks formulated explicit targets for their monetary policy. Sveriges Riksbank formulated its target in 1993 as an annual inflation rate, measured according to the consumer price index (CPI) of two per cent with a tolerated deviation interval of +/- 1 percentage points. Deviations from the target level are the rule rather than the exception. Monetary policy is not an exact science and society is not a machine; it would be neither possible nor desirable to keep inflation at a precise level, particularly not in the short term. In recent years the Swedish economy has been subjected to relatively large disturbances. On the international front, both the Asia crisis and the Russia crisis, as well as severe fluctuations on the stock markets and in oil prices, have had an effect on us. In Sweden, the rise and fall of the IT sector, as well as deregulation of the electricity and telecommunications markets with ensuing price falls, have affected both prices and production. Such crises and changes of policy can rarely be predicted. This means that the Riksbank will always make “mistakes”, with the benefit of hindsight. However, this is self-evident and not particularly valid when assessing monetary policy. What really counts is the direction for monetary policy on the basis of the information available at the time the decision is taken, not what should have been done if it had been possible to predict the future with perfect accuracy. When we experience major disturbances or changes in the economy, we cannot merely concentrate on the effects on prices. Let me illustrate this with reference to oil prices. If we assume that oil prices rise. Inflation rises, which means that real wages fall, partly as a result of petrol and heating oil becoming more expensive, which means that consumers have less money over to spend on other goods. This leads to a decline in demand and thereby in prices on other goods. Higher oil prices can thus lead to both rising prices and lower demand, which in the long term will once again subdue inflation. It is difficult to predict oil prices as they do not always reflect the demand and supply situation, but are also connected to politics. The current situation can illustrate this difficulty. Are oil prices rising because the increase in global demand and growth is higher than was assumed, or is the political uncertainty in the Middle East the most important factor? What is the resource situation within the economy? A price rise that occurs when resource utilisation is on its way down can lead to a rapid and profound decline. Rising oil prices in a situation with strained resources can lead to a spread effect, with a general rise in prices within the economy. We can thus have a higher inflation rate at the same time as this can have a subduing effect on production and employment. If monetary policy were to be aimed in every situation at using interest rate hikes to eliminate the effects of oil price rises on inflation, it could lead to a deterioration in production and employment. If transitory effects on inflation are expected to abate without spreading to other prices or affecting inflation expectations, there may be good reason to leave the repo rate unchanged. A gradual adaptation of monetary policy directed at achieving the inflation target a couple of years ahead allows us to take into account employment and growth. That is why the Riksbank’s policy is based on achieving its inflation target of 2 per cent one to two years ahead. Acts of terrorism, wars and natural disasters increase uncertainty It is important to observe that knowledge of the effects of monetary policy is not complete. The purpose of the deviation interval is to make clear that deviations are probable, while our ambition is to try to limit them. In practice, monetary policy is governed in such a way that we make forecasts for inflation one to two years ahead. If the forecasts for this time horizon are higher than the inflation target we raise the repo rate, and if they are lower, we cut the rate. So what do we think we can affect through monetary policy? To put it simply, the repo rate affects other Swedish market rates (the interest rate channel), the banks’ lending to the general public (the bank channel) as well as other asset prices, such as share prices, and the exchange rate (the 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 exchange rate channel). The size of the impact made by a change in the interest rate on households’ mortgages or on share prices varies over time. Monetary policy can also have an effect via households’ and companies’ expectations of the future. An inflation target of 2 per cent shall act as a kind of nominal anchor for expectations regarding the future development of inflation and thereby affect pricing, rates and wage-setting. When it comes to setting prices and wages, a major role is played by the expectations of the parties on the labour market or companies and households as to how the Riksbank will react. That is to say, they trust that the Riksbank will on average deliver an inflation rate of around 2 per cent. We know that forecasts are uncertain. We not only have a tolerated deviation interval and a medium-term target horizon (normally 1-2 years), we also try to assess the uncertainty of the forecast for each forecast we make. Is there a normal level of uncertainty, higher than normal or lower than normal? This is illustrated in the Inflation Report by means of an uncertainty interval with different outcomes for inflation. This interval is then taken into account in the total assessment. Acts of terrorism, wars and natural disasters lead to greater uncertainty. This makes it even more difficult to make assessments. Good target-fulfilment in historical terms, but last year raises some questions During the period 1970-1992 inflation in Sweden amounted to an average of 8 per cent a year, while real wages scarcely increased at all. Since the inflation target was first applied in 1995, inflation measured as UND1X (the underlying inflation rate) has been an average of 1.8 per cent a year and real wages have increased by an average of 2.8 per cent. On the whole, this must be regarded as a good level of target fulfilment. Last year, however, inflation was 2.8 per cent, when measured in the same way. And if we look at recent years, underlying inflation has risen for the past two years. Let me therefore give you a brief outline of our forecasts and considerations in recent years. During the period 1998-2000, the average growth rate was 4 per cent a year. At the beginning of 1999 inflation began to rise, which was initially explained by rising oil prices. It then became increasingly clear that shortages had arisen on the labour market and that these risked leading to high wage increases and thereby high inflation. We estimated that the Swedish economy was in a broad upturn phase, with rising resource utilisation and the risk of an inflation rate higher than the target level. In November 1999 we raised the repo rate and during early 2000 a similar assessment was made. During autumn 2000 we saw ahead of us a situation with a stable and strong upturn in economic activity that would gradually lead to a high level of resource utilisation and rising inflation. At the beginning of 2001 we received a number of statistics that indicated a slowdown, particularly in the USA. The Federal Reserve surprised everyone with an interest rate cut in January, in between two ordinary monetary policy meetings. The slowdown then spread. The Riksbank and most other forecasters began to revise down their growth forecasts for Sweden and internationally. The share and IT bubble burst and this together with rising oil prices and higher real interest rates during 1999 and 2000, led to a synchronous downturn in economic activity around the world. During the course of 2001, we made several major downward revisions to our forecasts for international growth. The economic downturn is assumed to have had a subduing effect on Swedish inflation via both direct and indirect channels. In mid-2001 the decline in the real economy had on the whole become more marked than expected. However, the development in prices deviated sharply from the forecasts made by the Riksbank and other analysts. When inflation surprisingly rose considerably during spring 2001, the assessment was made that this was largely due to factors of a transitory nature, partly caused by disturbances on the supply side. Meat prices rose sharply as a result of livestock diseases, electricity prices rose considerably, partly the result of a normalisation following on from the extreme price falls during the previous year when the electricity market was deregulated, but also because of an unusually low level of snow during the winter season 1999-2000, which led to a shortage of water in the power station dams. There were also production problems at the oil refineries, which led to sharp rises in petrol prices. We noted as early as spring 2001 that even when an adjustment was made for these transitory factors, inflation had risen more than expected and we estimated that there was a risk that resource utilisation, which affects inflationary pressure primarily during the following year, could have been higher in 2000 than we had earlier believed. The krona weakened considerably during spring 2001, which added to the concern over inflation. A majority of the Executive Board decided to raise the repo rate in summer 2001. However, the downward revisions to the growth forecasts continued during the autumn and following the acts of 
 BIS Review 32/2002 3 terrorism in September, there was considerable insecurity. The terrorist attacks came during a sensitive time for the US economy, which was already in a downturn phase, albeit with a relatively good growth in consumption. It was estimated that the attacks would entail a deeper and more prolonged economic downturn with repercussions for the entire global economy. Steering interest rates were cut all around the world, including in Sweden. Nevertheless, inflation continued to rise. A cold winter in Europe, problems with the Swedish apple harvest and poor fishing catches led to rising prices on fruit, vegetables and fish during the autumn. It is obviously easy to get caught up with details and fail to see the underlying changes. However, we could see even more clearly that the rise in inflation was not merely due to transitory factors, but entailed a broad rise primarily in domestic prices. This could be connected with the fact that secondary effects from the higher energy and food prices had made a greater impact in the consumer channel. Another important factor was that wage growth, despite the weaker development in demand, became even more problematic. Within many industries, for instance, construction, retail trade, banking and insurance, as well as the public sector, wages rose considerably during 2001. At the end of 2001/beginning of 2002, there were signals from confidence indicators that economic activity might have reached its lowest level in the USA and also Sweden and some optimism regarding the future began to spread. The effects of the terrorist attacks appear to have been limited, although some sectors were hit very hard. To sum up, we can conclude with the aid of this slide (OH 1 The Riksbank’s forecasts for GDP 1999-2003) that the year 2001 entailed constant downward adjustments in the growth forecasts. At the same time, we can conclude the opposite with regard to the inflation forecasts (OH 2 inflation forecasts 1998-2002), which we have been forced to revise upwards again and again. If we are right that a recovery is now beginning both in Sweden and abroad, we can conclude that the economic downturn was one of the mildest of the post-war period, partly as a result of resolute stabilisation policy. However, the slowdown in Sweden and the rest of the world during 2001 was unexpectedly severe in relation to the forecasts made in 2000. The fact that forecasters miss turning points in the economic cycle is not unique to this particular downturn, but quite a common phenomenon. I will return to the current situation, but first a look back in time. Historical patterns are repeated Is it possible to learn lessons from history? Both yes and no. If one studies economic slowdowns over the past three decades, one can see that they differ considerably both with regard to causes, sequence of events and recovery. There is no simple, cyclical pattern that is automatically repeated. At the same time, it is clear that what we have experienced now has elements in common with previous cycles.1 In some industrial nations, including the USA, the economic downturns during the 1990s have become milder compared with the downturns during the 1970s and early 1980s. Deep recessions have been unusual and arisen in combination with major structural problems, such as bank crises. The fact that industrial nations enter an economic downturn together has been a rule rather than an exception. The decline at the beginning of the 1990s was different, because it was due to different types of disturbance. The German reunification meant that Germany and Europe went their own way to some extent. Bank crises hit different countries at different points in time. In Sweden there was also a very large increase in real interest rates following in the footsteps of the change in the inflation rate and the defence of the fixed exchange rate, which contributed to the crisis in Sweden becoming deeper than those in most other industrial nations and, in addition, the worst recession Sweden had experienced since the 1930s. The downturn we have just experienced has been unusual in that the decline in production in the USA and Germany was lower than usual and in many European countries there has been no decline in growth at all. In Sweden, too, the slowdown appears to have been one of the mildest during the post-war period. Growth is not expected to decline for a single quarter. During all of the previous downturns in economic activity there has been at least one quarter with a negative result for growth and since 1970 economic downturns have always led to a decline in production over an average of four quarters. Households’ consumption has been relatively strong in many countries during the downturn and this is also the explanation why countries have avoided a decline in production altogether. However, the                                                       1 See, for instance, the box on earlier economic downturns in the Riksbank’s March Inflation Report or the box in the IMF’s most recent economic outlook. 
 4 BIS Review 32/2002 strong household consumption, primarily in the USA, does raise some questions with regard to the sustainability and strength of the recovery, given the initial low level of savings among US households and the relatively high indebtedness. The fact that large mistakes in forecasting can be made at turning points for economic activity is nothing unusual and the pattern we have been able to distinguish during the 1990s, with short-lived downturns and longer upturns, appears to be holding true. Economic policy has contributed to stability A number of different factors may have contributed to upturns in economic activity becoming longer, and the downturns shorter, while variations in production have declined. Various studies bring up different explanations, so I would like to point out that this is more a question of speculation than fact. One explanation could be that economic policy has contributed to increased stability. Fiscal policy in a large number of countries has been changed towards a balanced budget and avoiding an unsustainable build-up of debt, while monetary policy has been given a clearer focus on maintaining price stability. A greater emphasis on combating inflation and on institutional changes to make central banks more independent, has gone hand in hand with stabilisation policy appearing to have been more successful in counteracting fluctuations in economic activity in many countries. Changes in production methods, including an altered pattern for adapting stocks and new technology, may have enabled the demand and supply for both goods and capital to be matched more quickly than before, which contributes to the milder downturns and longer upswings. A further factor that could have contributed is that the percentage of services in GDP has increased and the production of services has shorter lead times. Expansive economic policy - good years for the Swedish economy A low inflation rate and tidy public finances have provided room for manoeuvre when facing a downturn in economic activity. A changeover towards a more expansionary economic policy in a large number of industrial nations has laid the foundation for the recovery this year. In the USA there was a substantial change in monetary policy at the beginning of 2001. On top of this came considerable fiscal policy stimulation. Monetary policy in Europe and Sweden has also been expansionary. However, many large countries in Europe are still struggling with large budget deficits, which have limited their fiscal policy scope for action. Last year Sweden had one of the largest surpluses on public savings in the EU. This has enabled an expansionary fiscal policy. This year households’ disposable incomes are expected to increase by almost 5 per cent, almost 80 per cent of which comes from increased transfers and lower taxes and charges. Such a large increase in income has only happened on a few occasions over the past decades. Despite the slowdown in economic activity, employment increased strongly and unemployment continued to fall. However, the labour market is split into two parts, with falling employment in manufacturing and an increase in the services industry. At the same time, the floating exchange rate regime has contributed to a significant change in the pattern. Historically, a devaluation of the krona has been necessary at the climax of a crisis and on several occasions during the 1970s and 1980s crises were caused by the fixed exchange rate in combination with cost developments leading to a cost crisis. The slowdown in 2001 was different to the extent that industry’s competitiveness was very strong. The weakening of the krona began, fortunately, a year before industrial activity slowed down. This contributed to a very strong development in net exports during 2001. This is probably an important factor behind the slowdown being a slowdown rather than a recession in Sweden. Although there are otherwise major differences, it can be noted that the decline in GDP and exports in Finland was much greater than that in Sweden. While industrial production in Sweden decreased at most by 5 per cent, it fell by over 10 per cent in Finland. Whether this is due more to other factors than to the exchange rate is an open question, but it is reasonable to assume that the development of the krona subdued the decline in the Swedish economy. Certainly, it may have at the same time have aggravated the inflation problems. If the krona continues to develop along the path estimated by the Riksbank and many other analysts, and continues to strengthen in 2002 and 2003, it will help ensure that the economic upturn does not grow into overheating. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 5 The economic situation and monetary policy It is clear from the minutes of the most recent monetary policy meeting that the Riksbank is painting a fairly bright picture of the Swedish economy in future. The international recovery, particularly in the USA, may become slightly stronger than we believed earlier, and this, combined with a continued weak krona, will benefit Swedish exports. However, developments in Ericsson and the telecommunications industry constitute cause for concern and uncertainty. At the same time, the significance of one single sector should not be exaggerated. Industrial activity in Sweden is continuing to strengthen. Both order intake and industrial production indicate a recovery is on its way. This is also reflected in various confidence indicators. With regard to consumption, there are also signs that a turnaround is on its way; households’ confidence indicators and the demand for banknotes and coins all point in this direction. Retail trade sales have stabilised and there has possibly been a slight upturn at the beginning of the year. This applies particularly to consumption of durable goods. Low real interest rates and the expansionary fiscal policy indicate that consumption will pick up. Developments in prices and wages leave a lot to be desired, as I mentioned in the beginning. It is not mumbo jumbo that a productivity level of around 1.5 per cent and an inflation target of 2 per cent are incompatible with wage rises of 4 per cent. The scope for wage rises is a maximum of 3.5 per cent at normal profit levels. Our assessment of wage developments in the coming two years is around 4 per cent, i.e. a level that is not compatible with the inflation target, unless productivity develops better than expected. Higher wage increases than expected were one of the causes behind the Riksbank’s two interest rate hikes in March and April. However, wage increases differ between the different sectors and different professional categories. Particularly high wage rises can be noted in the service industries. In some parts of these industries the wages for white-collar workers have increased more rapidly than those for blue-collar workers. This, together with considerable problems in attracting qualified personnel to certain parts of the public sector, entails a risk of a greater wage drift, particularly in a situation where economic activity has improved. Relative wage changes are a normal element in a dynamic economy, but the Swedish labour market has previously shown that large relative changes often lead to a compensatory wage drift. Some large groups have had wage rises of around 5 per cent - this applies to the service industries, the construction sector and white-collar workers in industry - but no large group has received less than the 3.5 per cent that would be necessary to achieve the inflation target. Construction activities over the next few years In line with other economic activity, construction activity declined slightly last year, although this was estimated to be a temporary phenomenon. Large resources have been allocated for infrastructure measures and for the development of the third generation of mobile telephony, which is estimated to lead to increased activity in future. There are numerous indications that residential construction will continue to increase, albeit from a low starting level. The continuing positive development of households’ disposable incomes should lead to an increase in new building and renovation of housing. Subsidies for building rental apartment blocks, support for student accommodation and ecological construction are also expected to stimulate investment in housing. Seen in a slightly longer term perspective, the low rate of new building is insufficient to meet the demand. A shift in the age structure will probably lead to an increase in housing investment as a percentage of GDP. However, even here prices and wages comprise a problem for the industry. The preliminary results show that construction workers received wage increases in excess of 5 per cent last year, while productivity only amounted to 1.4 per cent and unemployment among construction workers was almost 10 per cent. Unemployment in the construction industry varies geographically, however, with a rate of under 3 per cent in Stockholm and over 19 per cent in, for instance, the Gävleborg and Norrbotten regions. Relative productivity in the construction sector appears to be declining. The gap between the percentage employed and the percentage of GDP is increasing. This means that every person employed in the construction industry is providing a declining contribution to GDP, in relative terms. During most of the 1990s this difference increased, but it has recovered somewhat in recent years. This can perhaps be partly explained by the fact that there is still a large manual element that it is neither desirable nor possible to eliminate. At the same time, it is probable that the entire industry has a lower degree of rationalisation than other industries. This is also visible in the development of prices for both construction services and building materials, which is far above other industrial products, despite a relatively weak demand (OH 3 development of prices for building materials). There is 
 6 BIS Review 32/2002 something unhealthy in an industry where wages and prices rise despite a relatively weak demand and lingering unemployment in the industry as a whole. Let me conclude by saying that a recover in the Swedish economy is under way and that the Swedish economy has a good foundation on which to build, with a surplus in both our public finances and in Sweden’s international trade. Inflation is hopefully on the way down. At the same time, wage formation and pricing behaviour in general comprise an element of uncertainty as economic activity begins to pick up. Personally, I consider that this indicates a possibility that further interest rate hikes will be necessary in future. However, the next monetary policy step depends, as always, on what happens and the analyses we make. There is always uncertainty and we have now tightened up monetary policy by 0.5 percentage points.  Outcomeand forecastsof UND1X made at different pointsin timeSources: StatisticsSweden and the Riksbank0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0jan-98jul-98jan-99jul-99jan-00jul-00jan-01jul-01jan-020.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0IR 02:1IR 01:4IR 01:3IR 01:2IR 01:1IR 00:4IR 00:3IR 00:2IR 00:1Utfall   Building materials in CPI versustotal CPI-20246810jan-95jul-95jan-96jul-96jan-97jul-97jan-98jul-98jan-99jul-99jan-00jul-00jan-01jul-01jan-02-20246810Byggvaror i KPIKPI, totaltSource: StatisticsSweden  
 BIS Review 32/2002 7 GDP forecastsPercentageannualchange0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0IR99:1IR99:2IR99:3IR99:4IR00:1IR00:2IR00:3IR00:4IR01:1IR01:2IR01:3IR01:4IR02:10.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0199920002001200220032004Source: The Riksbank 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Willem F Duisenberg: Challenges to the ECB’s monetary policy Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, upon receiving the European Banker of the Year Award on behalf of the Governing Council of the ECB, Frankfurt, 16 May 2002 *      *      * Introductory remarks Lady Mayor, Karl-Otto, Andrew, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, On behalf of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, may I say that it is a special honour to receive the European Banker of the Year Award for 2002. The Council, which in two weeks’ time will have been directing monetary policy for three and a half years, is proud to be the recipient of this prestigious award. Since it was set up in June 1998, the Governing Council has discussed and deliberated in an atmosphere of collegiality and consensus. The search for broadly shared resolutions within the Council has ensured that a balanced judgement could be reached regarding the true state of the euro area, which covers a vast geographical area and comprises highly diverse national economies. The Council’s consensual approach has fostered a long-term perspective and preserved continuity with our past. Seeking and obtaining a broad consensus on policy decisions and then explaining them carefully to the public on the basis of euro-area aggregate evidence has a threefold effect. It shields Governing Council members from pressures originating in their home countries; it imposes a discipline on monetary policy by having a continuous, multilateral check of time consistency and policy direction within the Council; and it counters any public suspicion that a national bias may inform policy decisions. Internal governance has been an essential tool in the response to the many challenges confronting the ECB since its earliest days. At the start of Economic and Monetary Union we were faced with the extraordinary task of having to conduct policy with limited area-wide data, with several conventional statistical indicators still under construction and, of course, with the euro area undergoing a major regime shift. Moreover, we were hard pressed - following the Asian and Russian crises in 1997 and 1998 - to handle a difficult and unpredictable situation which some thought would spiral further downwards. And at the same time we had to attend to the unique task of laying the foundations for our future action, thereby completing the work that had been initiated by the European Monetary Institute. The ECB had to be guided towards full possession of the necessary economic details about a new and unique monetary area with an economic weight comparable to that of the United States. So it must have come as a surprise to many that the birth of the euro in January 1999 went so well. Indeed, it was a resounding success. The transition to the euro was virtually free of technical faults. We created almost overnight a unified money market, which, despite the formidable transaction overload, functioned smoothly from the very start. Short interest rate volatility remained well contained, and the main refinancing operations, along with the standing facilities and the reserve requirement system with averaging provisions, have since guaranteed that money market developments remain closely in line with the ECB’s intentions. The arrival of euro banknotes and coins on 1 January this year also went very smoothly. We supplied 300 million people with a new means of payment which in sixty days replaced, without technical failures or psychological regret, currencies that had served for centuries. Exchanging the old national banknotes and coins for the new euro denominations was a massive operation requiring enormous technical effort, perfect logistical co-ordination and economic wisdom. Its success, again, exceeded the expectations of many - and perhaps even our own dreams. From the outset, the people of Europe have been enthusiastic about the euro and have quickly adopted their new money. Key factors behind a successful monetary policy  But let me move on to my main subject today: the key institutional factors underlying the Governing Council’s policy. I shall also consider the many challenges - in addition to the changeover - which we have faced since the inception of the single monetary policy. 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 First, the well-designed institutional framework of EMU was a key factor setting the stage for a successful monetary policy. The Treaty establishing the European Union assigned to the ECB unambiguous responsibility for the maintenance of a stable scale of value which agents can internalise in their expectations. And it has shielded monetary policy from political interference. Price stability diminishes investment risk, reduces the cost of capital and lengthens the horizon over which lenders and borrowers wish to engage in credit arrangements. This multiplies the opportunities for agents to exercise their entrepreneurial spirits, to pursue and spread technological advances and to contribute to the well-being of society at large. Technological factors and agents’ attitudes towards consumption, savings and work combine with government thrift and legislation to determine the real basis for economic well-being. Any attempts by a central bank to change this balance of real forces in the short run at the expense of the stability of the currency can only be futile and self-defeating. Today, there is a broad consensus among economists that monetary policy is not a suitable tool for fine-tuning economic developments. Any attempts to sacrifice the medium-term goal of price stability to efforts to meet short-term objectives will ultimately weaken the stability of a currency. To prevent monetary policy itself disrupting the economy, it needs to be made and kept independent of pressures arising from short-term political and electoral objectives. A second key factor behind a successful monetary policy is the macroeconomic policy framework laid down in the Treaty. While preserving the value of our currency is our primary occupation, the Treaty recognises that the ECB does not operate in a vacuum. So, it has created a harmonious institutional structure in which areas of shared responsibilities across policy domains are carefully avoided, and the single monetary policy finds a standing safeguard in the virtuous principles disciplining its policy counterparts. The Stability and Growth Pact is a central component in this structure. The past three decades have taught us that fiscal laxity, far from enhancing collective prosperity, has only made endeavours by central banks to preserve the value of money costly and painful. The principles underlying the Pact have restrained and ultimately reversed what appeared an unrelenting growth in public liabilities. This has reduced the long-term cost of borrowing and made easier the task of the single monetary authority. Within the framework of the Treaty and the provisions set in place to implement the Stability and Growth Pact, national governments exchange views, agree on general guidelines and policy recommendations, and share frank assessments. For its part, the ECB accepted the invitation to participate in an informal dialogue with governments and other political actors. This was done on the clear understanding that the purpose was to share information and insights, not to receive guidance or instructions on matters of monetary policy. The institutional balance upon which this dialogue rests, while adequate and balanced, is delicate and at times fragile. We thus take note with increasing alarm that the voices calling for co-ordinated action by the monetary and fiscal authorities have become louder and more authoritative recently. According to these voices, the ‘policy mix’ should be improved, and the monetary and fiscal authorities should agree on ‘common standards that define general principles’ guiding policy conduct over time. We note these ideas with concern. If such steps were taken, they would undermine the independence granted to the ECB in pursuing its mandate. They would alter the incentives of economic actors to discharge their respective duties to the best of their ability. They would blur policy responsibilities and instil the perception that monetary policy may have become subservient to the needs and logic of the political cycle. Not least, they would, by implication, severely damage central bank credibility, which in turn would cause painful costs, in terms of higher interest rates. The exchange of information and advice, notably across policy domains, and more explicitly between fiscal and monetary jurisdictions, should never turn into reciprocal interference. The success of monetary policy fundamentally depends on central bank credibility. Central bank independence, a fundamental principle of modern monetary governance, should never be challenged. A third key factor behind a successful monetary policy is the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and the communication of its policy to the public. The Governing Council has clearly stated the ECB’s objective and the framework used to guide its actions. The Governing Council is also very transparent about its assessment of the current economic situation and the risks to price stability involved. There are no ambiguities as to how monetary policy would respond to possible changes in the economic environment and in the balance of risks to price stability. All this provides sufficient information for other policy actors to take the steps they deem necessary. At the same time, these policy actors also know how the ECB will react to their decisions. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 3 When setting up the ECB, a major challenge for the Governing Council was to devise a monetary policy strategy. This strategy, which was announced in 1998, is a new one, specially designed for the euro area. And compared with the strategies of other central banks, it is perhaps a more complex one. It was therefore not surprising that it has led to many discussions. In fact, the ECB has sometimes been criticised for not adopting a strategy focusing on one, or at most two indicators. Some observers claimed that the ECB, by having adopted its two-pillar strategy, might eventually downgrade the importance of the reference value for broad money growth. In their view, this would spell the danger of falling back into discretion. Other observers, meanwhile, were advocating a central - virtually all-encompassing - role for inflation forecasts. As is now evident, we were well advised not to yield to either of these calls. It would have been unwise to base our policy on any privileged indicator or a single forecast, to the exclusion of all other pieces of information, in a changing world in which statistical inference is such an elusive guide to our real-time perception of reality. We chose to broaden, rather than narrow, our perspective of the economy. Forced to decide, we chose to err, if anything, on the side of more evidence than needed, rather than disregarding key information; we opted to be inclusive rather than exclusive. This choice has ruled out the use of simple rules for both internal use and external communication. A central bank does not want to mislead its public with the elementary logic of a two term linear reaction formula, only to surprise them whenever circumstances demand. So observers should never succumb to the easy temptation of blaming a central bank for failing to obey a simple rule. More fundamentally: they should never lose sight of the complexity of the ‘economic story’ behind the conduct of monetary policy in a world of uncertainty. In its interactions with the public, the ECB has never departed from an honest and faithful - if at times seemingly unwieldy - account of this complex reality. We have shared with the public the evidence reaching the Governing Council ahead of policy discussions. We have described in detail the economic rationale behind policy decisions. Those decisions are explained in the press conference after the first meeting of the Council every month, in the Monthly Bulletin, in numerous speeches by members of the Council and in my testimonies to the European Parliament. Just listening to what I say about the current state of the economy and its direction can save all that time and effort devoted to uncovering the alleged secrets of central bank thinking, or the individual views of members of the Governing Council. Experience after four years How did these three key factors setting the stage for a successful monetary policy have an impact on the functioning of the Governing Council and on the ECB’s monetary policy? Looking back over the past years, I can see that the mutually reinforcing viewpoints of the two pillars have served as a balanced and comprehensive basis for analysis prior to monetary policy decisions. At the same time, the complex process of cross-checking information gathered from each of the two pillars has sharpened - rather than diminished - our awareness of the changing conditions in our economic environment. When confronted with new developments in the economic environment, the Governing Council has never hesitated to take resolute, timely action to pursue a policy stance which best serves the purpose of maintaining price stability over the medium term. Regarding the conditions for maintaining price stability, in January 1999, the single currency was born into an environment of inflation rates hovering around 1%, below the upper limit of the range considered to be consistent with price stability. At that time, there were some signs of risks of deflation in the context of a depressed global economy and the financial distress following the Asian and Russian crises. We responded by cutting interest rates by 50 basis points in April 1999. When, in the remainder of 1999 and in 2000, our analysis indicated that external shocks, namely the sharp rise in oil prices and the depreciation of the euro, were increasingly putting pressure on prices, and our assessment of monetary and credit aggregates signalled the existence of generous liquidity conditions in the euro area, we raised rates on seven occasions. Between November 1999 and October 2000 interest rates were increased by a total of 225 basis points in order to counteract the emergence of risks to price stability in the euro area. In early 2001, our analysis started to signal declining inflationary pressures over the medium term. But in 2001 price developments were affected by a surge in food costs driven by an unprecedented health 
 4 BIS Review 32/2002 crisis which had disrupted important segments of the primary sector. At the same time, the lower actual and prospective economic growth was one factor supporting an outlook in which inflation rates approached levels in line with our definition of price stability. It is worth noting that the first decision to lower our policy rates was taken in May 2001, that is, when actual consumer price inflation was at its peak in the euro area. This is a clear indication of the medium-term and forward-looking orientation of our policy. Between May and November 2001, we lowered our policy rates by a total of 150 basis points. In order to forestall imbalances that may not have been visible or evident at first sight, we have rarely been caught off guard by events. On the one occasion when we were - after the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September - we did not lose our nerve. We reacted without hesitation and moved swiftly to ensure that financial markets continued to function effectively. By and large, we can claim that we have maintained a firm course of action in the day-to-day business, guided by our monetary policy strategy, and that the shocks we have experienced have received a timely and appropriate monetary policy response. Inflation has been kept under control even in the face of substantial adverse shocks. Concluding remarks In conclusion, I believe that all the institutional preconditions for a stable currency and macroeconomic success are in place in Europe today. The institutional construct of the Treaty has paved the way for a single monetary policy in Europe to be a lasting success. The ECB - through its strategy - has successfully implemented the framework within which it pursues its mandate. And in the daily execution of its policy, the ECB displays a firm hand and a clear sense of direction in countering inflationary risks as they emerge. Markets seem to acknowledge this achievement. Continuous adverse price shocks have done little to shake the conviction of most Europeans that the statute and the competence of the ECB will indefinitely and effectively contain any inflationary or deflationary forces. This has constantly been reflected in well-behaved inflation expectations. Despite the fact that the recent increase in oil prices currently tends to slow down the fall in HICP inflation, long-term expectations of inflation have been remaining below 2%. Certainly, we are less than entirely satisfied about recent price developments. Recently published inflation forecasts, developments in indicators of inflation expectations and recent trends in wages neither clearly confirm nor entirely defuse the risk of an entrenchment of upward tendencies in prices. At this juncture, it is therefore particularly important to remain vigilant with regard to the further evolution of the key factors determining future price developments. While we have to acknowledge that monetary policy cannot affect inflation developments over the short-term, we are determined not to put our achievements at risk. 
 BIS Review 31/2002 1 Koh Yong Guan: Regulatory approaches in global capital markets Keynote address by Mr Koh Yong Guan, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the MAS Capital Markets Seminar 2002, Singapore, 2 May 2002.  *      *      * MAS Capital Markets Seminar  Ladies and Gentlemen Good morning and a warm welcome to the MAS Capital Markets Seminar. For participants from abroad, I wish you a pleasant and rewarding time in Singapore. We have chosen “Evolving Regulatory Approaches” as the theme to underscore the importance for regulators to keep pace with developments in the global capital markets.  Advances in technology have enabled instantaneous and seamless access into diverse capital markets. At the same time, consolidation of specialist financial institutions into financial conglomerates with cross-border presence has redefined traditional notions of market boundaries. The consequent growth in cross-border transactions poses regulatory challenges to national regulators supervising global market players.  As we have seen in recent months, a single event in one market can create significant ripple effects elsewhere. These developments have not been lost on regulators. Having no less than 12 countries represented here today bears testimony to the importance attached to learning from fellow regulators. One key reason for organising the capital market seminar is to facilitate the exchange of views and sharing of ideas. The occasion also provides an opportunity for regulators to get to know one another better.  We hope that the interaction through presentations and panel discussions will provide ample opportunities for participants to share the experiences and challenges in their home markets. To provide a global perspective, we are honoured to have distinguished speakers from the US Securities and Exchange Commission, the UK Financial Services Authority, and the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. The presentations by leading industry practitioners will add an important market dimension.  To start off the programme this morning, let me put to you three broad propositions which regulators should reconcile with, in keeping with the demands of global capital markets:  (a) First, the need for cross-jurisdiction regulatory collaboration;  (b) Second, a growing impetus for international standards; and  (c) Third, how can regulators and regulations respond and facilitate capital markets’ continued innovation and growth.  The need for regulatory collaboration  The importance of cross-border regulatory cooperation is evident from the cross-border element in the regulator’s job. Local investors buy financial products overseas while foreign funds own substantial stakes in locally-listed stocks. Capital market intermediaries compete vigorously to add value, servicing global orders. Even markets now seek direct presence, in the form of trading terminals, in different jurisdictions.  Increasingly, cross-border operations are no longer conducted predominantly via telephone or fax wires, but by proprietary networks capable of channeling orders and funds across the globe almost instantaneously. Such proprietary systems combined with the reach of the internet has pooled isolated pockets of liquidity into a single global market.  With the aid of international rating agencies and global issue managers, corporate entities on their part are raising funds wherever it is priced most cheaply and available with minimal hassle. On the demand side, investors recognize the importance of global liquidity and market diversification. By taking 
 2 BIS Review 31/2002 advantage of the financial links provided by intermediaries, retail investors have become empowered to actively manage a global portfolio of investments.  In this environment, no single national regulator can afford to focus just on activities taking place in its domestic markets. To achieve the objectives of investor protection and systemic stability, cross-border regulatory cooperation is imperative. The Sep 11 incident demonstrates the degree to which financial markets are interwoven and illustrates the need for such collaboration. All of you will recall that the event resulted not just in the closure of US markets for 4 working days, but also justified the temporary closure of several markets in Asia, while delaying trading hours in others. The reality was that regulators the world over found themselves having to assess the situation, update one another, and decide on actions to be taken in their respective markets.  Systemic risk has also increased with the trend towards commoditisation, ie volume business at competitive costs. The concentration of volumes into key nodes such as large global custodians represents exposure by market participants to entities located in other jurisdictions. Meanwhile, cross-border capital flows have significantly increased the magnitude by which markets adjust to shocks as evidenced in the Asian crisis. The same systems that allow international trades to be conducted from a hub are also conduits by which volatility is transmitted globally.  For the risk to be satisfactorily managed, collaboration is necessary. Regulatory collaboration can take many forms. It begins from interaction on occasions such as this, which represents an opportunity to compare notes, discuss issues and exchange views. Such informal but regular contact should not be discounted. Indeed, I understand from my colleagues that a series of telephone conversations and e-mails with regulatory counterparts elsewhere in the aftermath of Sep 11 contributed considerably to a quick appreciation of the type, and magnitude, of issues that could be expected. This contributed to the avoidance of instability in individual markets. Looking back, we can all agree the markets stood up remarkably well. International meetings and joint forums such as IOSCO are a further step towards setting the foundation for more structured lines of communication amongst regulators. Participation in IOSCO taskforces requires resources but helps to develop better appreciation of characteristics unique in other markets, and alternative approaches to addressing regulatory concerns. It is in recognition of this that MAS has devoted resources to active participation in IOSCO’s committees and working groups.  We have also found the Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) to be a useful instrument for setting out mutually agreed procedures by which regulators may exchange information and provide mutual assistance. Since the mid-1990s, MAS has entered into a number of such MOUs to ensure that the level of regulatory collaboration keeps pace with the capital market linkages that are in place. A formal arrangement enshrined in an MOU may not be necessary in all cases, but are helpful amongst jurisdictions with substantive capital market linkages or trading arrangements in place.  Impetus for international standards  The second proposition is the growing impetus for international standards. In this regard, IOSCO has taken the lead in putting forward a set of principles which its members subscribe to. Some of the principles are necessarily pitched at a broad level, to allow members to agree on key areas which regulators should focus their attention.  The challenge ahead is to continue working systematically on the principles to further cross-reference against quantifiable standards. There are several reasons why such international standards are important.  Danger of a weak link in the system  The first is that interconnected markets means that transactions involving intermediaries or markets in different jurisdictions are always exposed to the weakest link. As an example, a localised weak link in clearing and custody networks used for cross-border transactions that buckles under stress will have far reaching repercussions on the smooth functioning of counterparties and markets in other jurisdictions.  
 BIS Review 31/2002 3 Benchmarking The second reason is that, whereas regulations are developed for local usage, international standards are invariably developed under the close scrutiny of different regulators, and are derived after rigorous debate and sometimes protracted fine-tuning. The end product is usually of laudable standards and serves as a good yardstick for domestic practices to be benchmarked against.  Investor protection  The third reason is that a common set of standards facilitates sound regulatory oversight that is based on consistent treatment of cross-border markets and activities. With regulators using the same standards in assessing systems, products and practices, market players that deal with foreign institutions or instruments can take comfort that those institutions and products are regulated based on similar high standards. Efficiency & cost savings  And the fourth reason is that the establishment of a set of standards that is subscribed to internationally has the effect of aligning the regulatory practices in different jurisdictions. This allows international financial institutions operating in different markets with similar features and rules drawn up according to international standards, to benefit from lower compliance costs. Given a choice, from the business proposition point of view, few fund managers, issuers or financial advisers would wish to expend resources on compliance systems to keep track of different requirements and procedures in different markets.  Much work is already underway to develop international standards on specific subjects. Within IOSCO, MAS is a participant of various of its working groups including the Internet Project Team and the Implementation Committee which, as its name suggests, has been tasked to implement the 30 IOSCO principles of securities regulation. Apart from IOSCO, a number of other fora has also proposed recommendations in their respective areas. These include the Basle Committee’s work on a set of globally accepted principles of risk-based capital among banks; the Group of 30’s work in the area of standardising OTC documentation; and a collaborative effort by the Bank for International Settlements and IOSCO on recommended standards for securities settlement systems.  Indirectly giving impetus to international best practices is the IMF and World Bank’s Financial Sector Assessment Programme (“FSAP”). Under this initiative, assessors will collaborate with regulators in participating jurisdictions to benchmark financial systems and practices against global standards.  MAS is convinced that these efforts represent considerable value-add to the global regulatory environment and has participated in support of these initiatives. We will be undertaking an FSAP this year. As an international financial center, we are also committed to contributing to international financial stability as a member of the Financial Stability Forum, and have found our involvement in various of its working groups to be invaluable. The establishment of international standards and best practices as the way forward will become even more compelling as globalisation continues, and regulators should be prepared to stay engaged with the process.  In doing so, it should be recognised that initiatives to draw up international standards in themselves also add value by prompting regulators to re-examine existing regulation and review the policy rationale behind them. This is useful in bringing dated practices back into line with international best practices. Improvements to comply with globally accepted principles will benefit the market’s growth and in the long term attract participants with strong internal controls. Call for responsive regulation  My third point concerns the role of regulators and regulations. Markets are calling and indeed demanding for regulation to be more responsive to the needs of innovation and growth. If globalisation has changed the international outlook of markets, the blurring of sectoral boundaries has transformed financial markets from within. With the mergers and acquisitions of the 1990s in the financial industry, cross-selling has become prominent today with banks seeking to distribute investment and insurance products while stockbrokers offer cash management and checking accounts. Insurance corporations on their part 
 4 BIS Review 31/2002 have concentrated efforts to promote investment-linked policies. The trend is in part demand-driven with customers seeking a one-stop financial house that provides convenient and integrated approach to money management. Notwithstanding the global economic downturn which has checked M&A activities, market players have not let up efforts to gain a competitive edge by consolidating their positions through alliances.  The regulatory response to this has been a trend towards more integrated supervision. This allows regulators to supervise the range of activities more efficiently by taking a holistic view of the financial services market. The UK FSA is one example of integrated supervision under one roof while Australia’s Securities and Investments Commission and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority have ambits that cut across different industries.  As product lines converge, regulators in setting the rules have to be careful not to inadvertently pick and choose the winning models. Put another way, similar activities that involve identical risk issues should be regulated on an equal basis to avoid tilting the playing field. Failure to do so will result in regulatory arbitrage and cause activities to migrate towards looser controls. In Singapore, the regulators for banking, securities and insurance activities are consolidated in MAS. Specific to the capital market, we have integrated our legislation for the securities and futures industries, and harmonised our regulation of the financial advisory business to support the cross-selling of products. What is critical however, is not how regulatory responsibility is divided or consolidated into one or more agencies. The overriding objective is equitable treatment and consistency in the approach to the measurement and management of risk.  Capital requirements illustrate this most clearly. Most regulatory models have moved away from setting fixed minimum capital for regulated activities. In banks as for capital market intermediaries, regulators are adopting and refining the risk based regulatory approach. Where risks take on a similar profile therefore, the capital charges should be aligned based on a consistent principle. This is so even as the risk management regime in the banking, securities and insurance sectors retains some distinctive features that recognises the differences in these businesses.  Legislative initiatives in Singapore  In Singapore, at the heart of the regulatory framework for the capital markets is the Securities and Futures Act (“SFA”) which was enacted in September last year. The SFA is an omnibus Act that sets out the regulatory framework for the capital market. It seeks to cover in a single rulebook the range of capital market activities undertaken in Singapore, for the convenience of market participants. The SFA introduces a single licensing regime covering the various activities in securities and futures, fund management and corporate finance advice under a modular approach. This is a shift away from folding all capital market activities into the categories of dealing in securities, and provision of investment advice. In its place, the new licensing framework is designed to accommodate individual slices of the capital market value chain.  To complement the modular licensing of intermediaries, MAS has announced the introduction of a risk based capital framework which will take effect later this year. Under the framework, capital market licence holders need only maintain capital sufficient to the business risks they undertake, according to their respective operations. Complementing the SFA is the Financial Advisors Act which governs the provision of investment advice and the sale of collective investment products across all financial institutions. This will include banks, insurance companies, capital market intermediaries as well as independent financial advisers. A common code of conduct and business practices will be promulgated under the FA Act, and will set minimum standards for all investment advisers.  Conclusion In concluding, there is little doubt that the new financial landscape both domestically and internationally has thrown up challenges and opportunities for regulators and market players alike. It is a time of change and renewal as the tried and tested means of doing things come under scrutiny as markets continually innovate. The challenge for us as regulators is to put in place a regulatory framework and operate the system flexibly to meet the market demand for innovation and dynamism, without compromising the safety and soundness of the system.  
 BIS Review 31/2002 5 I hope to have given you some food for thought that will spark off questions and discussion over the next few days. It remains for me to encourage all of you to make the most of this opportunity and give voice to your views in the course of the seminar. I have no doubt that you will have much to share and learn from the speakers, and from one another’s experiences. I wish you a lively and useful Seminar. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 1 Niklaus Blattner: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Prof Dr Niklaus Blattner, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002 *      *      * Gold sales Since May 2000, the National Bank has been selling gold that is no longer required for monetary policy purposes. A total of 1,300 tonnes of gold is planned to be disposed of under the agreement on gold sales concluded on 26 September 1999 between fifteen European central banks. This agreement limits the total quantity of gold that can be sold by the signatories until September 2004 to 2,000 tonnes. To date, we have sold almost 520 tonnes of gold, which corresponds to 40% of the total quantity earmarked for sale. As shown in our periodic Bank returns, we are conducting regular sales of approximately one tonne a day. We consider this method more flexible, less costly and better suited to the characteristics of the market than the strategy chosen by the Bank of England, which is holding gold auctions of its own. Our average selling price has by now reached USD 279.4 per ounce (level of 31 May 2002), which is USD 2 higher than the average London gold fixing price, the benchmark price for gold. This performance has, to some degree, been realised thanks to the National Bank having been allocated a somewhat higher portion of the central banks' total annual quota of 400 tonnes since September 2001. Due to the bullish gold market, this slight increase in our sales quota has had favourable effects. Translated into Swiss francs, the average selling price has settled at over Sfr 15,140 per kilogram. Since the sales began, the price per ounce has fluctuated between USD 256 and USD 330 (see graph). Recently, it has again surpassed the level of USD 320 per ounce. Such high levels had been recorded only during short periods in recent years, for example in reaction to the central bank gold sales agreement of September 1999. What is striking about the current gold rally is how persistent it has proved so far. Several factors have contributed to this new trend: • A key factor supporting the high gold price is the mines' changed hedging policy. In order to reduce part of the price risk on their future production, the mining companies may engage in forward sales of gold and in similar hedging transactions. The commercial banks, in turn, which act as counterparties in these transactions hedge against the risk by borrowing gold from the central banks and reselling it immediately. This increases the amount of gold offered directly on the market. The gold lent by the central banks flows back to the lender upon expiration of the forward contract. If the mining companies hedge less, the gold on offer is reduced correspondingly. In the second half of the 1990s, gold producers massively expanded their hedge positions, which led to an increase in supply and thus contributed to depressing the gold price. Since 2000, and especially in recent months, the picture has changed. The mines have opted for another strategy and have cut back on price hedging. This strategy change can be partly attributed to more positive expectations regarding the gold price. As a result of the central bank agreement on gold sales, producers no longer fear large-scale sales by the central banks. Moreover, it seems that producers have recently become more upbeat in their assessment of private investment demand. It is interesting, in this respect, that gold producers' hedging activity tends to accelerate market trends. When they expect price decreases, prices do in fact decrease faster as a result of hedging, and when they expect price rises, prices do rise faster owing to the decrease in hedging. Such strategy changes, which are always due to changed market expectations, have to be reckoned with in future as well.  • Reviving private investment demand in the industrialised countries has also contributed to giving the gold price a boost. This phenomenon has been particularly pronounced in Japan, but Europe and the United States have also seen gold demand booming. Economic imponderables, concern over the financial health of some companies, heightened political tension in different parts of the world, the terror attacks of September 2001 and concomitantly subdued stock markets have caused investors to increase their holdings of the 
 2 BIS Review 39/2002 yellow metal. It seems as if gold is, for the time being, once again assuming its role of a safe haven investment.  • Fabrication demand for gold, by contrast, for jewellery as well as for industrial uses, has contracted in recent months. In the industrialised countries, this decline has been mainly brought about by the economic slowdown. The high gold price, however, has also played a role, especially in developing countries. In countries such as India, which accounts for a quarter of gold demand, the precious metal is held in the first place for saving purposes. Investors use a more or less fixed portion of their disposable income to purchase gold. In times of rising gold prices, investors buy correspondingly less gold.  From these developments we can draw two conclusions: • In the long term, the main elements influencing gold price expectations are changes in private investors' demand, mines' production costs as well as the central banks' fundamental attitude towards their gold reserves.  • In the short and medium term, any change in producers' hedging policies and in the central banks' gold holdings, as well as speculative demand can trigger noticeable shifts in the gold price. These price movements, both upward and downward, may be relatively significant because the gold market is not very liquid, as experience has shown. Under this point of view, the central bank gold sales agreement of September 1999 has had a stabilising effect, since it has made the operations of central banks transparent and eliminated an important source of uncertainty.  Our sales will continue until we have completed our programme, i.e. until we have sold 1,300 tonnes of gold. I will not take the risk and predict the development of the gold price, but one thing is certain: it will remain volatile. Our possibilities to actively hedge the gold risk are restricted by the agreement of September 1999. In particular, we may conduct hedging transactions only in the amount of the sales quota allocated to us for the current year. We are therefore all the more convinced that our strategy of regular sales remains appropriate. The principles that have guided our operations for the past two years – namely fulfilment of our commitments under the central bank agreement, transparency in communication and situation-adapted handling of day-to-day business – remain relevant. Management of the free assets The market value of the free asset portfolio – consisting of the as yet unsold portion of the 1,300 tonnes of gold and the proceeds from the already effected gold sales – amounted to Sfr 21 billion at the end of May. The free asset portfolio is managed separately from our other reserves, which will facilitate its transfer to the future beneficiaries once the legal framework has been put in place. As I mentioned earlier on, our possibilities of actively hedging the gold risk against an unfavourable development of the gold price are restricted by the agreement on gold sales of September 1999. However, we limited the risks of a weak US dollar that might reduce the value of our future sales by hedging 35% of the future proceeds in US dollars against the Swiss franc. The proceeds from the gold sales are placed in a bond portfolio, whose composition differs from that of our currency reserves. Approximately 65% of the portfolio is invested in Swiss franc bonds or hedged against exchange rate risks. The rest consists of bonds denominated in euros (25%), US dollars (3%) and other currencies (7%). The average duration of the portfolio is about three years. This investment profile takes account of the SNB's legal framework and of the fact that future beneficiaries will want their return denominated in Swiss francs. The market value of the gold proceeds amounts to approximately Sfr 8 billion. Since it was created in May 2000, this portfolio generated an average annual yield of 4.3%. The legal provision still prohibiting the National Bank from acquiring equities has in fact rather well served the interests of the future beneficiaries of the free assets, as stock markets have been on a decline since May 2000. Next September, the Swiss people will have to decide on the appropriation of the free assets. There are several conceivable scenarios: either the so-called gold initiative is accepted, or the counter-proposal of the Federal Council is accepted, or both proposals are rejected. Each scenario has different implications for the date of transfer of the free assets and for the SNB's balance sheet. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 3 Whatever the outcome of the vote, we believe that the funds allocated to the free assets are no longer needed for conducting monetary policy and that, therefore, they have to be assigned for other purposes. As soon as one of the proposals put to the vote is accepted and the operational framework allowing such a transfer has been put in place, the National Bank can transfer these assets to the future beneficiaries. Should both proposals be rejected, this will not be interpreted as a mandate for the SNB to reintegrate the free assets into its monetary reserves. In this case, we will instead continue to manage the free assets separately until a new allocation has been decided on. The income from this portfolio will be recorded in the SNB's ordinary income statement and will become distributable only once the profit distribution agreement between the SNB and the Confederation has been revised. In this case, the income might lead to an increase in the SNB's annual distribution of currently Sfr 2.5 billion.  
 BIS Review 39/2002 1 Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 14 June 2002 *      *      * The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.75% - 1.75%. For the time being, the three-month Libor is to be kept in the middle of the target range. Since the last assessment of 21 March 2002, the National Bank has again adjusted its monetary policy. On 2 May 2002, we lowered the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.5 percentage points to the current level. Some time earlier, on 27 March 2002, we had already lowered repo rates by approximately 10 basis points, which led to a corresponding change in the three-month Libor. In both cases, we acted in response to the appreciation of the Swiss franc, which had led to an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. Since March 2001, the National Bank has eased its monetary policy substantially, lowering the target range for the three-month Libor by a total of 2.25 percentage points. After the cyclical downturn in the second half of last year, there are now signs that the world economy is starting to pick up, which will also benefit economic activity in Switzerland. However, uncertainties regarding the upswing in Switzerland persist. For the time being, the National Bank will thus maintain its expansive monetary policy stance. This does not jeopardise price stability. Assuming that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.25%, average annual inflation is expected to hover between 0.9% and 1.6% in the next three years. For 2002, the National Bank still anticipates a growth rate of around 1%. The difficult situation of the world economy has had a marked influence on the development of business activity in Switzerland in the past few months. Following a decline in the third quarter 2001, the economy stabilised in the fourth quarter, and in the first quarter 2002 gross domestic product again rose somewhat. Notably exports and capital spending were on the decline during this period, while private and government consumption as well as the construction industry exerted a stabilising influence. On the whole, the development in the past six months fulfilled our expectations. We assume that the Swiss economy will grow extremely moderately and below its potential until mid-2002. Growth is likely to pick up perceptibly again only during the second half of 2002. Consumption will remain robust and strengthen economic activity. The actual upswing, however, should be triggered by higher exports and these, in turn, will depend on improved economic conditions worldwide. With a slight time lag, capital spending is also expected to grow markedly again. As already stated, we still believe that real economic activity should increase by around 1% in 2002. In 2003, growth should continue to approach its potential, thereby clearly exceeding this year's level. Unemployment is unlikely to rise much more, and the production gap should gradually disappear in the course of the coming year. I shall now describe the development of inflation over the past few months and explain our new inflation forecast in more detail. The dotted green curve in the graph shows our inflation forecast of December 2001. At that time, we assumed that the three-month Libor rate would remain stable at 1.75% and accordingly expected a slight general rise in inflation to approximately 1.5% by the end of 2004. The fluctuations in inflation predicted for 2002 reflect basis effects. Last December's forecast was based on the assumption that the US economy and the European economy would stagnate until mid-2002 and would then gradually return to their potential growth path. Our forecast of December 2001 slightly overestimated the development of inflation for the first quarter 2002 and at the same time slightly underestimated inflation for the second quarter 2002. The deviation from the forecasting path is due mainly to the development of oil prices and the changed time of collecting data on clearance sales prices for clothing and shoes. Year-on-year inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index, rose to 0.6% in the first quarter 2002 from 0.4% in the fourth quarter 2001. In April, inflation increased to 1.1%, while declining again in May to 0.6%. The distinct rise in April was largely due to yet again higher oil prices and higher prices for clothing and shoes. At 1.6%, the price pressure on domestic goods still clearly exceeds that on foreign goods. The dashed red curve in the graph shows our latest inflation forecast, while the table contains the corresponding average annual inflation. Our new forecast rests on the assumption that after the surprisingly strong first quarter, growth in the US will be considerably weaker in the second quarter of this year. Subsequently, however, the US economy should gradually return to its potential growth path. 
 2 BIS Review 39/2002 In Europe, the economy will stagnate until the middle of this year and should then again accelerate markedly. We expect that the dollar/euro rate will remain at about the current level and that the oil price will be around $25 per barrel. On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 1.25% during the next three years, inflation should average 0.9% in 2002, move up to 1.3% in 2003 and reach 1.6% in 2004. The forecast inflation will accelerate over time. Throughout the forecasting period, however, it will remain within the range of price stability. Until mid-2003, the forecast inflation will be considerably influenced by basis effects, which explains the various fluctuations. After that it will be largely determined by monetary policy effects. Until the beginning of 2004, the new forecast is very similar to the forecast of December 2001. In the new forecast, however, inflation then rises rapidly and at the end of the forecasting period it is only barely within the range of price stability. This difference is primarily due to the even more expansionary monetary policy compared with last December. With the global economy improving and Swiss business activity picking up, an enduringly expansionary monetary policy will in time lead to higher inflation rates. We consider the current level of the three-month Libor rate as appropriate for the time being to enable the economy to return to sustainable, inflation-free growth. Monetary policy decision-making is difficult under present circumstances. Given the strength of the Swiss franc we have very considerably relaxed monetary policy and cut interest rates much more than the European central bank. We are aware that our expansionary policy entails certain risks. Yet we believe that in view of the sluggish development of the Swiss economy and the strength of the Swiss franc we are conducting a reasonable policy. To adopt a more restrictive monetary policy would be premature at the present time and might jeopardise the still fragile economic recovery, notably in the export sector. We are also of the opinion that we still have sufficient leeway to counter any increased price pressures in good time and that price stability is currently not threatened. The National Bank must be ready and willing to react to changes in the world economy. At the moment, we see mainly two risks which might compel us to reassess the situation and to adjust our monetary policy course. For one thing, the economic recovery in Europe might be delayed somewhat. For another, the Swiss franc could again come under upward pressure. In both cases, the National Bank would react with adequate means. To conclude my remarks, I would like to reiterate what role the exchange rate plays in our monetary-policy decision-making process. We live in a system with flexible exchange rates. Such a system is very advantageous for Switzerland, but once in a while exchange rate fluctuations have to be reckoned with. We are currently going through a period characterised by a strong Swiss franc. In the past, there have always been phases during which the Swiss franc tended to be very strong. Experience has also shown, though, that there have always been corrective phases as well. It is the National Bank's responsibility to maintain price stability in the medium term, thus creating a favourable environment for the development of all sectors of the economy. For monetary policy, the exchange rate is an extremely important measure, as it influences the price level directly via import prices as well as indirectly via capacity utilisation in the export sector, and thus via economic growth. Particularly the last nine months exemplify the strong influence of the exchange rate on Switzerland's monetary policy. We always neutralised the tightening of monetary conditions, which was brought about by the appreciation of the Swiss franc, and rendered Swiss franc investments less attractive. We are aware of the fact that these measures do not provide relief to all sectors of the economy at the same time or to the same extent. The present situation is difficult for the export industry and for parts of the tourism sector. We should not forget, however, that enterprises in the rest of Europe also have to contend with unfavourable conditions. High inflation or calls for massive pay rises, as seen in some countries, may cause production costs to surge. Switzerland as an industrial location remains attractive. Its advantages include low inflation, high social stability, performance-oriented and well-trained employees, trade unions with an awareness of economic correlations, a first-rate public infrastructure and administrative system and, last but not least, a low interest rate level and favourable financing possibilities in a first-class financial centre. The export industry's situation should improve rapidly once the global economy, and in particular the European economy, start to rebound. Experience has shown that the export industry always does everything in its power to further increase its productivity and to remain competitive internationally in the current exchange rate environment. Its efforts must be supported by a strengthening of domestic competition in Switzerland. The export industry will remain a key engine of growth in Switzerland and an essential basis of our prosperity. 
 BIS Review 39/2002 3   The main ticks on the horizontal axis indicate the beginning of the first quarter of the respective year. The value for each quarter is recorded in the middle of the quarter.   Inflation Forecast June 2002 with Libor at 1,25% 2001 2002 20032004Annual average inflation in % 1.0 0.9 1.31.6 
 BIS Review 38/2002 1 Susan S Bies: Banking supervision and its application in developing countries Speech by Ms Susan S Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the World Bank Group's Finance Forum 2002, Chantilly, Virginia, 20 June 2002. *      *      * I am very pleased to participate in the Finance Forum 2002. As a former banker and current bank supervisor, I would like to focus my remarks on the process of building a strong system of financial supervision and regulation. Generally speaking, I believe a sound supervisory framework must be dynamic and must closely mirror the realities of the financial sector for which it is created. As such, though best practices in industrial countries are an important starting point for thinking about enhancing supervisory frameworks, one also should bear in mind that a single framework very rarely fits all types of banking organizations or banking systems.  My comments today will include an overview of the evolution of banking supervision in the United States, a discussion of the fundamental elements of our system, and a review of aspects of the U.S. experience that may provide lessons for supervisory development in emerging markets. I would like to conclude my remarks with a discussion of a basic supervisory issue related to foreign banking organizations that continues to challenge supervisory agencies around the world.  Evolution of the U.S. Supervisory System In the not-too-distant past, the Federal Reserve and other supervisory agencies in the United States relied considerably on validating financial accounts and records during on-site examinations to assess the safety and soundness of banking organizations. Examiners also spent significant time valuing account balances by performing detailed reviews of individual loans and other risk assets. Labor-intensive efforts went into verifying compliance with banking laws, regulations, and reporting requirements, and testing the adequacy of internal controls. These procedures enabled examiners to obtain a detailed assessment of a banking organization’s financial condition at the time of the examination. Since examinations were conducted annually and the banking business changed slowly during most of the post World War II war period, this framework provided supervisors with a reasonable assessment of the safety and soundness of the banking industry.  However, as you are aware, by the 1990s the pace of consolidation, expansion, and innovation in the U.S. banking industry had begun to accelerate, particularly among the largest institutions. The emergence of large, complex banking organizations and their use of new financial instruments, particularly derivatives, enabled these organizations to change their risk profiles rapidly. As a result, the point-in-time evaluations derived from transaction validation and valuation-oriented banking supervision became insufficient to ensure that banking organizations, particularly large complex banking organizations, were operating in a safe and sound manner. Moreover, the increased complexity and volume of financial transactions across the largest institutions began to significantly strain examiner resources.  Along with financial innovation, the risk management systems of banking organizations also began to evolve around this time because of advances in information technology, which significantly reduced the cost of obtaining and analyzing data and increased the sophistication of risk management models. More sophisticated risk management systems gave banking institutions a more accurate view of their risk-adjusted returns on capital. Value-at-risk models were adopted to measure expected losses at given levels of probability, and financial products such as swaps and other derivatives were used to manage interest-rate risk more effectively. On the credit side, where banks already had access to considerable information about their borrowers, more sophisticated risk-modeling techniques complimented management’s views on credit risk. These models include credit scoring for consumer lending and KMV models for corporate financing, which estimate option-based pricing models and information contained in stock prices with the probability of default.  As a result, the evolution of the industry in the 1990s rendered our traditional point-in-time, transaction validation, and valuation-based supervisory system inadequate. At the same time, the advancements in risk measurement in the industry allowed supervisors, when evaluating bank soundness, to rely more directly on information from banks’ own internal risk management systems. Doing so, however, 
 2 BIS Review 38/2002 necessitates testing these systems, and thus our current model of risk-focused supervision was developed.  At its core, risk-focused supervision is a relatively simple concept: Supervisors are expected to concentrate their efforts on ensuring that financial institutions use the processes necessary to identify, measure, monitor, and control risk exposures. Given the risk profile of U.S. banking organizations, risks are divided into six categories: credit, market, liquidity, operational, legal, and reputational. More time has been allocated to the examination planning process, in which supervisory teams assess the most important risks facing the organization and structure their examination activities around assessing and testing the adequacy of it’s management of those important risks. Thus, in the application of risk-focused supervision in the United States, our examiners verify the adequacy of the banking organization’s risk management systems, including whether they have an appropriate degree of transaction testing.  One aspect of sound risk management that did not change during the 1990s is the importance of sound corporate governance. In particular, bank directors and senior managers are responsible for seeing that their banks have effective internal controls, including an internal audit function. Effective internal controls ensure the implementation of bank policies and procedures designed to limit and manage risks and otherwise promote sound business practices. For example, internal control procedures that give front- and back-office responsibilities to independent units within the corporation reduce the ability of individuals to hide losses from bank management and thereby reduce operating risk. An internal audit function, in turn, verifies that a bank’s internal control procedures function as intended. Therefore, another critical aspect of our system of risk-focused supervision is the bank examiners’ assessment and evaluation of a bank’s internal controls and internal audit function.  The application of risk-focused supervision in the United States is supported by a strong culture of market discipline. The extent and the content of financial disclosure in the United States have developed markedly over the past few decades through the collective efforts of the corporate sector and government authorities. Although recent events have illuminated weaknesses in the accounting and auditing professions in the United States, most knowledgeable observers believe that the quality of information released by most firms in this country continues to be sound. Further, the long-standing independence of the regulatory community in the United States has fostered an environment in which banks are expected to correct in a timely fashion and have in most cases corrected deficiencies uncovered during the supervisory process.  Our supervisory system has successfully changed to the new risk-focused approach, but the transition was difficult in the early stages, particularly for supervisory staff who had long careers in the field. Examiners at times struggled with the shift to evaluating risks and risk management systems from making independent valuations of a very large portion of an institution’s risk assets. Also, some examiners misperceived that risk-focused supervision meant eliminating even a cursory review of less-important business lines and transaction testing from the examination process. In fact, we continue to struggle with these issues under our current approach, particularly since the system has not been thoroughly tested under adverse conditions in the banking sector.  It is crucial that the new system remain both flexible in view of the rapid evolution of the banking industry and grounded in core supervisory concepts, such as maintaining an adequate control environment--an issue to which I will return at the end of my remarks.  Applicability of this System to Developing Countries I believe that the basic principles of risk-focused supervision are relevant to most supervisory systems in industrial and developing countries. However, I would caution those attempting to introduce the U.S. supervisory model as it exists in this country to other countries, particularly where the characteristics of the banking sector differ markedly from those of the United States. Even in the United States, we have very different approaches to supervising large, complex banking organizations and smaller community banks.  First of all, the U. S. financial system is based on several fundamental factors. The first is a well-developed rule of law that enables regulators to administer their responsibilities effectively. This legal framework also ensures the enforceability of contracts, removing problems when borrowers are unwilling rather than unable to repay loans. For example, the ability to seize collateral of borrowers in default is essential if banks are to mitigate risks. As you know, difficulties in this regard have contributed to bank losses in many countries around the globe.  
 BIS Review 38/2002 3 The second fundamental element of our system is the availability of a large volume of high-quality financial information. For both banks and corporations, a sound system of accounting and disclosure that provides accurate, timely, and complete information is needed for banks to properly assess and manage risks and for supervisors to ensure that the institutions are operating in a safe and sound manner. The third element is that the U.S. supervisory agencies are both operationally independent and sufficiently funded to carry out their duties. In addition, supervisory staff must have a basic understanding of credit analysis and risk management in banking organizations.  We also know from experience that connected lending can weaken banking systems by distorting the incentives of bank owners and managers to manage risk properly. Thus, a fourth critical element that underlies our system is restrictions on and disclosure of lending to bank affiliates, shareholders, and managers. A similar concern underlies our separation of banking and commerce, something with which I had personal experience when I worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis more than thirty years ago. My responsibilities included implementation of the new regulations for one-bank holding companies. For the first time one-bank holding companies no longer could have both a bank and nonfinancial subsidiary. This separation eliminates any temptation banks might have to evaluate a commercial affiliate’s loan application less objectively than that of an unaffiliated firm. In countries that are still developing their system of banking supervision, such a separation can reduce the need for bank supervisors to ensure arm’s-length transactions between banks and their commercial affiliates, thus freeing up scarce supervisory resources.  Finally, our system was established to supervise the activities of for-profit, private-sector, commercial banks, and it is wholly incompatible with a banking system that contains widespread government-directed lending. Once the responsibility for taking risk has been removed from bank managers, their incentive for monitoring and managing risk is greatly diminished. Moreover, the incentive of the supervisory authorities, which are part of the government structure, to criticize lending that was granted at the behest of the government is limited. As a result, one of the first steps toward implementing a rigorous supervisory framework must be the elimination of such practices in the banking sector.  In the absence of these fundamental elements, the application of the U.S. supervisory system and many similar systems is likely to be unsuccessful. I encourage you and your colleagues, who provide such valuable skills and resources to developing countries, to continue focusing the bulk of your attention on introducing or improving these critical elements of infrastructure for effective supervision in countries that are lacking these attributes.  In addition, as I have mentioned, one of the key aspects of our supervisory approach in the United States is our increasing reliance on the evaluation and testing of banks’ own risk management systems. This aspect of our supervisory approach probably has the least relevance for developing countries that lack the fundamental factors I have just outlined. The growing sophistication of some global banking organizations’ internal risk-rating systems has led the Basel committee to propose incorporating these models in the calculation of capital requirements under the Basel II Capital Accord. However, the use of such models in calculating capital requirements is likely to be restricted to a limited subset of internationally active banking organizations, given the model’s reliance on accurate data and the expense involved in developing these techniques. As you are undoubtedly aware, banks in countries with poor data and resource constraints are unlikely to employ high-quality risk management systems. Relying on the systems used by those banks to measure the safety and soundness of institutions may give supervisors little useful information about the condition of their banking sector.  Instead, supervisory policies and procedures created in developing countries should focus on the risk environment in that market. For example, if the information supplied by banking organizations is poor and the auditing profession is underdeveloped, examiners should focus on validating accounts and records, valuing risk assets, and verifying the accuracy of financial statements. United States supervisors played this role earlier in the evolution of our banking system. If the banking sector engages primarily in straightforward credit-extending and deposit- taking activities, a system geared toward intensive credit review and transaction testing may be more appropriate. Certainly the years of regulatory report verification and large scale transaction testing allowed our supervisory system to develop skills in assessing borrowers’ ability to repay, verifying the adequacy of internal controls, and recognizing signals that reported information may not reflect the true condition of the financial institution. It is difficult to gauge whether, without this experience, we could have shifted effectively to our current risk management intensive system of supervision.  
 4 BIS Review 38/2002 Another issue that receives a great deal of debate in this country and in supervisory systems around the world is whether a single regulatory body is most efficient for supervising financial institutions. As you are aware, the U.S. banking supervisory system is composed of a large number of regulatory agencies. The Federal Reserve has argued against the creation of a single regulatory body outside the central bank, given the valuable information that the supervisory process provides to us in maintaining financial-market stability. However, compelling arguments have been made regarding efficiencies created by housing the entire financial supervisory apparatus under one roof. In the case of developing countries, a central consideration is the structure and character of the government itself. In countries with strong traditions of bureaucratic control over economic decisionmaking, consolidating the regulatory function may prove counterproductive because that agency would have tremendous power and few checks and balances. Further, such consolidation is likely to be a larger problem if the supervisory agency is not independent of other government functions.  Current Issues Facing Global Supervisors  Finally, I would like to discuss a key issue related to the supervision of foreign banking organizations that arises in a dramatic fashion every few years. This issue is the importance of ensuring that banking organizations maintain controls for their foreign affiliates that are sound and independent local management’s influence. History has shown that foreign affiliates are particularly vulnerable to internal control problems. The failure of Barings Bank and the losses incurred by institutions such as Daiwa Bank and, most recently, Allied Irish Bank were directly related to a failure in proper control of foreign affiliates. In most cases these losses could have been avoided by ensuring that the bank’s control procedures--for example, segregation of duties and the conduct of thorough and independent internal audits--were functioning properly. Even under a risk-focused approach, supervisors must ensure that bank management is providing adequate controls for all aspects of the business, even those that appear relatively minor in scope.  A number of banking organizations from developing countries have also had difficulties related to inadequate controls in recent years, particularly banks from countries with weak supervisory oversight. The difficulties have created significant losses for these banking organizations. The lessons from these cases for developing country supervision are that basic control functions are critical to all organizations, no matter what the size, and that banks operating overseas must be monitored carefully and continuously.  Related to these cases is the broader issue of implementing a rigorous supervisory structure for foreign banking organizations. We have seen in our markets that the increased competition produced by opening the banking sector to foreign institutions can enhance efficiency. For developing countries, the introduction of foreign competition is likely also to introduce a transfer of skills to the local banking community. Staff trained by foreign bankers often move to local institutions, and foreign bankers themselves have been involved in training local banking staff. For example, in the People’s Republic of China, a prominent U.S. banking organization has been providing training for staff and executives of state-owned, local banks--training the organization believes will benefit its business in the longer run by increasing the sophistication of the market as a whole.  Yet from the perspective of the home country supervisor, introducing an appropriate supervisory apparatus is important to monitor the activities of these banks and to enhance the host supervisor’s understanding of the global institution and supervisory framework in the home country market. The development of a clear supervisory framework for foreign banking organizations will improve the safety and soundness of the banking sector as a whole. And in addition, the supervision of foreign banking organizations may provide a training opportunity to host supervisors in developing countries, given the quality of information and risk management practices in many foreign banking organizations operating in their market.  Conclusion  The increasingly integrated nature of financial sectors around the world has increased the importance of sound banking supervision in all financial markets. The U.S. experience provides valuable lessons for the development of effective supervision in developing countries, but those lessons must be viewed within the institutional context of each market. The earlier stages of development in our system may hold the most important practices for developing countries. I wish you all the best in your very important work in this field and have greatly enjoyed the opportunity to speak with you today.  
 BIS Review 38/2002 1 Jaime Caruana: Presentation of the Bank of Spain’s annual report Speech by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Governing Council of the Bank of Spain on the presentation of the annual report, Madrid, 14 June 2002. *      *      * A year ago I addressed you in my first presentation of an Annual Report, that for the year 2000. At the time I highlighted the importance of an impending event: the introduction of euro notes and coins. This event clearly symbolised the culmination of monetary union in Europe, a process set in train ten years earlier and coming to fruition against a background of enormous expectation not free from uncertainty. It is only fair today to start by stressing the success of the cash changeover, which was notably smooth despite the complexity inherent in such a singular, large-scale and radically novel operation. Underpinning this success was the collaboration of all the sectors concerned: households and firms and, in particular, the banking system and the distribution sector, without whose contribution the changeover of notes and coins would have simply been unviable. The fact that such a far-reaching change should have found such widespread support in society ultimately reflects European citizens' acceptance of their new currency and their confidence as to the benefits they may reap from it. With the culmination of this process, the euro area is consolidated as an extensive and stable monetary zone. This is an effective instrument for increasing the prosperity of European citizens and one suited to playing a leading role in the international monetary system. It is also a magnet for other European countries whose integration into the area will give it greater worldwide influence. A dynamic process is now under way in the area in which those economies that are most flexible and best equipped with physical, technological and human capital will be those that most benefit from participation in the common European venture. To date, the Spanish economy has been able to draw on its progressive economic and monetary integration in Europe to move towards correcting some of its structural imbalances, to further real convergence with the core European countries and to pursue increasing external openness. In parallel, Spain has re-geared its economic policies towards stability and has pushed through the liberalisation of its financial, factor and product markets. This modernisation and openness drive has led to a substantial change in Spain's position in the world economy, which includes strategic ownership interests in certain regions in which it has invested strongly. Undoubtedly, the main challenge now facing the Spanish economy is to consolidate this position against a background of heightened competition, rapid technological change and future European Union enlargement. The Annual Report presented today illustrates the benefits that the Spanish economy has obtained from participation in Economic and Monetary Union, even under the particular circumstances of a generalised slowdown in the world economy, as was the case in 2001. The advantages stemming from price stability, budgetary discipline and the reforms undertaken are enabling the phase of lacklustre growth to be overcome without halting progress in real convergence. The pattern has differed from previous cycles, where the imbalances incubated in expansionary phases would inescapably result in periods of recession and job destruction. In this first part of my address, I shall give an overview of world economic developments last year and discuss the response of the euro area economy to the new international setting, paying particular attention to the performance of the Spanish economy. In the second part, I shall refer to matters relating to financial stability, banking supervision and the role of the Banco de España in these areas. The world economy The slowdown in the world economy in 2001 was more short-lived and milder than expected, despite the emergence of several adverse shocks which it was thought, at the time, would have a strongly negative impact. First, there was the correction of the speculative bubble in the industries most closely related to new technologies and telecommunications. This prompted a substantial decline in these companies' earnings and their share prices on the stock market, and a rapid adjustment to the over-investment that had built up. Next were the repercussions of dearer oil prices in 2000, which were partly corrected in 2001 but which have rebounded again this year. Further, the crises in Turkey and 
 2 BIS Review 38/2002 Argentina once more highlighted the vulnerability of some emerging economies and certain shortcomings in the architecture of the international financial system. And finally, there were the attacks of 11th September, which had a specific and strongly depressive effect on confidence. Despite this build-up of adverse effects, the world economy proved notably resilient. This was all the more striking considering that on this occasion the downturn coincided in the three main areas (the United States, the European Union and Japan), which a priori heightened the risk of a deep and prolonged decline in world output. With the exception of Japan, the industrialised countries avoided going into recession, while the emerging economies, although seeing a decline in their growth rates, have on the whole remained more buoyant than the developed countries. The opening months of 2002 have gradually confirmed the greater buoyancy of the world economy. This is clearer in the United States, but is also perceptible in other countries. Activity, confidence and employment indicators have all firmed, and GDP growth forecasts have been revised upwards. Nonetheless, elements of uncertainty remain in place over the strength and timing of the ongoing recovery. These relate essentially to the persistence of certain imbalances in the US economy (linked mainly to the shortfall in private saving and the high foreign deficit), the weakness of the Japanese economy and the crises besetting certain emerging countries.  It is worth inquiring into the causes of the world economy's resilience in the face of these shocks. Firstly, it is probably indicative of the greater microeconomic flexibility of both the developed and the emerging economies. It appears the structural reforms of recent years, aimed at increasing the adaptability and responsiveness of economies to adverse effects, are beginning to bear fruit. Consequently, it is crucial to further such reforms, especially in times of plenty, when their cost is lower, so that when lean times arrive the economy has the spontaneous adjustment mechanisms in place to reduce the cost and duration of the crisis. Secondly, from the macroeconomic policy standpoint, the recent economic slowdown shows the importance of having sufficient fiscal and monetary policy leeway to be able to react to adverse disturbances, meaning in turn that prices and public finances should have performed favourably during economic upturns. Fortunately, on this occasion, the slowdown found the main economies in a relatively balanced inflationary and budgetary situation. This was conducive to a monetary policy response (which was more intense in the United States, in step with the sharper reduction in the pace of activity in this country) and to the operation of the automatic stabilisers, without jeopardising the long-term fundamentals. The notable exception is Japan. Here there is no further room for additional stimuli on the demand side owing to the economic and financial problems inherited from previous years. And this has led to the economy going into recession for the third time in ten years. In the other industrialised countries, the prompt economic policy response largely accounts for the mildness of the slowdown. Thirdly, part of the explanation for the swift recovery in the main economies in the face of the aforementioned shocks lies in the fact that efficient, sound financial systems are in place, which have been propitious to the smooth working of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. I will return to this idea later on discussing financial stability. In most of the main countries, then, the cuts in intervention rates have fed through appropriately to banks' lending and deposit rates, and the liquidity provided by central banks has passed through the credit channel to households and firms, where expenditure decisions are taken. The exception once more here is Japan, where the financial sector's problems have prevented the pass-through of monetary policy stimuli. Fourthly, the limited knock-on effect of the Turkish and Argentine crises to other emerging countries, in contrast to similar previous situations, also contributes to explaining why the slowdown in the world economy has been relatively mild. This phenomenon is all the more notable given that two relatively large countries of potentially systemic significance are involved. And particularly so Argentina, which was the biggest sovereign issuer among the emerging countries. The more orthodox and disciplined policies of the main emerging countries have been rewarded on this occasion by the international financial markets. As the dispersion of spreads testifies, markets appear to have increased their ability to discriminate between countries with better and worse fundamentals. This greater ability has been partly due to increased transparency in the emerging countries themselves, as a result of reforms in recent years including the application of statistical codes and standards of good practice. It is also partly attributable to improved risk management by investors on international financial markets. 
 BIS Review 38/2002 3 In sum, behind the greater resilience of the world economy in facing adversities, it appears there are positive factors which have tended to increase economies' capacity for spontaneous adjustment, the responsiveness of macroeconomic policies and the discipline exerted by international financial markets. Hence the importance of persevering in the coming years along these lines, especially bearing in mind the growing economic and financial interdependence of different countries and regions and their exposure to global shocks. Euro area and monetary policy The euro area fell prone to the slowdown affecting the world economy in 2001, although the impact on the euro zone differed from that on other areas. The initial idea that the euro area could sustain growth on its own has not held up in reality. Indeed, some particular features of the area (such as the notable falling off of residential investment in Germany) exacerbated the slowdown in activity in 2001. Nonetheless, the euro area does appear to be emerging from this slump relatively satisfactorily, helped by the absence of significant imbalances and by an economic policy response which have contributed to shortening the recessionary bout and tempering its impact on employment. At the onset of 2001 inflation was on a rising path, influenced by various essentially temporary factors such as dearer oil prices, crises in the meat industry and the depreciation of the euro. Its trajectory changed mid-year, partly following that of oil prices, and it fell to 2% in December. Although inflation stood above the 2% level throughout the year, medium-term inflation expectations broadly converged towards levels consistent with price stability. This contributed to wage moderation, preventing the temporary rebound in prices from having a durable effect on inflation. Thus, against a backdrop marked by the progressive slowdown in activity, by moderate cost pressures and by price expectations on the part of agents that coincided with the monetary authority’s targets, the inflation outlook improved as the year unfolded. The monetary policy stance, marked by the tightening carried out in 2000 in a very different macroeconomic setting, gradually became accommodative of the new circumstances and several interest rate cuts were applied, proving conducive to the economic recovery. I would like to underscore two different factors that were pivotal to the assessment of the inflation outlook and the intensity of the monetary policy response in 2001. The first was wage moderation, and the second the reaction by the economic authorities to the attacks on 11th September, particularly in the light of the sizable rise in economic uncertainty and the immediate deterioration of confidence levels. The firm, concerted response by the monetary authorities in the main economic areas softened the initial impact on financial markets and meant that the effects on the world economy were relatively short-lived, though sharp, and confined to specific sectors. Broadly, the design of the euro area members' fiscal policies in 2001 prevented expansionary discretionary measures being adopted. Such measures would have jeopardised the sustainability of recent fiscal consolidation achievements and, given the lag with which such measures operate, they could have had a counter-productive effect on the cyclical stability of the economies in the area. However, the available estimates of the structural budget balance show that, at the aggregate level, there was a slight deterioration last year as a result of the tax cuts applied in certain countries before the cyclical weakening had become apparent. Further, fiscal results have shown that, in certain countries, not enough room for manoeuvre was available to absorb the budgetary effects of the slowdown without drawing too close to the limits set in the Stability and Growth Pact. Clearly, in such cases the consolidation drive made has not been sufficient to attain a balanced budgetary position. In this respect, it is of paramount importance that EMU members maintain the commitments entered into under the Pact and do so symmetrically, as reflected in the conclusions of the Barcelona Summit. The appropriate response by economic policies to the slowdown in 2001 has therefore contributed to the recovery of the European economy apparently under way since the beginning of the current year. The intensity and duration of this new phase of recovery will be influenced by conditioning factors that are largely external to the area, such as oil prices, or the sustainability of the US recovery, given the persistence of its financial imbalances. But, above all, a sound recovery will depend on the ability of European economies to underpin their growth with domestic factors supportive of robust investment that increases productive capital. 
 4 BIS Review 38/2002 The monetary policy stance should be tailored to the prospects of maintaining price stability. Particularly important in this respect (besides oil prices, which have already hampered any reduction in inflation in the first half of the year) is continuing wage moderation which, in some countries, is beginning to be questioned. The single market and monetary union provide the European economy with a particularly suitable framework for developing its growth potential and for consolidating it as one of the central pivots of the world economy. Notwithstanding, the area still lacks sufficient flexibility and innovative capacity to compete satisfactorily with other more dynamic areas, mainly in the more technologically advanced industries. The Barcelona Summit has clearly shown the ability of the European authorities to pinpoint key issues and to design a blueprint for reforms (of differing ambition but of equal importance) that will make Europe a more dynamic economy. While greater ambition would conceivably have been desirable, meeting the targets laid down in Barcelona on schedule would entail a qualitative change of enormous importance. The Spanish economy The weakening of the international economy and the loss of buoyancy in the European economy contributed in 2001 to prolonging the gradual slowdown in activity in Spain in train since the previous year, when the first symptoms of the previous lengthy expansionary phase having run its course were discerned. Consumption and investment in construction were the main underpinnings of growth in our economy, while productive investment and exports were the chief components dampening it. That said, GDP increased by 2.8% in 2001, clearly above the figure of 1.5% posted in the euro area. The maintenance of high job creation rates during 2001, set against the slowing trend marked by general developments in the economy, and the favourable financial conditions in place contributed to sustaining household income and helped underpin consumer spending and residential investment. However, the declining course of investment in capital goods steepened in the face of heightening uncertainty, worsening expectations and slowing final demand, which the generous financial conditions were unable to offset. The effects on activity were reinforced by the fall in the growth rate of exports as from the early months of 2001. In any event, the trends apparent at the beginning of the year 2002 (namely greater growth in the economy in quarter-on-quarter terms but with something of a loss of steam in job creation and in consumption, accompanied by a check on the rate of decline of investment and continuing sluggishness in exports) are consistent with a scenario of gradual recovery, but fail to dispel the uncertainty over its intensity and scale. The profile of the Spanish inflation rate during 2001 was similar to that in the euro area as a whole, albeit maintaining a positive gap. After rising in the opening months, in the wake of dearer food and energy product prices, inflation dipped appreciably in the second half of the year, largely due to the course of oil prices on international markets. At the end of 2001 it stood at 2.7% in year-on-year terms. However, the initial data for 2002 have shown a more marked rebound in the 12-month growth rate of consumer prices than that recorded in the euro area as a whole, due partly to temporary factors that should be reabsorbed in the coming months. Of concern to us is the persistence in the Spanish economy of inflationary biases reflected in the inflation gap with the euro area, especially when they are manifest in the behaviour of unit labour costs. I shall refer to the risks this entails later. The change in the cyclical pattern of the Spanish economy As I said at the outset, these features of the recent slowdown in the Spanish economy have shown up a different pattern of behaviour than that followed in previous cycles. The factors accounting for this change are related both to the conditions of greater macroeconomic stability attained by the Spanish economy in its convergence towards and integration into the euro area, and to the progress made in terms of structural reforms. These factors have had a bearing both on the balanced nature of the upturn in the second half of the nineties and on the mildness of the recent deceleration. The greater macroeconomic stability has been underpinned, as is known, by a notable fiscal consolidation drive and by wage moderation. In the upturn, these conditions provided the economy with a most significant expansionary boost, prompting rapid convergence towards the real income 
 BIS Review 38/2002 5 levels of the core European countries, without this translating into the emergence of significant macroeconomic imbalances. During the more recent phase of lower economic growth, the absence of imbalances left over from the expansionary phase continuing favourable monetary conditions have tempered the intensity of the adjustment, allowing real convergence to continue. The presence of a credible environment of price stability and fiscal equilibrium is a necessary condition for further headway in real convergence by the Spanish economy, as it moves into a phase of recovery. Consequently, particular attention must be paid to the fiscal policy stance and to monetary and financial conditions. The year 2001 saw the attainment of a balanced budget, without the slowdown in the Spanish economy preventing strict compliance with the commitments made under the Stability Programme, consistent with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact. Last year, moreover, new fiscal discipline measures were adopted which will contribute to maintaining sound public finances in the medium term. I refer here to the budgetary stability legislation and to the new regional government financing arrangements, which increase the degree of fiscal co-responsibility of the regional governments under the transparency requirements demanded of general government. I have already mentioned that monetary and financial conditions in the Spanish economy were more generous than in the rest of the euro area, although the significance of this difference lessened as demand lost momentum. The credit aggregates grew at high rates for the third year running. That said, they did slow during the year, in step with cyclical developments, although this remains insufficient. The growth of financing to Spanish households and corporations translated last year into a fresh increase in this sector’s debt as a percentage of GDP, with the rise in lending to households for house purchases proving particularly notable. The greater ease with which the private sector has been able to finance its spending decisions has contributed to limiting the depth of the ongoing cyclical slowdown, but at the expense of incurring high debt levels. The increase in private debt is a logical response to the new setting of lower interest rates in the Spanish economy, but it has also increased the exposure of this sector to potential adversities. As the expansionary effects of this process of adaptation by our economy to the new environment ease off, progress towards real convergence at similar rates to those at present will require that growth be underpinned by more stable factors. Main challenges facing the Spanish economy This overall positive assessment of the Spanish economy, even during the recent slowdown, should nonetheless not conceal the presence of certain rather unsatisfactory aspects. These include the positive gap with the euro area in terms of price and cost growth, the flatness of investment in capital goods and low productivity gains. To further real convergence, these problems must be overcome. In this connection, economic policy action should be geared primarily to promoting competitiveness, in the broadest sense of the term, where aspects linked to the behaviour of prices and costs combine with others related to growth potential. Regarding the behaviour of prices, and despite the substantial progress made towards nominal stability since the mid-nineties, the persistence of an inflation differential with the euro area poses risks in respect of future competitiveness. The wage restraint characterising the most recent phase of the Spanish economy has passed through unevenly to the sectors exposed to competition and those sheltered from it. In the exposed sectors, price increases cannot be far removed from those made abroad, whereas in the sheltered sectors there has been a continuous tendency to widen margins, irrespective of where the economy is in the cycle. Hence, the combination of a rather inflexible wage structure and still-insufficient competition in certain services sectors has led to the phenomenon of dual inflation, which feeds the inflation gap with the euro area. Another fundamental variable for the economy's competitiveness is productivity, although it is difficult to measure and interpret. Clearly, what lies behind the low labour productivity gains in recent years is the beneficial effect of employment-promoting policies, which have raised the economy's employment-generating capacity. However, research indicates that such low gains may also be reflecting a low increase in certain components of the stock of capital and an insufficient incorporation of technological progress. 
 6 BIS Review 38/2002 The most significant means of expanding the economy's growth potential has therefore been the incorporation of workers into the labour force. This is a suitable way to improve the Spanish economy’s endowment and utilisation of productive factors, and should be maintained. But it cannot be the sole avenue. In parallel, investment must be bolstered, especially in those forms of capital most conducive to the incorporation of technical progress and innovation. Policies supportive of a more flexible and efficient corporate environment and aimed at the better functioning of the economy must also be persevered with. The investment in new technologies in recent years has already had a positive influence on Spanish productivity, although its overall effects have been blurred by the less dynamic behaviour of other types of investment. Looking ahead, a step-up in investment in technological capital will require the complementary promotion of investment in human capital and in capital goods to help spread innovation across the economy as a whole. As regards policies aimed at promoting market flexibility and efficiency, the liberalising momentum of the reforms undertaken must be carried further. The Annual Report underscores the advisability of land market reform, given its consequences for the formation of real estate prices and costs and its influence on labour mobility. It further stresses the need to pursue liberalisation and competition policies in the network industries (telecommunications, electricity, transport and distribution, etc.), as the benefits of better workings here will spread to all productive activities. In the labour market, the persistently high ratio of temporary to permanent employees alongside a high unemployment level (especially among certain groups), with labour shortages in certain industries and regions, highlights the need to press ahead with reform. In particular, the incentives for effective participation in the labour market must be further improved, as must the decentralisation of collective bargaining, so that it is better suited to the conditions firms face and to workers' characteristics. To conclude this part of my address, let me stress the importance of building on the balanced budget obtained in 2001 by introducing improvements into the structural aspects of general government conduct. Public spending must be increasingly efficient, so that it contributes to increasing the economy's stock of capital and productivity. Moreover, the necessary adjustments should be made so that due attention to the growing demands that will be made of the public sector as a result of the ageing of the population (to cover pensions, health, care for the aged, etc.) will not lead in the long run to situations jeopardising public finances. Financial stability I shall devote the second part of my address to financial stability. From this perspective, I shall discuss the main consequences of some of the earlier-mentioned shocks the international financial system underwent last year. I should like to begin with some reflections drawn from the crises experienced by certain emerging countries. First, let me mention the importance of compatibility between the exchange rate regime chosen by a country and its overall economic policies and institutional structure. No exchange rate regime can, on its own, protect an economy from financial crises if it is not accompanied by appropriate and coherent policies. A second reflection is that the presence of and adherence to a legally sound, open and stable institutional framework that is respectful of creditors' and debtors' rights is the only way to generate the confidence and support of international financial markets in such a way that domestic saving shortfalls may be financed. My third reflection considers the need for clear, credible criteria beforehand as to how to distribute the costs of crises. Such criteria should strike a balance between both domestic and foreign private creditors. Coverage of the shocks experienced by the international financial system last year would be incomplete without some reference to the set of shortcomings highlighted in the so-called ENRON case, which goes beyond the particular scope of this company and reveals weaknesses of a more institutional and systemic nature. These events were significant since they showed that, even in economies with more sophisticated institutional arrangements, some types of conduct with great destabilising potential may occur. The ENRON case was important not only in quantitative terms but also, and especially, in qualitative terms, witnessing a series of legally dubious practices which go beyond the strictly financial field: conflicts of interest, serious corporate governance shortcomings, 
 BIS Review 38/2002 7 excessively ad-hoc accounting practices deviating from prudential principles and from what is a fair view of the real economic situation, manipulation of information, etc. And all this set against the inoperativeness of the internal and external control mechanisms of the company. We have thus been faced with a broad litany of serious problems affecting many of the institutional requirements and elements that are so vital for maintaining confidence, for the efficient allocation of resources, for the orderly working of any financial system and for the effective supervision thereof. I shall return to these matters later. But let me first say that, faced with the above-mentioned multifarious shocks, the international financial system showed a capacity for resilience that should be viewed as highly satisfactory. It is not easy to assess which factors have contributed to increasing, and to what extent, such resilience. Among them, however, mention should be made of the following: the priority given to stability by many monetary and fiscal authorities during the preceding long expansionary phase; the improved workings of more integrated and better informed international financial markets with increasingly flexible trading systems; the high levels of solvency, via own funds and provisions, attained by banks during the previous upturn, which has made it easier to soak up the losses now arising; and, finally, the advances made by many banks in risk management, providing for better risk identification and monitoring, risk diversification and the reallocation of risk towards final investors, on increasingly efficient derivatives markets. Despite the resilience of the international financial system, both the independent developments within the system and the aforementioned events which perturbed the markets have repercussions for banking supervision. These are worthy of mention. Before doing so, however, I shall offer a brief overview of the financial situation last year in Spain. Spanish banking system Inevitably, the Spanish financial system was affected during 2001, albeit unevenly, by the aforementioned shocks. The economic slowdown throughout the year translated into a lesser rate of banking activity than in previous years, resulting in growth in total assets of 7.3% in consolidated terms. Though below this, the growth rate of credit remained high, especially in respect of mortgage lending, which made for an increase in the level of debt and, in turn, saw credit markets gain weight relative to securities markets. The Spanish banking system was scarcely affected by the shocks discussed earlier, with the exception of the Argentine crisis, whose repercussions were more telling. Notwithstanding, our banks are weathering the storm caused by the Argentine crisis thanks to an appropriate and prudent provisioning policy. Although this has meant reduced earnings, these have still continued to outgrow those of most of the major international banks. The cyclical turnaround has also led to an increase in bad loans. Yet owing to the relatively strong growth of credit, this has not been reflected in default ratios, which have held at historical lows. The solvency of Spanish banking institutions was bolstered last year, breaking with the trend seen since 1997, although this improvement is mainly attributable to secondary capital. As a result, credit institutions' capital adequacy ratio stands three percentage points above the regulatory minimum, calculated in accordance with Spanish rules, and almost five percentage points higher according to the criteria of the Basel Banking Supervision Committee. As a result of the lower rate of banking activity, combined with the impact of the crisis in Argentina, with the consequences of the full implementation of the statistical provision and with the unfavourable performance of stock markets, the growth of net attributable earnings after tax declined to 6.9% in 2001. Although this growth is but one-third of that posted the previous year, compared with our peer countries it may be viewed as satisfactory. This result has been possible thanks to the favourable contribution of the traditional business segment in Spain. Reversing the trend of prior years, the net interest margin picked up slightly while operating expenses fell. As a consequence of the foregoing, the fall in the return on equity was cushioned. Spanish banks have thus successfully negotiated a relatively difficult year. Contributing to this, undoubtedly, have been the improvements during the lengthy expansion in general and risk management, in the containment of costs and in the reinforcement of solvency. These improvements should be built on. Regarding this latter issue, I wish to highlight the significant stabilising role that the 
 8 BIS Review 38/2002 so-called statistical provision has begun to play. The provision is designed to promote the provisioning of the foreseeable losses generated by credit risk at the time this risk is assumed, and not when, years later, such losses begin to emerge, frequently on the downward track of the cycle when activity is lower and the profit and loss account is weakened. I shall conclude this section with a reference to the position in 2001 of Spanish securities markets. Apart from the decline in equity indices and trading in favour of fixed income, I might mention the significant headway made in market integration, which crystallised in the creation of a holding company grouping all existing secondary and derivatives markets, together with all the securities clearing and settlement systems. This process of vertical integration will enable the unquestionable economies of scale and scope offered by the securities industry in Spain to be harnessed, thereby enhancing their efficiency and strengthening their competitive position on the international stage. Banking supervision I shall commence the final part of my address, dedicated to banking supervision, with a summary of events last year in both the international and the Spanish financial system. Given the speed of change in the financial environment, supervision requires an ongoing effort to improve and adapt itself to changing circumstances. This means proving equal to market innovations, developments and trends, but also involves being more attentive and sensitive to the changes that arise in the demands society makes of the financial system and its supervisors. Accordingly, as supervisors we should test principles, theories and procedures against the reality of events in financial systems. Both within and outside Spain, last year provided us with representative cases of weaknesses that leave no room for complacency and which require fresh thought and responses. The rest of my speech will deal with these aspects. Let me begin by noting that no new initiative it is sought to take in this field may be considered in isolation. It must be part of a two-dimensional framework. First is the matter of international co-ordination, since in markets as interrelated as is currently the case, the stability and behaviour of the system has an international facet. And second is the multi-disciplinary dimension, since, as revealed by the welter of problems I discussed in connection with the ENRON case, it is becoming increasingly evident that no banking supervision model may be expected to be efficient if the rest of the institutional apparatus underpinning the rationale of the market economy does not function properly. Among these institutional underpinnings, there are two which, although they affect all companies, I consider to be of particular importance for the workings of credit institutions and for their proper supervision. The first is the need to reinforce market discipline. On the basis of adequate, reliable and updated information compiled by companies, duly verified by independent auditors and impartially evaluated by analysts and rating agencies, such discipline should simultaneously act as a deterrent to and penalise imprudent, inappropriate or simply mistaken behaviour. The second concerns strengthening corporate governance. Banking supervision cannot and should not replace company directors and senior managers in the performance of their functions or the discharging of their responsibilities. Naturally, then, the contribution of bank directors and senior managers is essential if sounder, more stable and more efficient systems are to be attained. Achieving appropriate corporate governance standards contributes to corporate health, increases market confidence and promotes efficiency in the economy in general. Legislators, supervisors and, above all, entities themselves should promote the sound functioning of companies through the following key aspects: management transparency; the reliability and integrity of accounting information; the protection of shareholders; and the appropriate treatment of conflicts of interest. Also vital are the accountability of boards of directors and the suitability of their composition and procedural rules; guarantees that key decisions are adopted by the appropriate collegiate bodies and then duly recorded and conveyed to the market with sufficient transparency; and the setting up of audit, remuneration or appointment committees with clear objectives so as to ensure their effectiveness. To be effective, the adoption of any code in this area should be supported by appropriate structures and procedures. It will also require substantial participation and commitment by the company's directors and managers. Specifically, I should like to stress the importance for good corporate 
 BIS Review 38/2002 9 governance of an audit committee that is suitably composed and committed and on which non-executive directors form the majority. As a complement to a good corporate governance structure, credit institutions should be equipped with a sound risk culture. Such a culture should infuse the design and workings of the organisation and its management criteria, systems and methods; it should be founded on control procedures whose reliability has been duly tested; and its application should be overseen by departments possessing sufficient power and independence. All this should be substantiated by internal and external auditors and be highly visible to the market. Finally, I would like to stress the need for all types of financial institutions to apply due diligence. They should know their clients and systematically monitor their operations so they might prevent, and where necessary curb, not only money laundering and the funding of terrorism but also any other attempt to use the financial system for illegal or unethical purposes. Beyond the obligation all individuals and corporations have to observe and comply with the law, good practices in this area have an important supervisory dimension, as they play a decisive role when preventing or curbing such serious risks as those pertaining to reputation, legal risk, and so on. Despite the unquestionable importance of market discipline and good corporate governance, these are complements to banking supervision and, therefore, cannot replace it in respect of its essential task, namely "to promote the sound functioning and stability of the financial system", as stipulated in article 7 of our Law of Autonomy. Without exceeding the terms of this legal mandate, proper compliance requires, as I stated earlier, that banking supervision should be able to adapt to changes in its environment. One group of these changes covers aspects such as financial innovation, concentration and internationalisation, i.e. all developments present in the system and the attendant trends. Banking supervision must know how to capture and interpret the latter, as part of a threefold aim: to encourage their positive aspects; to eliminate, or at least minimise, processes which may prove harmful; and to adapt its own procedures to new circumstances. Only in this way will banking supervision, observing to the full the system's underlying rationale and the initiative of its agents, be able to avoid or correct, at the lowest possible cost, the imperfections of the markets, especially the externalities that may harm third parties. The second no less important group of changes to which banking supervision must adapt is in relation to the demands posed by society. I consider two such demands to be particularly significant. The first is the growing social demand that supervision should promote not only sound, stable and efficient financial systems but systems, moreover, which are governed by increasingly stricter codes of conduct giving rise to practices and conduct subject to ever-higher standards. Among the practical consequences of this demand are, among others, improvements in transparency, in corporate governance and in banks’ knowledge of their clients, as I mentioned earlier. On the basis of these tenets, and within the framework of international co-ordination I have referred to, banking systems as internationalised, interdependent, liberalised, dynamic and complex as those at present require an increasingly less intrusive and more incentives-based form of regulation, along with more preventive supervision. To achieve such regulation and supervision we are, at the national and international levels, setting aside ever more resources. The relevance of all these matters has been duly reflected in the work of different groups at the international level, addressing the associated accounting, financial regulation and corporate governance facets. In the EU, we may mention the action envisaged under the Financial Services Action Plan, or the work of groups such as the High Level Group of Company Law Experts. And in the international domain we have the work of the International Accounting Standards Board. In Spain the Financial Law, currently under passage through Parliament, heralds many improvements, one of which is particularly significant for banking supervision. This is, namely, the possibility of considering as a breach of disciplinary rules the situation whereby a credit institution’s solvency and viability is jeopardised by administrative or accounting shortcomings or deficiencies in internal control procedures, including those relating to risk management. The methodology known as Supervision of Banking Activity under the Risk Approach, on which the Banco de España has been working, provides a framework suited to meeting the challenges posed to Spanish banking supervision by the aforementioned aspects. The Banco de España will assign more resources to complementing traditional supervision with the evaluation of the foregoing qualitative 
 10 BIS Review 38/2002 aspects, including corporate governance codes of practice, procedures and structures. The results of this evaluation will bear on our determination of each institution’s risk profile. Let me conclude this section with a reference to the greater demands made of supervisors by society for information and transparency. The obligation of professional secrecy imposed on supervises by national and international standards and the necessary discretion with which constructive banking supervision must be pursued are compatible with greater supervisory transparency. Indeed, that will allow for better knowledge, and thus control, of what are, at each moment in time, the priority goals of supervision, the problems it faces, the procedures to which it resorts, the means it assigns and the resulting measures drawing the foregoing elements together. In order to meet this - in my view - fully legitimate demand, and to foment knowledge and discussion on these matters, a Banking Supervision Report, which is at an advanced age of preparation, is shortly to be released. This will complement the new publication "Estabilidad Financiera" ("Financial Stability") launched in September last year. In our capacity as a Eurosystem central bank to which additional functions of great importance are entrusted, we continued to make progress in 2001 along the lines marked out for the future last year. Major changes have been initiated in the areas of human resources management and technology, and the directorates banking supervision, internal audit, administration and works, note issuance and circulation, and control and accounting have been reorganised. In all these changes, the collaboration of the Bank's staff has been excellent. I should thus first thank the Deputy-Governor and the Directors-General for their support and co-operation and, on their behalf, express our profound gratitude to all the Bank's staff for their positive attitude and hard work. Particular acknowledgment is due to all those who, directly or indirectly, participated in the physical introduction of the euro. Without their dedication and effort, the success of the changeover would not have been possible. Finally, let me convey my gratitude to all the members of this Council for their invaluable support and co-operation. Their contributions have been fundamental in ensuring collegiate decision-making, adding depth and quality to the process. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s June report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 13 June 2002. *      *      * The Bank’s view2 Japan’s economy shows signs of stabilizing with a distinct increase in exports and a pick-up in production, although domestic private demand remains weak. With regard to final demand, business fixed investment continues to decrease and private consumption, despite some resilience, remains weak as a whole. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is on a downtrend. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real imports) are increasing markedly due to the recovery in overseas economies and also to the effects of restocking abroad, mainly in IT-related goods. Industrial production is picking up, reflecting the increase in exports and completion of inventory adjustment. The rebound in production is beginning to affect employment conditions, albeit marginally, with an increase in overtime working hours and in new job offers mainly for part-time workers. Nevertheless, firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses from a longer term perspective and as a consequence, household income continues to decrease noticeably. In sum, employment and income conditions of households overall remain severe. Turning to the outlook, exports are projected to continue to trend up mainly in IT-related goods amid the ongoing recovery in overseas economies, especially in the U.S. and East Asia. However, the pace of recovery is likely to become somewhat slower in the future than at present, as the effects from overseas restocking dissipate. Supported by this upturn in exports and also by the completion of inventory adjustment, industrial production is expected to accelerate momentarily followed by a gradual uptrend. Meanwhile, with respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private demand is likely to remain weak for the immediate future. Nevertheless, if the increase in exports and production mentioned above continues, corporate profits will recover, particularly in the manufacturing sector, and this will gradually have a positive impact on domestic private demand such as business fixed investment. Overall, Japan’s economy is projected to stop declining as a whole since an increase in exports and production will lead to an improvement in corporate profits and in turn, domestic private demand. However, considering that forces restraining the economy stemming from excessive employment and debt are still persistently at work, it will take a while for the positive momentum to spread across the nonmanufacturing sector, small firms and households. The outlook for overseas economies, particularly for the U.S. economy, is also accompanied by various uncertain factors. Amid the persisting fragility and uncertainty of the economy, it should continue to be borne in mind that unstable movements in the foreign exchange and financial markets at home and abroad would easily exert a negative influence on the economy. On the price front, import prices become almost unchanged because the continued upward pressure from the rise in crude oil prices around early spring is offset by the recent appreciation of the yen. Domestic wholesale prices are also almost flat since the decline in machinery prices and the reduction in electricity charges are offset by the effects of the increase in import prices in the past and of the progress in inventory adjustment. However, consumer prices and corporate service prices continue to decline. As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the balance between supply and demand is expected to still keep exerting downward pressure on prices amid persistently weak domestic demand for a while, although the progress in inventory adjustment will support prices to some degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the                                                       1 This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on June 11 and 12, 2002. 2 The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on June 11 and 12 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 37/2002 streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. Under these circumstances, as import prices are likely to turn down, domestic wholesale prices, which are sensitive to import prices, will edge down after remaining flat a little further. On the other hand, consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. This is partly because while the slower growth in imports of consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices. As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is recently moving around 15 trillion yen as the Bank continues to provide ample liquidity to the money market. In these circumstances, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent. Moreover, interest rates on term instruments remain steady. Yields on long-term government bonds are mainly moving in the range of 1.3-1.4 percent recently. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds continue to contract. However, spreads between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds still remain wide. Stock prices are level on the whole and are basically moving in the range of 11,000-12,000 yen. In the foreign exchange market, the yen continued to appreciate reflecting the overall downtrend in the U.S. dollar, but has been mixed thereafter since late May due mainly to the news on yen-selling intervention by the Japanese monetary authority. With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming severe. In the corporate bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings remains severe, but the environment for firms with high credit ratings is on an improving trend. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms are decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is decreasing somewhat. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued is declining recently, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level. The monetary base continued to increase substantially by around 30 percent from the previous year’s level in May, although the growth rate slowed slightly due partly to the abatement of liquidity demand prompted by a system failure of a major bank group. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock (M2 + CDs) remained around 3.5 percent. Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy on the whole in terms of money market conditions. The deterioration in the funding situation of firms is coming to a halt. However, the stance of investors toward firms with high credit risks remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 1 Kristina Persson: The economic situation in a monetary policy perspective Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference by Sveriges Kyrkokamerala förening, Sundsvall, 11 June 2002. *      *      * First of all, I would like to thank you for the invitation to participate in your congress and for the opportunity to expound the Riksbank’s views of the Swedish economy at the present time. By way of introduction, I intend to discuss the role of monetary policy on a more general level and then to present the Riksbank’s view of the economic situation and inflation prospects on the basis of the most recent Executive Board meeting, where we decided to leave the repo rate unchanged. I shall also describe the risk scenario and how we see developments beyond the forecast horizon. In conclusion, I shall briefly touch on an issue that I have personally been interested in for some time, namely the economic aspects of a potential Swedish membership of the Eurosystem. The role of the Riksbank Let me first clarify the Riksbank’s tasks and explain how monetary policy decisions are taken, i.e. how monetary policy strategy is formulated. The Riksbank has had a statutory duty to maintain price stability since 1 January 1999. We have chosen to put this in operational terms by means of setting an inflation target. This is defined by stipulating that the annual inflation rate, measured in terms of the consumer price index (CPI), should be two per cent with a tolerated deviation of plus/minus one percentage point. Monetary policy should thus be conducted to keep the purchasing power of the krona stable with regard to the basket of goods bought by an average Swedish household. This means that when central wage agreements are signed, the average wage-earner should be able to be fairly sure of what a nominal wage increase will entail in terms of purchasing power. A predictable rate of inflation can also serve as a rudder when domestically-oriented companies set their prices. Low and stable inflation expectations reduce uncertainty concerning the real effects of borrowing and saving in krona for households and companies with their costs and income in Sweden. This means that the resources within the economy can be allocated in a better way that if the consumer prices vary. A monetary policy that is credibly aimed towards an inflation target can thereby create good conditions for growth. Moreover, a monetary policy that it conducted with the aid of a symmetrical inflation target often has a counter-cyclical function. This means that it has a stimulating effect on the economy during a downturn in economic activity, as the inflation rate is normally low then, and vice versa. That, in a few words, is the philosophy behind the Riksbank’s inflation target. The Sveriges Riksbank Act also establishes that the Riksbank shall be autonomous, which means that we six members of the Executive Board, who make the decisions on the steering interest rates, may not seek or receive instructions from the government or parliament. The idea is that we are thus free to maintain price stability and will not be tempted to concentrate on short-term considerations when making our decisions. It may appear that this target forces the Riksbank to give lower priority to the development of the real economy. We only have a target for monetary policy. However, the preparatory work on the Riksbank Act stated that we shall “without setting aside the price stability target, support the objectives of the general economic policy with the aim of achieving sustainable growth and a high level of employment”. In any event, the assessments of the future path of the real economy play an important role in our decisions, as developments in economic activity are an important component in determining inflation. However, what is even more important is that there is no contradiction between good growth and price stability in the long term, quite the contrary. If we look at developments during the 1990s, growth after 1992 was on average 3.0 per cent a year, despite the fact that inflation had been below the target level for several years. Unemployment had at the same time declined from 9 per cent to around 4 per cent. This can be compared with the 1970s and 1980s, when inflation was approximately 8 per cent and growth was on average 2 per cent. Contributing to this positive development was the fact that 
 2 BIS Review 37/2002 there was good access to free resources in the economy after the crisis years at the beginning of the 1990s. An important part of the Riksbank’s monetary policy strategy is clarity and openness with regard to the bases for monetary policy decisions. The purpose of this is to create support for the price stability target and understanding of what governs the interest rate decisions among the general public. This is also the reason why we Executive Board members often travel round making speeches. Openness and clarity on our part can contribute to stabilising inflation expectations in society and reduce the risk of unnecessary tension on the financial markets. As monetary policy has an effect with some time lag, interest rate decisions are based on forecasts of price developments one to two years ahead. If the forecasts show a rate higher than the inflation target, the interest rate is raised, and vice versa. In other words, the instrumental rate is adjusted so that the total assessment of inflation 1-2 years ahead, taking into account the risk scenario, is in line with the target. The assessments are described in the Riksbank’s Inflation Reports, which are issued 4 times a year. As the economy is from time to time subject to unforeseen shocks, there will be deviations from the forecasts, even if the forecasts are well-founded. If, for instance, fruit-growers’ harvests are affected by insects, the price of fruit will rise, if the water reservoirs are not filled, electricity prices could rise and if cattle in Europe suffer various diseases, the price of meat and some other foodstuffs will rise. If the Riksbank tried to make adjustments for this type of temporary price disturbance, it would probably lead to large swings in monetary policy and unnecessary fluctuations in demand and production. It would therefore be wrong to give the impression that inflation will always be above two per cent. On the other hand, it is important that the Riksbank adapts the instrumental rate so that the inflation forecast one to two years ahead is in line with the target. This means that companies and households can rely on temporary deviations upwards or downwards being only temporary. In retrospect and looking outwards The attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on 11 September last year increased the uncertainty as to how the already weak global economic activity would develop. Even before then, signals of a more evident slowdown in industry and a poor development on the stock markets had caused the Riksbank to make a downward revision of its growth forecasts. The risk was that the terrorist attacks would undermine confidence in future prospects among households and companies, which usually has a negative effect on demand. As inflationary pressure can vary according to demand and changes in the level of resource utilisation, the events caused the Riksbank and other central banks to decide to lower their instrumental rates shortly after the attacks. Now that almost exactly nine months have passed, we can conclude that the impact on the global economy was less than feared, although some sectors, such as the airline industry, were hard hit. Furthermore, we are seeing increasing signs that economic activity is improving both in the USA and Europe. One factor that often contributes to turnarounds in economic activity is companies’ stockbuilding. When stocks are well-filled and sales decline, companies cut back on production so that it becomes even lower than demand. This destocking then pushes economic activity down to begin with. When the cutback in stocks gradually reaches an end, companies can increase production again without waiting for demand to increase. This gives increased strength to the upturn in activity. It is probable that this is the case right now; according to several indicators production has begun to increase and a certain amount of optimism is beginning to spread. The total economic policy is expansionary in many countries, which provides additional fuel to the sequence of events. The economic situation in the USA and Europe This means that demand on Sweden’s most important export markets is increasing. The turnaround has been particularly noticeable in the USA. There, both residential construction and household demand have been upheld during the economic slowdown by stimulation policy. In addition, strong productivity within US industry has contributed to improved profit margins. However, the upturn in the USA is expected to be fairly modest, which is mainly because households are expected to increase their low level of savings. (Diagram 1 - savings in the USA). There is a large 
 BIS Review 37/2002 3 savings imbalance in the US economy. Sooner or later an adjustment is expected. The weakening of the dollar that we have seen recently may be an indication that the adjustment process has begun. The deficit on the current account amounted to 3.9 per cent last year. On top of this, households’ wealth in the form of shares is expected to continue to develop weakly and the rapid price increases on property are expected to subside. The US labour market does not appear likely to improve before the end of the year, which will give a subdued development in real wages. (Diagram 2 - unemployment in the USA, the euro area, Germany and France). At the same time, there is a risk that imbalances in savings in the USA will be adjusted more rapidly and more forcefully with the result that the US economy may lose speed. If the American household sector were to increase its savings and thereby reduce the debt burden more rapidly than is currently predicted, it could lead to a poorer development in consumption than expected and a stagnating economy. The factors that could trigger such a sequence of events include, for instance, US share prices continuing to fall or a decline in house prices. On the other hand, developments in the USA could be stronger and the positive spread effects to the surrounding world greater than we have estimated. A large part of Sweden’s exports is to the euro area and economic activity in these countries is therefore particularly important to us. The improved growth prospects in the USA will contribute to the recovery in Europe. However, a continued weak development on the European labour market and an unexpectedly high inflation rate will probably subdue the recovery somewhat. Germany, which is an important market for Swedish products, is still showing a very weak development. According to some leading indicators, European companies have become more optimistic recently. However, profit margins have been pushed down by the fact that productivity has fallen and when productivity falls, labour unit costs rise, which in turn reduces the scope for investment. This could be an explanation for the recent high inflation rate in the euro area. When the level of economic activity rises and productivity increases, the inflation rate is expected to subside. In addition, the high inflation rate can be partly explained by “secondary” effects from earlier price increases on food and energy, and possibly by rounding-off effects on the introduction of euro banknotes. (Diagram 3 - inflation in the euro area) Growth prospects are good for several important Swedish export markets in the rest of Europe. The level of activity in the Finnish economy is still poor, but will benefit, like the Swedish economy, from the global improvement in economic activity. In Denmark and Norway, private consumption will be stimulated by tax reductions. There are also signs of a turnaround in industrial activity in the UK, while private consumption continues to develop favourably. However, there are also risks for developments in Europe: in the euro area the main cause of uncertainty is wage developments. High wage increases for metalworkers in Germany may spread to other sectors and then to other countries in the euro area. There is thus some possibility that the rate of wage increase and inflation in the euro area will be higher than in the main scenario depicted by the Riksbank. The economic situation in Sweden The Inflation Report that was published at the same time as our interest rate decision paints a mainly bright picture of the Swedish economy in the near future. The assessment is that the downturn in economic activity will be shallow and relatively short-lived. The recovery in global market growth, which for Swedish goods amounts to 2-3 per cent this year, will lead to an increase in Swedish exports. Over the next few years, this increase is expected to become 7-8 per cent a year. At the same time, households’ disposable incomes are improving, which contributes to increased consumption. This year they are expected to increase by almost 5 per cent, almost 80 per cent of which will come from increased transfers and reduced taxes and charges. An increase in income of this size has only occurred on a few occasions over the past decades. During 2003 and 2004 the increase is expected to be almost 3 per cent a year. It is primarily the strong development in disposable income that is expected to contribute to an increase in consumption over the coming years. Consumption of durable goods, such as fridges and TVs is expected to increase in particular. An expected recovery on the stock market (albeit modest) and a slight rise in property prices are other factors that will contribute to an increase in consumption in Sweden. Public consumption in Sweden is also expected to grow, by approximately 1 per cent a year. 
 4 BIS Review 37/2002 As a whole, industrial activity in Sweden is showing several signs of improvement, although the upturn is still proceeding at a fairly slow pace. The recovery is fragmented. Base industries such as forestry and steel are in a period of recovery and the motor vehicle industry is also showing some improvement. The telecommunications product industry, on the other hand, has experienced a continued deterioration in demand. In mid-April Ericsson presented an interim report that painted a very gloomy picture of prospects for the near future and the company warned of redundancies. This development is a source of some concern and uncertainty. At the same time, the significance of one particular sector should not be over-emphasised; employment at Ericsson corresponded to approximately one per cent of the total number of employees in Sweden. In recent times, the Swedish economy has been characterised by a clear division into two parts. Employment in manufacturing declined during the greater part of 2001 and this development has continued during spring 2002. On the other hand, employment in the private services sector increased last year, although this rise has been subdued slightly during the spring. A generally weak demand in industry, combined with problems of a more structural nature in the information and telecom sector has led to considerable cutbacks in employment and vacant production capacity within these parts of the economy. At the same time, the expansionary economic policy has been a contributing factor in sustaining the demand for consumer goods and services. This is the explanation for employment remaining at a high total level and even strengthening somewhat during 2001, despite the decline in economic activity. Developments during spring 2002 indicate a slight weakening on the labour market and although growth in the Swedish economy is expected to recover this year, the positive effect on unemployment will probably be delayed until next year. The number of job vacancies has increased during the first four months of the year, while the number of notices of redundancy has declined. However, unlike last year, many of the vacancies are temporary summer jobs. In addition, the number of persons being notified of redundancy could rise in the near future as a result of Ericsson’s cutbacks. A problem for the Swedish economy is that there will be a large increase in the percentage of very young and very old members of the population during 2003 and 2004, which limits the supply of labour. The labour supply is also affected by how the regulations on unemployment benefit, sickness insurance, etc. are formulated. The large number of employed persons who are absent from work as a result of sickness or other reasons also comprises a significant uncertainty factor. It is difficult to estimate to what extent these people could come back to work and boost production capacity. (Diagram 4 - number of employed persons, excl. sick and other absentees). The public sector is expected to provide a positive contribution to growth in employment during the entire forecast period. While employment in industry is not expected to increase until the latter part of the forecast period. During 2001 wages increased by 4.3 per cent, according to preliminary data. It is partly due to this high rate of wage increase that inflation has been above the Riksbank’s target level during 2001-2002. The wages statistics that have been received so far this year indicate a continued high rate of wage increase, or approximately 4 per cent. The design of the central wage agreements and a slightly weaker labour market situation are some important factors in subduing the rate of wage increase. The weak growth in productivity during 2001 and falling profits can also have a subduing effect on wage developments. During 2003 and 2004 the labour market situation is expected to gradually improve, which could contribute to a larger wage drift. A large part (70 per cent) of wages is determined at a local level. At the same time, inflation is expected to be slightly lower, which should have a subduing effect on the wage agreements signed. On average, wages are expected to increase by 4.1 and 4.3 per cent respectively during 2003 and 2004. Pricing and wage formation are influenced by inflation expectations among the different parties concerned, and therefore comprise an important part of the monetary policy analysis. Since March, households’ inflation expectations have remained around 2.5 per cent for one year ahead and the National Institute of Economic Research’s latest economic barometer shows that companies’ inflation expectations have remained more or less unchanged. (Diagram 5 - Actual inflation (CPI) as well as households’ and companies’ inflation expectations). In April, inflation measured in terms of CPI amounted to 2.5 per cent. The effects of the disturbances in supply that temporarily contributed to higher prices on energy and certain foodstuffs last year have abated, which has contributed to a decline in the inflation rate. In the short term, inflation is expected to continue to decline as these temporary effects disappear from the inflation measure. (Diagram 6 -
 BIS Review 37/2002 5 Inflation. Outcome and main scenario). The forecast for underlying inflation, measured as UND1X, is 1.9 per cent one year ahead and 2.0 per cent two years ahead. However, the uncertainty in the inflation forecast has increased recently for several reasons. Between 2000 and 2001 GDP growth was subdued from 3.5 to 1.2 per cent, at the same time as inflation rose from 1.4 to 2.7 per cent on an annual average. One possible explanation for this unexpected development is that the production capacity of the economy increased at a slower rate last year. The production gap, which comprises the difference between actual and potential production, plays an important role in the Riksbank’s assessment of inflation. The basic idea is that if the total demand in the economy exceeds the production capacity, it creates price pressure in the economy that can lead to inflation. Potential growth is thus the production level compatible with price stability. Production capacity depends on factors such as labour supply, production technology, capital stock, as well as institutions and regulatory frameworks that affect the way the economy functions. These factors also affect the development of demand in the economy. The fact that a gap can arise between the actual and potential production could be due to prices and production factors being slow moving and to the fact that it takes time before production and demand have adapted to a change. As the economy is affected by different types of disturbances, the potential production capacity and the level of production vary over time. Disturbances can be temporary, such as a winter with little rain reducing the water level in reservoirs at the power stations, or more lasting - for instance, a new production technique can affect capital stock and industrial structure. Many of the disturbances that occur affect both the supply and the demand in the economy. According to some calculations, which were presented in the Inflation Report, production capacity during the slowdown could have declined from approximately 3 per cent at the beginning of 2000 to 1 per cent at the end of 2001. At the same time, it is important to emphasise that production capacity cannot be measured in a reliable and simple manner, which means that this type of calculation is characterised by uncertainty. GDP growth in Sweden is estimated to amount to 1.5 per cent this year, 2.7 per cent in 2003 and 2.6 per cent in 2004. An important issue is whether production capacity will increase when the economy picks up. After all, it is the long-term production capacity that determines whether growth is compatible with low inflation and can thereby provide a sustainable positive development in income and welfare in the economy. The most important factors with regard to developments in the near future are the labour supply and productivity. The labour force has increased considerably in recent years, mainly thanks to increased employment in trade and industry. At the same time, a reduction in the average working hours has had a counteractive effect. The decline in the average working hours over the past year is partly due to the economic downturn, as overtime has fallen. However, there also appear to be structural factors, such as a rising level of absence due to sickness and central agreements on shorter working hours, behind the decline. This indicates that the reduction in the labour supply could be at least partly of a more lasting nature. The decline in productivity during 2001 was limited in comparison with the declines in 1977, 1980 and 1990. Greater openness towards the world around us, a higher level of education during the 1990s and certain improvements in competitive pressure indicate that productivity will continue to be higher than in the 1970s and 1980s. However, this also presupposes that productivity in the information and telecommunications sector will return to a good level. There are also other risks: Inflation rose more than expected last spring, which was only partly due to price increases of a more temporary nature. The rest was primarily due to wage developments in the services industries. When employment begins to rise once again, while the labour market is strained, there is a risk that the new central wage agreements signed over the coming years will be affected by the fact that others have previously received high wage increases. To summarise: low inflation and consolidated central government finances have meant that there was room for manoeuvre to meet the economic downturn. Last year Sweden had one of the largest surpluses in public savings in the EU, which enabled an expansionary fiscal policy. The slowdown in 2001 also differs from the problem periods during the 1970s and 1980s in that the manufacturing industry’s competitive situation was very strong from the start. The weakening of the krona began as soon as one year before industrial activity slowed down and contributed to a strong development in net exports during 2001. Nor was it lack of competitiveness or a decline in productivity that lay behind the depreciation of the krona - it was financial flows resulting from the decline on the 
 6 BIS Review 37/2002 stock market and portfolio investments connected with the AP pension funds being given the opportunity to invest some assets abroad. A recovery in the Swedish economy has now begun and the Swedish economy has a good foundation to stand on, with a surplus in both the central government finances and in Sweden’s trade abroad. Inflation is on the way down. At the same time, wage formation and pricing behaviour in general will comprise an uncertainty factor when economic activity gradually picks up speed. It may therefore be necessary to implement further interest rate hikes in future. However, the next monetary policy stage depends, as always, on what happens with regard to economic activity, inflation and in the world around us. Developments beyond the forecast horizon The uncertainty in the forecasts increases the further ahead they look, but despite this it can be interesting to look beyond the two-year forecast horizon in the main scenario. Economic developments during the past decade have been characterised by considerable free resources following the crisis at the end of the 1990s. That is not the case today, and will be even less the case in two years’ time, if the economic upturn continues as expected. This changes the focus of economic policy. A decisive factor for economic growth will be the development of production capacity, as I have mentioned earlier. It is production capacity that governs the development in demand that is compatible with price stability. Here there are some worrying tendencies, which I have touched upon earlier. The labour supply in Sweden risks developing less favourably beyond the forecast horizon as a result of demographical changes. Shorter working hours would have the same effect. On the other hand, measures may be taken to increase the supply of labour and thereby affect developments in the opposite direction. This effect could be obtained by, for instance, lower absence due to sickness. It is clear that the way the labour market functions will play a decisive role for economic growth both in the coming two years and beyond the forecast horizon. An important issue for Sweden in the near future is whether we shall take part in the third stage of EMU. This will be decided by the government and parliament, following a referendum on this question. The timetable for a decision will be determined by a political process. Statements by, for instance, Prime Minister Göran Persson indicate that a referendum will be held as early as next year. If the result were a “yes”, parliament would decide to send in an application to the European Commission and the ECB to examine whether we meet the convergence criteria. In connection with making a decision on application, Sweden would probably also have to take a position on participation in ERM2. The government has said earlier that if Sweden is to take part in stage three of EMU, it would be logical to first tie the krona to this exchange rate mechanism. The economic criteria are the inflation rate, long-term interest rates, exchange rate stability and the budget balance and debt in the public sector. Following this scrutiny, the European Parliament and Council of Europe would give their opinion on the Commission’s proposal and after this the ECOFIN Council would take a decision on whether Sweden could participate. If Sweden were accepted as a member of the Eurosystem, there would be negotiations on when membership could occur and at what exchange rate the krona would be fixed against the euro. Parliament decided as early as 1997 that Sweden should keep the door open for future membership by creating the highest possible level of readiness for action, by means of technical and practical preparations. The Riksbank has therefore been working on internal EMU preparations for several years now. What would the economic consequences of membership of the Eurosystem be for Sweden? Swedish participation in stage three of EMU is essentially a political issue on which the Executive Board of the Riksbank has not taken a stand. On the other hand, earlier General Councils of the Riksbank have declared themselves in favour of EMU membership on two occasions, in 1994 and 1997. So, what economic consequences would membership of the Eurosystem have for Sweden? One advantage, in my opinion, is the strength and stability entailed in belonging to a large currency area rather than a small one. Fluctuations in the value of the currency ought to decline, which would reduce uncertainty. The most evident economic effect of EMU membership would be the transaction gains as a result of the currency borders disappearing. These are the costs and the inconvenience of 
 BIS Review 37/2002 7 exchanging currency when one visits or trades with different countries in the euro area. Another concrete advantage is that the administration costs companies have been forced to bear to safeguard against undesirable fluctuations in exchange rates would disappear. It is probably of greater significance for the economy that a single currency would promote competition to the advantage of consumers, who would meet lower prices and thereby have more money left in their purses. When all parties use the same currency unit, it is possible to make price comparisons between countries. Competition also facilitates the work on holding back inflation. The EMU has particular importance for the scope of the trade. Many economists have tried to estimate this gain by looking at the way fixed and floating exchanges respectively affect trade, and they have found very little difference. However, a single currency is not the same as a fixed exchange rate. There are considerable practical and psychological differences. Professor Andrew K. Rose at Berkeley in the USA, together with some other economists, has instead compared trade within monetary unions with trade between countries outside of the monetary union, and made adjustments for facts such as monetary unions often sharing the same language, culture and other regulatory frameworks. When Professor Rose presented such a study for Sweden some time ago, he claimed that EMU could increase trade and integration by as much as 30-50 per cent over the course of a few decades. This could lead to an increase in Swedish welfare of over ten per cent in the long term. Rose himself admits that the figures are uncertain and other economists believe in much lower figures for trade gains. So what about the disadvantages? Giving up one’s own currency entails also giving up some of the right to self-determination in economic policy. The instrumental rate would no longer be set in Stockholm, but in Frankfurt and would reflect the economic situation in a large monetary area. The criticism of a Swedish membership of the Eurosystem has often concerned the possibility of being able to conduct an independent stabilisation policy under these circumstances. This is based on a supposition that the Swedish economy could for some reason become out of synch with the economic developments in the euro are, what is termed an asymmetric shock. An independent monetary policy and currency, in addition to fiscal policy, gives us the opportunity to stabilise our economy ourselves - a form of shock-absorber that will be lost if we have a joint monetary policy steered by inflation and economic prospects throughout the entire euro area. This was the primary reason why the Calmfors Commission, which examined the consequences for Sweden of participation in the third stage of EMU, concluded that Sweden should wait before joining the Eurosystem until the Swedish labour market and wage formation showed sufficient flexibility to be able to manage a serious shock.1 It is often forgotten that one of the points of the EU is that the union shall function as an insurance; that the countries are strong standing together than they are standing alone. In practice, it is also the case that when the Swedish economy has come out of synch with the euro area, this has not been due to shocks over which we had no control, but to mistakes made in our own economic policy. There are also many indications that the covariance between Sweden and the euro area will increase further if we join the Eurosystem, as trade and integration with the euro countries would be strengthened. Increased trade and greater openness to the outside world have positive effects on the development of growth and incomes. In my opinion, the European integration of which EMU forms a part should not stop at the borders of the EU, but be the first step towards greater global openness. Conclusion I have today accounted for the current monetary policy situation in Sweden and the assessments that formed the basis for our decision last week to leave the repo rate unchanged. A low inflation rate (2%), which is the target for monetary policy, does not in itself create good growth and welfare; it should rather be seen as a fundamental condition to ensure that other parties - trade and industry, organisations, government and parliament - are successful in working to improve Sweden’s economy by various different means. In other words, it is an extensive and complicated interplay that will determine how well a country’s economic potential is realised. The Riksbank does its best to ensure that monetary policy provides a contribution here. Thank you for listening!                                                       1 EMU commission of enquiry report SOU 1996:158. 
 8 BIS Review 37/2002 1. Savingsin the USA0246810121985198719891991199319951997199920012003024681012SparkvotPrognosSource: US Department of CommerceSavingsratioForecast   2. Unemploymentin the USA, the euro area, Germanyand France246810121419931994199519961997199819992000200120022468101214USAEuroområdetTysklandFrankrikeSources: Bureau of LaborStatistics, Eurostat, Federal LaborOffice, National EmploymentOfficeEuro areaGermanyFrance   3. Euro area inflationPercentage12-month changeSource: Eurostat0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Apr-00Jun-00Aug-00Oct-00Dec-00Feb-01Apr-01Jun-01Aug-01Oct-01Dec-01Feb-02Apr-020.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5HICPUnderlying inflation (HICP excl. energy and unprocessd food)  
 BIS Review 37/2002 9 2500027000290003100033000350003700039000410004300045000198719891991199319951997199920012500027000290003100033000350003700039000410004300045000Sysselsatta minus frånvarande pga. egen sjukdomSysselsatta minus samtliga frånvarandeSysselsatta totalt4. Numberof employedin total, excl. sickand all absent from work1987:01-2002:04The series are seasonally-adjustedwith a 3-month slidingaverageSource: StatisticsSweden (AKU)Employedminus thoseon sickleaveEmployedminus all leaveof absenceTotal numberof employed   5. CPI and inflation expectationsof householdsand firms, per centSources: National Instituteof Economic Research and StatisticsSweden-101234567199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003-101234567CPIHouseholds, Statistics SwedenHouseholds, National InstituteFirms   6. Inflation: outcomesand the mainscenarioPercentage12-month change-2-101234561995199619971998199920002001200220032004-2-10123456KPIUND1XUNDINHXUNDIMPXSources: StatisticsSweden and the Riksbank-2-101234561995199619971998199920002001200220032004-2-10123456CPIUND1XUNDINHXUNDIMPX 
 BIS Review 37/2002 1 David Dodge: Trust, transparency and financial markets Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Halifax Partnership, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 11 June 2002. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. It is a pleasure to come to Halifax and see the exciting things happening in this city and this province. I’d like to congratulate the Greater Halifax Partnership for its role in community development. You have been recognized for your outstanding work in community economic growth, and your innovative approach makes this partnership a model for private and public sector co-operation. Financial market efficiency My remarks today will concentrate on two themes. Later on, I want to talk a bit about the Bank of Canada’s view of the economy. But first, I would like to address an important subject; that is, how to promote the efficient operation of Canada’s financial markets. Rather than approaching this topic in a detailed, technical way, I want to speak about two qualities that are essential to their efficient operation: trust and transparency. Let me take a few minutes to describe why these qualities are important to the Bank. I think this can provide a good illustration as to why these same qualities are equally important for the private sector, particularly in light of Enron, and related questions about corporate practices. I will start with a quick definition of what I mean by trust. It’s a term that’s closely related to two other very important words: confidence and credibility. Trust, as I will use the term today, is more than a simple belief in something or someone without supporting evidence. Trust is what develops when a group of people share an understanding that the rules for behaviour governing their system or society work well and make things better for everyone. With trust, less effort is expended in keeping tabs on others, so systems can run more efficiently. With trust, people can develop confidence that others will, in fact, do what they say they will do. And over time, as trust builds, so does the credibility of those who are trustworthy. I can tell you from our own experience that trust is an important enabler for all of the Bank of Canada’s key functions. And nowhere is this more true or more relevant than in the conduct of monetary policy. We have worked hard over the past decade or so to build up trust in our policy of explicit inflation targets. And this effort has been bolstered by our moves towards greater transparency. The economic benefits of establishing trust During the 1970s and 1980s, the Bank of Canada had ample experience with operating in an environment where Canadians had significantly less confidence in the Bank’s ability to safeguard the domestic value of the currency. Inflation was choppy and unpredictable, and the Bank of Canada was struggling to come up with an appropriate anchor for monetary policy. However, in recent years, Canadians have gained confidence that we will keep inflation low, stable, and predictable, thanks to our system of explicit inflation targets and our success in meeting them. This trust can be thought of as a kind of social capital—a shared asset that benefits everyone, including the central bank. This capital is very valuable and must not be squandered. What does this have to do with efficiency? Quite a bit. If you think back to the 1970s and 1980s, people spent a great deal of time and effort trying to hedge against inflation. Resources that should have been put to more productive uses were spent devising ways to protect the value of savings. Then, in 1991, the Government of Canada and the Bank agreed on a system of explicit inflation-control targets. As you may know, under the current agreement our target is the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent band for the total consumer price index. Since we adopted this inflation-control system we have been consistently successful in meeting the target. As a result, inflation expectations have fallen in line with the target and are now well anchored, not just for the near term, but well into the future. 
 2 BIS Review 37/2002 With this trust in place, this social capital earned, the list of economic benefits for Canada is long indeed. Less time, energy, and money is being spent on protecting oneself against inflation. Labour and financial contracts have lengthened, while the amount of time lost to strikes and lockouts has dropped. What is more, the dynamics of the inflation process have been changed, to the point that inflation itself has become much more stable and predictable. Inflation expectations are less vulnerable to swings in the external value of the Canadian dollar, and to changes in key energy prices. All this allows the Bank to conduct monetary policy more easily. And it allows financial markets and businesses to operate more efficiently. Of course, the economy has also undergone a number of other necessary changes, including a massive restructuring of the private sector and a restoration of fiscal health. Together, these changes have led to better economic performance. Transparency supports the system Before I move on, I want to say a few words about transparency. Like many other major central banks, we have embraced the notion that it is better for the conduct of monetary policy if people can understand what their central bank is thinking and why. The Bank of Canada has dramatically increased the number of opportunities for updating Canadians on the economic outlook. We use our four Monetary Policy Reports and Updates, as well our eight fixed announcement dates each year, to share our thinking on the economy. We want Canadians to have a good grasp of what our goals are and of the framework we use to achieve those goals. Our explicit inflation target gives Canadians a yardstick for measuring how their central bank is doing. In our view, the less flexible the yardstick, the better. It is one thing to have a goal of “low inflation” or “price stability.” But the Bank and the Government of Canada agree that it is much more effective to have an explicit target for inflation so people know if we are meeting our commitment. So the result of all this effort at increased transparency is to give people a clear yardstick they can use to measure performance. All of this enhances the Bank’s accountability and reinforces the trust we have fostered through inflation targeting. After all, it’s a lot easier to have trust in an institution if it is open about its goals and strategies, and if it offers a clear way to measure its performance. Trust and the private sector This is relevant not just to central banks but to the entire business and financial community. Trustworthy business standards are one of the most important forms of social capital. Trust is paramount to the efficient operation of financial markets. And financial markets are a key ingredient of a well-functioning economy. This trust includes confidence in the players involved—the people who run the companies, and those who watch them. It also includes trust that the information required to make sound investment decisions is disclosed fully and accurately. Moreover, the disclosure must be fair—there must be confidence that insiders are not trading on information not available to everyone. Only when all these components of trust are in place can we have healthy, efficient financial markets that benefit everybody. Generally speaking, these components are in place in Canada. But the Enron collapse in the United States reminds us here that we cannot be complacent about our own situation. So what is lost when something like Enron occurs? Skepticism sets in about the truthfulness of routine financial disclosures. Companies find it more expensive to raise funds because once trust is broken, fewer investors are willing to participate, and those who remain demand a premium for the increased risk of being misled. A lack of reliable information also leads investors to make poor investment decisions, so capital is misallocated. In short, financial markets operate less efficiently, with fewer benefits for everyone. Avoiding a widespread loss of trust requires a systematic and coordinated effort to fix the flaws and weaknesses that can undermine investor confidence. 
 BIS Review 37/2002 3 It is important that there be a set of reasonable rules—so that chief executives, boards, and their auditors truly and fairly disclose the financial position of public companies—and that the investing public can rely on the truth, fairness, and completeness of that disclosure. Now, in spite of the specific flaws that the Enron collapse has revealed, it has become clear that much of the public’s confidence in the efficient operation of financial markets remains intact. But we must continue to be vigilant. Restoring confidence Financial statements form the foundation on which financial markets operate. I have already spoken of the way that a clear yardstick has helped the Bank improve its transparency. The same idea holds true for financial statements. Clear and accurate corporate reporting, together with other reliable information for investors, are essential. Equally importantly, information must be presented in a straightforward manner. Earnings reports should be used to disclose information, not bury it. We can’t pretend that hundreds of complicated pages lead to the type of disclosure that facilitates efficiency. Next, confidence must be constantly earned by corporate managers and directors, auditors, analysts and investment advisors, rating agencies and regulators. Reputations have been threatened by events like Enron, and by the suspicion that some insiders have been feathering their nests at the expense of shareholders. Obviously, it is wrong for analysts who actively own shares in a firm to use their assessments to promote that firm. But there can be more subtle conflicts of interest that don’t involve illegal or fraudulent activity—for example, auditors who are not truly independent of the companies they audit. Risk assessment is another issue that needs more attention, particularly by companies outside the financial sector. This involves more than just listing in a financial filing all the things that could go wrong. Companies need to tell investors how they are handling both the external risks that they face and the risks they have chosen to take on as part of their business strategy. After all, investors are required to sign a form that tells their broker about their risk tolerance before they buy a stock. Surely then, the company issuing that stock should be able to give those investors some honest disclosure of their assessment of the risks involved in that investment. The fallout from Enron has prompted debate about the need for tougher financial market rules. If it is determined that new rules need to be written, they must not be picayune regulations that simply give the unscrupulous a roadmap to evade the spirit of the rules. It is the observance of the spirit as well as the letter of the regulations that we all must aspire to achieve. And when unscrupulous market participants or practices are revealed, authorities must come down on them with full force. To do otherwise is to do markets a disservice. Only strict reprobation will restore and maintain confidence that the rules are being enforced. Regulatory and supervisory bodies around the globe have begun to deal with the fallout from Enron and other high-profile bankruptcies. In the United States, the Financial Accounting Standards Board is looking at proposals to determine when so-called “special-purpose entities” should be consolidated on company balance sheets. The Securities and Exchange Commission has proposed new rules for more detailed and timely corporate disclosure. Here at home, the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) has asked its Accounting Standards Oversight Council to closely monitor the accounting and financial reporting issues raised by Enron. The CICA is also looking at ways to boost auditor independence. I am also aware that the accounting profession and its regulators are working to develop an oversight body to promote high-quality audits of public companies. The Toronto Stock Exchange has made changes to its guidelines for effective corporate governance. Parliamentary committees such as the Senate Banking, Trade and Commerce Committee have also launched their own investigations into the Canadian market post-Enron. The market is responding We have seen much self-evaluation by market participants in recent months. I am very encouraged by how seriously these issues are being taken. The market is enforcing its own discipline. Corporate boards are re-examining their roles and taking a closer look at what is being done in their companies. 
 4 BIS Review 37/2002 Investors are demanding greater reconciliation between pro forma financial statements and generally accepted accounting principles. Major firms, in response to those demands, are changing their corporate reporting methods. For example, some firms have announced plans to include, as an expense, the cost of executive stock options. And Standard and Poor’s has introduced new benchmarks for reporting corporate earnings. Those changes aim to more accurately describe the revenues and costs associated with companies’ primary businesses. We feel steps like these are helpful in advancing the debate about the most fair and accurate methods for reporting a company’s true financial state. These are all positive examples of participants working together to enforce the spirit—not just the letter—of the rules under which financial markets operate. In the end, everyone needs to have trust in the financial markets—to know that the right rules are in place and that those rules are being enforced. We must continue to build on that social capital, to promote the efficient operation of financial markets, and the benefits that those markets can bring to everyone in society. The current outlook for the economy Now, I would like to say a few words on the Nova Scotia economy. Like the rest of Canada, Nova Scotia’s economy has proven to be stronger than expected over the past year. Indeed, Statistics Canada reported last week that the province’s employment rate has returned to an all-time high in May. Nova Scotia was buoyed by strong offshore oil and gas production last year. The study commissioned by the Greater Halifax Partnership paints an exciting picture of the future impact of offshore development. The province has also been making important strides in building other sectors to diversify its economy, and this bodes well for the future. We’ve seen tremendous expansion in the information technology and life sciences sectors. That includes commercializing some of the excellent research being done at Nova Scotia universities and fostering technology companies to capitalize on the province’s telecommunications infrastructure. Turning to the outlook for Canada as a whole, the economy has been growing robustly—expanding at an annual rate of 6 per cent in the first quarter—well above expectations. And this has been reflected in the extraordinary number of jobs created since the beginning of the year. Employment has grown by almost a quarter of a million jobs in the past five months. Canada is demonstrating clear economic momentum. Consumer spending, particularly on interest-sensitive items, continues to show strength. Business investment is no longer acting as a drag on growth, and there are signs of the beginnings of a recovery in investment in machinery and equipment. Corporate profits are rebounding, which should continue to support business investment. While this domestic performance bodes well, geopolitical uncertainties and weaker profits among large multinational firms may inhibit a strong rebound in investment around the world for a period of time. Let me sum up. Canada’s economy is growing at a faster pace, and is operating at a higher level, than had been anticipated. And this means that it is moving towards full production capacity more quickly than we had expected. Core inflation has also been running slightly higher than we anticipated, at 2.2 per cent in April. Against this backdrop, last week, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by 25 basis points to 2.50 per cent. This was the second increase in the target rate, aimed at withdrawing some of the substantial amount of monetary stimulus in the economy. With the domestic economy showing strong momentum, the Bank will take whatever action is necessary to keep inflation near its 2 per cent target over the medium term. And that is the best contribution the Bank of Canada can make to promoting a strong, sustainable economy for all of Canada. 
  1 Eva Srejber: Sweden and European integration Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the IBC Euroforum: Nordic Banking, Stockholm, 3 June 2002. *      *      * Let me begin at once by stating the limits I intend to set for this subject in my speech: I intend to focus on financial integration within the EU and to discuss how companies and individuals can benefit from the advantages created by integration in this field. My starting point is, thus, that greater integration in the financial area mainly brings advantages, but there is cause to seek to analyse the forces behind such a development. As different public rules and regulations play an important role for developments in the financial sector, there is also reason to discuss a number of questions of a policy nature that are already on the agenda for a strengthened co-operation within the EU. This is largely a matter of achieving a balance between providing scope for product development and efficiency in the production of financial services in Europe, and creating the right conditions for stability and predictability in the financial system. From white paper to financial action plan Ten years ago, 1992, was the final date for realising the common market in the EU on the basis of the programme in the white paper presented by the European Commission in 1985. In this paper the commission described a total of almost 300 different directives that should be adopted in order to realise full mobility for goods, services, capital and persons within the European Community. Twenty-four of these directives concerned financial activities, including the liberalisation of capital movements. Almost all of these directives also came to be decided within the set time period, and a number of favourable conditions were created for bringing about more vigorous competition between the different EU member states. A lot has also happened in this field and contributed to strengthening developments within the EU with regard to both supply and demand for financial services. The most important driving force behind this development relates to the general internationalisation process, the new communication technology and the deregulation of parts of the government rules and regulations. When the euro was later introduced as the single currency in twelve EU member states, it provided the ‘finishing touch’ that abolished uncertainty over exchange rate developments in a large part of Europe. At the same time, there is some disappointment that it has not been possible to create a market completely without borders for all types of financial activities within the EU even more quickly, and that some obstacles still remain. These obstacles are partly linked to the rules and regulations governing financial activities - and it is therefore in principle possible to influence them. The EU is now working on implementing a financial services action plan, which should be implemented by 2005. It includes 42 new or amended directives which have a bearing on the financial sector. Disappearing exchange rate risks … It is easy to conclude that there has been a dramatic decline in interest rate spreads between the countries that have introduced the euro, in the region of from around 5 down to 0.3 percentage points for government bonds. Some of this decline is, of course, connected with the consolidation of government finances in the EU member states, but as long as the national currencies remained, investors often also demanded a premium for managing exchange rate risk. The remaining interest rate spread can be largely explained by different credit ratings of member states in the euro area, which are carrying different baggage weights from debt previously incurred, as well as by differences in liquidity between different bond issues. The introduction of the euro has also contributed to increasing the breadth and depth of European capital markets and in any case led to almost complete integration of the part of the money market trading that is closely connected with the Eurosystem’s monetary policy transactions. To be sure, it is the quintessence of a common monetary policy that there should be uniform interest rate conditions for the liquidity supply across the entire monetary union. This has also led to an integration of deposit markets, i.e. short-term financing without formal collateral. 
  … but remaining deficiencies in the infrastructure On the other hand, things have moved rather more slowly with regard to integration of cross-border money market trading against collateral. This is because it is more difficult to equate the value of these different types of collateral when they fall under different national legal systems. Securities trading between different countries is on the whole made more difficult by the fact that the infrastructure has still not been adapted to making transactions between buyers and sellers in different countries as simply and cheaply as within individual countries. One of the most cited examples of obstacles to cross-border financial transactions is the cost of making payments from one country to another. Now there is an EC regulation that prescribes that the price of making payments in euro between countries should not be higher than the same payments within a country, but the underlying infrastructure has involved de facto higher costs for making payments across borders. Other examples of national differences concern provisions aimed at establishing good consumer protection, but which make it more expensive and difficult in practice to create an efficient competition across borders, as the suppliers of financial products must adapt their marketing strategies to each individual country. One might have believed that the Internet would break this national fragmentation and open up the way for a demand-based international market for traditional bank services, but so far electronic banking services have mainly been used on a national basis. There are also numerous examples of tax systems discriminating between domestic and international financial transactions, which of course impedes the customers’ incentives to use foreign suppliers, even if they offer more favourable terms for the actual service. Integration contributes to greater welfare Despite the difficulties in moving ahead more quickly with financial integration in the EU, there are estimates that it may be extensive enough in the future to make a contribution of more than one half of a per cent to GDP on an annual basis.1 The actual figure should perhaps not be seen as exact, but there is reason to expect an unequivocally positive connection between financial integration and real growth on the basis of the development trends observed so far. A larger market makes it possible to benefit from economies of scale and economies of scope. This means increased economic welfare for the financial system’s customers, provided that a sufficient degree of competition is maintained on the market and that there are efficient systems for supervision and oversight to ensure the stability of the system is upheld. If, for instance, European securities funds could operate under the same market conditions as American ones, they could become much larger than they are now. According to the same source as above, this could entail annual savings for European fund savers of 5 billion euro - close to 50 billion kronor!2 More diversified demand A more efficient supply also presupposes changes on the demand side. If the element of national thinking in financial investments were reduced, more savers would also be able to benefit from a broader supply of products. At the same time, it is essential that increased financial exposures towards companies and financial operators in other countries occur in controlled forms, i.e. with a high degree of transparency with regard to the risks attached to them. This is particularly important with regard to financial commitments of normally very long duration, e.g. investments in connection with life insurance. There is reason to believe that the demand for financial services will continue to be a driving force behind the integration process and give a basis for further structural changes in the financial markets. Increased corporate financing through securities is one trend that will undoubtedly be further reinforced. Similarly, households’ saving in funds will probably show a rapid increase in the future, particularly in order to secure future pensions, and this will call for a capacity to diversify investments, where geographical spread in particular is an important aspect. In these two latter aspects, however, Europe is a long way behind the United States. One obvious difference between the US and Europe is that the banking system plays a much bigger role here. This                                                       1 Heinemann, F & M Jopp (2002): The Benefits of a Working European Retail Market for Financial Services, Report to the European Financial Services Round Table. 2 idem. 
  3 has largely historical reasons, but it also has importance for the continued structural development of the financial system, since it has proved to be much more difficult to integrate financial institutions than financial markets. The most obvious trend in the banking system in Europe is the consolidation within individual countries into larger units. On the other hand, very few banks have established themselves in other countries, and the - relatively modest - consolidation that has occurred through cross-border mergers and acquisitions has not in general led to any radical change in the market within the EU for the services traditionally offered by the banks to households and small companies. Within this area of the banking sector there is still a substantial over-capacity in the EU, which seems to be taking some time to phase out. However, a number of banks in western Europe have expanded into eastern Europe and contributed to a modernisation of the banking systems in the former planned economies. Internationalisation is a driving force My point thus far is that most of the driving forces behind the developments in the financial sector are connected with increased international competition and an increased awareness of international opportunities, and that regulatory systems are also becoming more international. Within the legal community constituted by the EU, the financial legislation applies to all 15 member states, and the financial services action plan that is now on the agenda for implementation by 2005 will also affect the conditions for the operations of the financial sector in Sweden. In addition, the single currency creates a further dimension in the opportunities for bringing about a truly integrated financial market in the countries that have adopted the euro, in that it is more efficient to build up systems that can be used on a larger market than within smaller, individual currency areas. In order to benefit fully from this dimension, it is necessary to strengthen the incentives for making the infrastructure more efficient, in order to conduct cross-border trading in financial services, e.g. with regard to payments, clearing and settlement between operators in different countries. Less detailed government rules and regulations for financial services The political system, which has power over the rules and regulations for the financial sector, thus has important tasks with regard to ensuring that effective competition can be maintained and to reducing uncertainty regarding financial transactions. A number of initiatives are also being taken to strengthen financial integration. This involves the delicate task of prioritising between removing obstacles to cross-border operations and ensuring a fundamental consumer protection that does not have a discriminating effect. Ten years after the white paper on the single market was to be realised, there are new action plans within the EU with the aim of removing the remaining obstacles to borderless trading in financial services. This should not necessarily be seen as a failure with regard to the initial ambitions, but is also a result of new trends in the financial system making new demands of the regulatory systems, which it is to be welcomed that the political system embraces. And there has also emerged a partially new view on the purposes of government rules and regulations, which has been a process that has taken some time as it is based on a long tradition of fairly detailed provisions regarding which transactions were allowed or forbidden and who should do what. This has applied at least to financial services primarily aimed at the household sector, which has made it difficult to continuously adapt the financial sector to changing market conditions and has entailed considerable costs for the consumers. Now the emphasis is on ensuring that those who produce the services are clear in showing what they have to offer and what risks may be involved in different financial commitments, which gives the customers greater scope to decide for themselves how they want to make their arrangements. Continued pressure for political initiatives The EU has high ambitions to make the European economies more efficient. At the summit meeting in Lisbon two years ago the heads of state and government adopted a strategy aimed at making the EU the most competitive, knowledge-based economic area in the world by the year 2010! Financial integration plays an important role in realising this strategy. Prior to the most recent informal meeting of the finance ministers and central bank governors in the EU, which took place in Oviedo in Spain, a working group had studied the conditions for speeding up financial integration. This group made a review of the important welfare functions of the financial system and referred to the profits that an efficient financial sector can generate. They also illustrated some of the obstacles that remain within 
  the EU and which I have just mentioned. On the basis of its analysis, the group drew conclusions on what measures from the public sector could contribute to realising the political ambitions within the EU. The finance ministers and central bank governors of the EU member states endorsed the group’s conclusions. They thus emphasise once again that the 42 measures in the financial services action plan must indeed be implemented in the member states no later than 2005, in a way that opens up markets but does not create new obstacles to integration. Public supervision of financial activities needs to become more uniform within the EU, to enable operators with financial activities in several countries to be covered by similar conditions and to facilitate co-operation between the national supervisory authorities. Competition within the financial sector should be intensified, and in particular different financial operators should be afforded equal access to clearing and settlement systems. Furthermore, existing elements of tax discrimination should be identified and removed. The position of consumers should be strengthened by making it easier for them to obtain information on the financial services they wish to use. They may also need better support from consumer complaints boards in the EU member states, to fight for their rights, where needed. General principles for regulation In this list of measures I would personally like to draw attention to the principle that the regulations necessary for the financial sector should be more general in nature and be based on aspects such as transparency and openness in access to different markets. This creates the right conditions for active competition and for market forces to efficiently adapt to new trends in the supply of and demand for financial services. More general principles for prudential regulation also improves the scope for higher efficiency in the supervision of financial institutions - for the institutions which are obliged today to report to many different authorities, as well as for the authorities themselves who can follow the same principles in all countries. Within the framework of clear rules that promote competition, there should be a general minimum protection for smaller consumers so that they do not risk being victims in the event of financial failures, e.g. in the form of a deposit guarantee for normal bank savings, and codes of conduct for operators on the financial markets to avoid abuse in the form of insider trading, etc. It is important to maintain a high level of confidence that institutions and markets will function in the way that the customers expect them to function. It is quite possible to combine a good general consumer protection with flexibility in the range of products which could make production more efficient. On the other hand, a far-reaching harmonisation of detailed conduct of business rules would probably involve greater costs for consumers than what they would stand to gain from completely harmonised services. The principles that form the basis of the EU’s regulatory framework for the financial sector are to a great extent based on this general orientation. The directives generally establish criteria of minimum harmonisation in order to enable financial operators to be active throughout the entire union. On this basis, authorisation and supervision should in principle be performed by the authorities within one member state, normally the home country of the institution in question. This “licence” to conduct financial operations should thus be recognised by the authorities in the other member states and financial institutions should be able to operate there from their establishments in their respective home country. In the same way, the EC directives on securities markets have led to some minimum harmonisation of the conditions for trade in financial instruments, e.g. what the issue prospectuses should contain and how insider trading could be limited. Limitations in practice The problem is that it is difficult to apply this model for rules and regulations fully when there are many different national peculiarities which are hard to do away with. This has therefore provided some scope for the authorities also in the host countries to apply supplementary provisions, which have in practice impeded cross-border competition. Such provisions are often attributed to some form of general good, which can be hard to define - and for which it is even harder to disclose a hidden protectionist background. Another problem with the legislative work within the EU is that it has been so difficult to continuously modernise the rules and regulations and adapt them to new market conditions. The legislators have in several cases been one step behind the market, which has meant on the one hand that new products and operations may not have been encompassed by the new freedom of movement on the single 
  5 market, and on the other hand that the protection the legislation aims to provide has been undermined. This problem came under particular focus last year, with regard to the securities markets within the EU, and a Committee of Wise Men headed by former EMI head Alexandre Lamfalussy proposed a simplified procedure for the entire legislation process. As you know, directives are adopted by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament in a co-decision procedure, which is in itself a complex process and even more so when the directives include detailed provisions on what is to be regulated. A more efficient method would be to limit the directives to fundamental principles and to delegate the detailed design and further development to a special committee. Furthermore, by involving the national supervisory authorities closer in the legislation process, the idea is to make it easier and quicker to adapt the rules and regulations to new market trends and behaviour. Since the Lamfalussy Group’s proposals touched on the delicate division of responsibilities between the Council of Ministers, the European Commission and the European Parliament, difficult negotiations have been needed to gain acceptance of the new model, but it is now being applied to the proposals for a directive presented most recently for the securities markets in the EU. Perhaps there are more pitfalls ahead in the work on making EU legislation on financial services more efficient, but ambitions for achieving results in this field have now clearly been raised. Efficiency and stability must - and can - go hand in hand So far I have talked a lot about the importance of efficient financial markets and effective means of adapting legislation to new conditions. However, measures to ensure the stability of the financial systems are at least as important. An economic policy aimed at macroeconomic stability is a fundamental precondition for a stable financial system. However, this is not sufficient in itself - special measures aimed directly at the financial system are also required. Regulations should ideally be worked out in consultation between the legislators and the supervisory authorities and the central banks in order to facilitate the different roles played by the authorities in promoting financial stability. I would like to emphasise that there is no contradiction between an increased significance for financial transactions and stable financial systems, provided that there are good opportunities to assess the realism and risks in financial commitments. The review of the capital adequacy rules for banks now being prepared is a good example of how the overall purposes or rules to maintain financial stability can be combined with good scope for individual banks to apply the regulations in a way that is effective for them. As the banks are enjoined to better monitor their own risks, a capital requirement that is adapted to their risk exposure is achieved de facto, without a need for detailed provisions in individual cases. This also builds into the system an assurance that fundamental stability can be maintained within the system without unnecessary encroachment on the efficiency of the financial sector. An efficient monitoring of institutions and markets is central to being able to assess the risk of tensions that can nevertheless arise if over-investment financed by loans leads to financial bubbles and if regulations are abused. In particular, when the regulatory framework is made more general in character, great demands will be put on having sufficient resources and good competence at the authorities concerned in order to carry out the monitoring in a well-informed way. Here, it is also necessary to have an interplay between the central banks and supervisory authorities to implement existing regulations in a good manner. And the more integrated the financial sector becomes within the EU, the larger the number of people who will potentially be affected by such tensions or crises, which will make further demands for well-oiled channels for monitoring between different countries and concerning different types of financial activities. This involves not merely having good systems for mutually providing information on what is happening when things are going smoothly, but also maintaining a readiness to identify problems and intervene in acute crises that might arise and that could threaten the stability of the system. It is complicated to build up this kind of readiness when it comes to authorities in different countries with different traditions, different principals, responsibility for different parts of the financial system, etc., but it is nevertheless extremely important that the network co-operation in this field be developed further. New requirements for co-ordination in supervision and oversight The basic model for financial supervision within the EU is that it shall be carried out by national authorities and this is, in my opinion, the most natural and efficient means of keeping a watch over financial operators and markets. However, this requires that the supervision of other operations and markets that can affect financial conglomerates is also sufficiently co-ordinated. 
  Within the EU a discussion has come up as to which type of authority is best suited to exercise supervision of the financial system: the central banks with their overall responsibility for the safe and efficient functioning of the payment system, or independent financial supervisory authorities, which are not involved in monetary policy decisions that can have consequences for individual institutions. In Sweden we apply the latter model, which I consider to work well in our environment. On the one hand, the risk of a conflict of interests between monetary policy decisions and supervisory decisions will thereby be avoided, and on the other hand it provides scope for a co-ordinated supervision between financial operations pursued in different institutional forms, e.g. banking and insurance, within financial conglomerates. Other EU countries have other models and there are also ambitions from some quarters to change the division of responsibilities. In my opinion, there is no reason to settle for a particular institutional solution for the supervisory work; it is more important to ensure the good functioning of the arrangements that apply. A larger issue that might have institutional consequences is whether it is sufficient in a more integrated EU to rely on co-operation and co-ordination between national authorities or whether a controlling authority is needed that can take on a leader role as required to ensure that the co-operation functions well. A discussion on this has recently been intensified within the EU and has also involved the question of what type of institution should in that case be the responsible authority at European level. Here I believe that it would be best to wait and see and to build upon the only path that there is currently political scope to realise, namely to ensure that the co-operation between the existing authorities functions efficiently. Some conclusions Financial integration is an ongoing process throughout the world and has positive welfare effects in all countries that accept it and ensure to adapt their regulatory framework to make it possible. International co-operation takes place within several bodies in order to develop the regulatory framework, and Sweden is affected in particular by the legislation within the EU. When designing the rules and regulations for the financial sector, it is most important to identify the essential elements for counteracting stability problems without making product development and efficiency more difficult. There are distinct advantages to focusing on an overall framework legislation without too many details, which would obscure the view and hamper continued adaptation. When it comes to the implementation of the rules and regulations, co-operation is required between central banks and supervisory authorities in order to enable the financial system to develop effectively without risks to the overall stability. A general framework legislation does not make supervision simpler, but instead makes greater demands for competent analysis of operational conditions in the financial sector. At the Riksbank we have therefore invested in developing competence within our field of responsibility for the oversight of the payment system, which plays a central role with regard to the functioning of the whole financial sector. 
  Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and wage growth Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the general assembly of the Employers’ Organisation NAVO, 11 June 2002. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 22 May and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. *      *      * Norway’s economic policy is based on the guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. The guideline for fiscal policy states that the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget shall be equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. This means that all the capital in the Fund is being utilised. Monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. Historically, periods of high inflation have always been followed by a downturn. Low and stable inflation therefore fosters stability in the economy. Establishing guidelines for economic policy is not new. Both fiscal and monetary policy have been subject to a rules-based framework throughout the post-war period, with the exception of the last half of the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s. Monetary policy has had a clear anchor since 1986. The phasing in of petroleum revenues in the central government budget shall be equivalent to the expected return on the Petroleum Fund. Most of the phasing in of petroleum revenues will take place over the next ten years. With a four per cent return on the Petroleum Fund, the use of petroleum revenues will rise to almost five per cent of mainland GDP in 2010. The inflation target provides an anchor for expectations concerning future inflation and interest rates. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. The current level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target. Economic agents can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be 2½ per cent. If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. The interest rate is the most important monetary policy instrument. It affects price inflation through two channels: demand for domestic goods and services and the krone exchange rate. Changes in labour costs influence the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services. The tighter the labour market is, the higher wage growth will be. Demand for goods and services determines to a great extent how tight the labour market will be. High levels of private and public consumption, investment and exports will sustain the demand for labour. When the supply of labour is limited, the competition for labour pushes up wages. A tight monetary policy stance with a high real interest rate will curb domestic demand. In many countries, low and stable consumer price inflation is the goal of monetary policy. Consequently, we can assume that imported price inflation will remain subdued. However, price inflation will nonetheless vary in pace with global economic developments. The krone exchange rate also plays an important role in determining import prices. A strong krone exchange rate will curb prices for imported goods, while a weak krone exchange rate will result in higher prices. When there is a rise in the interest rate in Norway and a widening differential between domestic and foreign interest rates, investments in NOK will increase, and the krone exchange rate will rise. Price inflation may vary considerably from month to month. This variation may be due to random or temporary conditions, such as fluctuations in electricity prices or petrol prices, or the effects of changes in real taxes. 
  When we assess the interest rate, we disregard these effects. Statistics Norway has constructed an indicator for adjusted price inflation - CPI-ATE - which is the measure we use to examine the results of monetary policy performance. A sharp rise in labour costs is currently fuelling brisk growth in the prices of goods and services produced in Norway. Inflation is being kept at bay because the rise in prices for imported goods is close to zero. A stronger krone exchange rate, increased trade with China and eastern European countries, a reduction in tariffs and the global downturn have kept import prices low. If the krone exchange rate remains at today’s level, imported price inflation will remain subdued. Wage growth has remained at between five and seven per cent every year since 1998. It appears that this year’s wage settlement will result in a similar outcome. Strong wage growth is the result of a tight labour market. The interest rate is higher in Norway than in most other OECD countries. This is a direct result of considerably higher nominal wage growth in Norway. The phasing in of petroleum revenues increases the demand for labour from the public sector and from enterprises selling goods and services to households. With little slack in the economy, employment in the internationally exposed sector must decline. As competitiveness has deteriorated, manufacturing employment has been scaled back in waves. Competitiveness deteriorated by around 10 per cent from 1994 to 2001. If wages in Norway relative to other countries develop along the same lines as last year and the krone exchange rate remains at the present level to the end of the year, competitiveness will deteriorate further by around seven per cent. Growth in public spending from last year to this year is estimated at seven per cent. This is considerably stronger than the growth in value-added in the private sector of the mainland economy, which is estimated at around four per cent. The guideline for fiscal policy has been followed closely. Real growth in public consumption is estimated at 1½ per cent. In other words, growth in the production of public services will be moderate, even though public spending is rising sharply in nominal kroner terms because of the steep increase in the cost of producing public services. This reflects high wage growth in the public sector. There have also been substantial increases in transfers to the household sector in connection with our social security system. As a result, most of the strong growth in central government allocations translates into a sharp rise in household consumption, while growth in public service production remains moderate. This is only to be expected when there is steep increase in public sector allocations in an economy where there are no available resources. Employment and labour force participation rates are high. The labour market is tight. Unemployment remains low, with limited available resources. There will be slow growth in the labour force. Working hours have been reduced by increasing the number of vacation days. In addition, outflows from the labour market have risen over the last few years as a result of early retirement and the use of disability pensions. Strong wage growth generates demands for greater efficiency in both private enterprises and government agencies. Strong wage growth may thereby increase the outflow of discouraged workers to various social security and pension schemes. All in all, we can expect an increase in the labour force of only 0.3-0.4 per cent in the years ahead. Wage increases in this year’s settlement were high. Wage settlements in internationally exposed sectors did not set the trend for wages. Wage increases in these sectors were around five per cent, while they were appreciably higher in a number of sheltered industries. This is a break with the pattern for the past few years. Many enterprises in the sheltered sector can, in principle, pass on higher wage costs to their customers. Monetary policy must reduce the possibility of passing on these costs in order to curb inflation. This is done partly by keeping growth in demand for goods and services under control. In addition, a strong krone may result in the importation of goods and services previously reserved for domestic producers. In rural areas and towns, where local government employment is an alternative to working in agriculture, the fisheries, local service production or small-scale industry, the public sector, with its nationwide agreements, is a wage trendsetter. Wage growth in the public sector may therefore be an important source of higher inflation. In the public sector, higher labour costs as a result of a costly income settlement can only to a limited extent be passed on to customers. On the other hand, the rise in costs can increase the pressure to 
  raise central government allocations. Many will probably expect the central government to pick up the bill when labour costs rise sharply. In the business sector - with its profitability requirements - higher labour costs must be matched by an increase in productivity. In principle, the central government will impose the same requirements on government agencies. How these requirements will be met in practice will have a decisive impact on developments in central government expenditure and, consequently, on the interest rate and the krone exchange rate.                                   
                                          
                                    
   
  Urban Bäckström: The importance of a well-functioning stock market Remarks by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the World Federation of Investors 20th World Congress, Stockholm, 7 June 2002. *      *      * First I want to express my gratitude for the invitation to attend your congress and briefly discuss with you the importance of a well-functioning stock market. Let me start by saying that just as it is important that networks for transport, electricity and telecommunications function properly, so is it essential that, for example, payments can be transacted, capital can be saved and channelled to the most profitable investment projects and that both households and firms get help in handling financial uncertainty and risk as well as possibilities of spreading consumption over time. Financial markets constitute an important part of the total infrastructure for every economy that has passed the stage of domestic production. The financial system performs three main tasks: firstly, it handles payments; secondly, it channels savings to investments with a good return for future consumption; and thirdly, it spreads and reduces economic risks in relation to the players’ required returns. A smooth functioning of all these activities facilitates economic growth in that lower costs and risks promote the production of goods and services as well as employment. In this way the financial system contributes to increased prosperity. The stock market is one of the most important sources for companies to raise money. Experience has taught us that the price of shares and other assets is an important part of the dynamics of economic growth. Rising share prices, for instance, tend to be associated with increased business investment and vice versa. Share prices also affect the wealth of households and their consumption. Therefore, central banks tend to keep an Argus eye on the development of the stock market and reflect on how the financial system functions. Another reason is the oversight of financial stability. Today, I would like to confine my brief remarks to some aspects that have to do with the fact that shares now weigh considerably more heavily in household portfolios than was the case thirty years ago. What are the implications of this trend? Increased interest in stock market investment In recent decades the financial system in most western countries has undergone a remarkable transformation. One feature of this development is disintermediation. A portion of the funds involved in saving and financing flows directly to the financial markets instead of being routed via banks’ traditional lending and deposit operations. The general public’s heightened interest in investing in the stock market, either directly or through mutual funds, has been an important component of this process. Statistics show that in recent decades shares have made up an increasingly large proportion of households’ financial assets in many countries. Thirty years ago in Sweden, bank deposits and other very liquid assets with little risk made up almost 60 per cent of households’ financial wealth, as against less than 20 per cent today. The major part of this adjustment in financial portfolios has gone to shares but a good deal now takes the form of insurance saving. The trend towards forms of saving with a higher risk has been accentuated by new rules for insurance companies, permitting a high proportion of shares, although this is arranged more indirectly. Similar tendencies are to be found in other industrialised countries. So it is not just in Sweden that saving has moved away from traditional bank deposits. This is a positive trend. However, long-term saving requires an ability to manage the associated risks. Stock prices fluctuate widely, in marked contrast to the stability of bank deposits. This is something that could affect not only the individual investor or household, but also the economy on a large scale. Therefore, I think it’s important to discuss the risks of the financial sector in general and the stock market in particular. This could be even more important now that so many newcomers have entered the stock market. Allow me to quote the following: 
  “With each passing year, the noise level in the stock market rises. Television commentators, financial writers, analysts, and market strategists are all overtalking each other to get investors’ attention. At the same time, individual investors, immersed in chat rooms and message boards, are exchanging questionable and often misleading tips. Yet, despite all this available information, investors find it increasingly difficult to profit. … Stock prices skyrocket with little reason, then plummet just as quickly, and people who have turned to investing for their children’s education and their own retirement become frightened. There appears to be no rhyme or reason to the market, only folly.” This is a quote from the preface to a recently published biography about the well-known and long term value oriented investor Warren Buffet.1 Buffet began his career forty-five years ago with only 100 U.S. dollars and has over the years built himself a multibillion-dollar fortune. I quote the passage to illustrate a view held by some of what was going on in the stock market during the end of the 20th century and the beginning of the 21st. Learn from new theories From experience we know that investors may temporarily pull financial prices away from their trend level. Over-reactions can occur so that excessive euphoria drives prices unduly high, just as undue pessimism can push them down too far. New theoretical and empirical arguments have been put forward against the notion that financial markets are efficient. According to the efficient market hypothesis, it is only changes in fundamental factors, such as profits or dividends, that ought to affect share prices. Something that no doubt helped to question the explanatory power of the efficient-market hypothesis was the stock market crash in 1987, when the Dow Jones index plummeted 22.6 per cent - the largest-ever one-day fall in the United States. This dramatic event demonstrated that share prices can fall even though nothing more fundamental appears to have happened; a thorough search failed to detect any specific or unexpected development that might account for the crash. It also seems to be the case more generally that many price movements are not occasioned by new information; a study of the fifty largest one-day share price movements in the United States in the post-war period confirms this.2 Moreover, a number of studies have shown that price movements have occurred solely because the company in question has been included in or excluded from Standard & Poor’s 500 index, without any new information about fundamentals. Various explanations for such overreactions have been found. For instance, research has shown that risk management systems and the use of strategies such as stop-loss limits and VaR limits, theoretically could cause financial markets to overreact. Other research has shown that different forms of psychological factors can also cause those developments. Experimental psychology has found that people often perceive a wider pattern in the light of just a few observations that are actually entirely random. In the present context this means that a succession of good news items about a company’s profits may lead investors to project the trend well into the future and accordingly generate an over-reaction; if the share price then rises, this is seen as confirming the analysis. A period of good returns also boosts the investor’s self-confidence, making her/him bolder and more prone to take risks. Bit by bit the over-reaction takes shape and, if the worst comes to the worst, leads to a bubble.3 A phenomenon - also studied in experimental psychology - that works against taking an independent stance is group thinking. It is not easy to stick to an opinion that differs from what a majority of the group seems to hold; “surely all the others cannot be wrong” is a common thought. An example with which you may be familiar is the reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty; people generally prefer one that has many guests - they simply rely on the judgement of others. Even if you hold a different opinion from others, it could be profitable to act as you think the majority will. An investor who considers a stock to be valued above its fundamental level could still decide to buy or hold on to the stock if he or she believes that others might still be interested in buying the stock at an even higher price, for instance due to the factors mentioned earlier. In a paper the authors draw                                                       1 Hagstrom, R.G. (2001): The essential Buffet, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York. 2 Cutler, D., J. Poterba and L. Summers (1991): Speculative dynamics, Review of Economic Studies 58, pp. 520-546. 3 See e.g. Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1974): Judgement under uncertainty: heuristics and biases, Science 185, pp. 1124-1131. 
  an analogy with a game of poker.4 In normal times the market behaves like a game of roulette; the probabilities are known and independent of the investment decisions of the different players. In times of market stress, though, the game becomes poker. The players have to take into consideration the position of others and their likely behaviour. We are also liable to succumb to wishful thinking. An example that confronts me almost daily at present is when supporters of a national football team, for instance, are frequently over-confident about the chances of winning. Learn from history The so-called IT boom, combined with markedly lower transaction costs as a result of new technology, induced many inexperienced people to invest in shares. Moreover, access to the Internet leads to an increased number of share transactions, often with poorer results. Investors have also become younger. The same tendency applies to stockbrokers and analysts, many of whom began their careers in the 1990s. Inexperienced investors did not get the assistance and support they needed. In the period running up to the Nasdaq crash, less than 1 per cent of the analyst’s recommendations had been to sell. The media accentuated the exuberant mood, with reports of rapidly rising share prices, and the notion that quick money could be earned in the so-called new economy became the conventional wisdom. From the recent years’ experience I can identify some important and interesting issues. Although time does not allow me to expand on them, allow me nevertheless to mention some briefly. What can be done to make the stock market function better? What can be done to provide more support in the future for long-term saving by households? How could more education and knowledge be provided so that the inexperienced investor becomes experienced and well-educated instead. I’m sure that shareholders associations all over the world have an important role to play in this respect. Further, it goes without saying that prompt, up-to-date, correct and relevant information is crucial. However, we must remember that more information is not the same as better information. Quality is not the same as quantity. The inexperienced investor must be helped to interpret the information and pick out what matters most. An important role could be played by independent analysts, not to mention media. There have to be agents in society that can see through and criticise corporate managements that are unduly optimistic or provide information selectively. The argument for this is that international studies indicate that in the second half of the 1990s firms, banks and analysts had incentives to talk inexperienced people into investing in new enterprises on grounds that were not entirely sound. Many new technology companies were not generating a profit and had to rely instead on paying for wages and equipment by issuing shares. For this to be feasible, stock market valuation needs to be high. In this sense there were incentives for managements to trim reports and statements about their firm’s future profits. At the same time, analysts and investment banks, with potential earnings from launching share issues, lacked incentives to take a critical look at these reports, so inexperienced investors did not get the assistance and support they needed. In order to reduce the risk of financial market imbalances, it is important that we have a well thought-out legislative, regulatory and supervisory infrastructure that functions properly and follows changes in the rest of the world. This is a never-ending task that requires the participation of all concerned. Today, households face what are sometimes very difficult risk-management decisions that were not called for or even possible before. Many people still lack the relevant knowledge for this and it may be asked whether people in general can be expected to have such knowledge in the future. Everyone cannot be a specialist in risk management and financial theory. Therefore, I think banks and other financial institutions should become more consumer-oriented, instead of today’s greater focus on products. The increased exposure of households to the stock market calls for tailor-made plans for the life cycle that take all important risks into account. Central matters here are, of course, investment horizons, how buying and selling is arranged and the degree of diversification across companies and geographical regions. Another parameter is, as indicated, the                                                       4 Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (1999): Oxford Review of Economic Policy, vol. 15, no 3. 
  life cycle; the possibility of saving for the long run is restricted by how much capital is likely to be needed in the nearer future. Admittedly, this process has to some extent begun already. However, the decisive steps lie ahead. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 1 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Corporate governance and aspects of the regulatory framework instituted in Malaysia Special address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 2nd Seminar for Central Banks and Monetary Agencies on AAOIFI’s Accounting Standards, Kuala Lumpur, 29 May 2002. *      *      * Assalamu`alaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatuh and Good Morning Malaysia is indeed honoured to host this annual Seminar organised by the Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) for Central Banks and Monetary Agencies on AAOIFI’s Accounting Standards for Islamic financial institutions. Since its establishment in 1990, AAOIFI has made a significant contribution in formulating and issuing accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions. The standards issued by AAOIFI have contributed towards the improved quality of financial statements and reporting methodology of Islamic financial institutions. AAOIFI has also issued standards on the role of Syariah committees as well as the code of ethics that should govern the accountants and auditors of Islamic financial institutions. Undoubtedly, efforts by AAOIFI have accelerated the pace of transparency and corporate governance of Islamic financial institutions globally. Ladies and Gentlemen, A well functioning and efficient banking system is vital for achieving robust economic performance. Within the context of the economy, the banking institutions perform the important function of mobilising funds that are channelled to productive investments thereby generating economic activity. In performing their intermediation function of channelling funds between the savers and investors, depositors need to be assured of the safety of their deposits and the efficiency in the manner in which the funds are mobilised and channelled to productive investment. Through their extensive branch network, and now through internet banking, banking institutions are able to efficiently reach an extensive customer base nationwide. As a custodian of public funds, maintaining integrity and confidence in the banking sector is vital towards ensuring the stability and soundness of our financial system. The trust of the public in banking institutions is inspired by the confidence in the safety and security of deposits, and that these funds will be professionally managed. Banking business involves risks and these risks need to be rigorously managed if public confidence in the banking system is to be secured. These risks involves credit risks, market risks, sovereign risks and foreign exchange risks, to name a few. There is therefore no room for negligence. This emphasize that the business of banking is too important to be left to self regulation. The regulatory framework put in place by Central Banks are aimed to ensure the soundness and efficiency of the system and the protection of the interest of depositors and investors. Before proceeding further, I would like to touch some aspects of the regulatory framework instituted for the Islamic banking industry in Malaysia. In Malaysia, we have embarked on the concept of dual banking where the Islamic banking system operates in parallel with the conventional banking system. In our context, the Islamic banking system comprises the Islamic banks and the conventional banks offering Islamic banking products and services. In this regard, the main challenge to the regulator is to formulate a regulatory framework for Islamic banking that is in line with Syariah principles. Our approach is two-fold, firstly to adopt the existing international regulatory standards where it complies with Syariah, and secondly to develop a separate regulatory framework to address the unique characteristics of Islamic banking. As far as the first approach is concerned, the Islamic banks and the conventional banks with Islamic windows observe similar international standards as well as the prudential and supervisory concerns such as the Basel Concordat on minimum RWCR of 8%, statutory reserve requirement, corporate governance standards, risk management standards, financial disclosure and know your customer policy. They are also subject to similar supervision, surveillance and monitoring by the Central Bank. These policies have been implemented efficiently as most of these requirements, if not all, are not against the injunctions of Syariah. 
 2 BIS Review 35/2002 The second approach refers to the implementation of Islamic banking within the conventional set-up. Bank Negara Malaysia has advocated for the “bank within a bank” concept for the conventional banks with Islamic windows to enable the Islamic banking divisions in the conventional bank to provide the strategic focus and autonomy, maximise synergy for economies of scale and capitalise on cost efficiency. These measures would also act as a firewall to ensure strict compliance to Syariah. To achieve this objective, we have made it mandatory for the conventional banks to establish a dedicated Islamic banking division within the bank, create and observe a minimum Islamic banking fund, opening separate clearing account with the Central Bank to facilitate effective separation in the payments system as well as to have a separate accounting disclosure. Having these policies and infrastructure in place, we have been able to operate the dual banking system in a structured and systematic manner. Ladies and Gentlemen, Although the regulations are in place, close oversight and updated statistical reporting, supported by close monitoring through the early warning system, are necessary as measures to avoid banking failures. The global experience has shown that not all banking failures are due to economic and financial crises. The global experiences has shown that banking failures can be caused by the lack of good corporate governance in the banking institutions. Lack of transparency, lack of oversight, weak internal controls, lack of checks and balances, incompetent directors and abuse of power are among the elements of poor corporate governance. Hence, even the best regulations and supervision and the best financial safety nets cannot prevent such banking failures. The regulation of banking institutions therefore needs to be complemented and reinforced with good corporate governance. In the context of the banking industry, corporate governance involves the manner in which the business and the affairs of the individual banking institutions are being governed by their board of directors and senior management, how the economic returns are generated to the owners, the day-to-day running of the operations of the business and the consideration of the interests of recognised stakeholders including depositors; and how they behave in a safe and sound manner, in compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In this context, the transparency in the conduct of banking institutions, facilitated by the proper accounting standards that reflect the true and fair value of banking operations would lead to greater accountability and responsibility of the part of the bank’s management. Islam strongly advocates all forms of positive governance. These values and ethical conduct have already been in built and inherent in the Muslim community. Islamic corporate governance serves through its underlying principles of economic well-being of the Ummah, universal brotherhood, justice and equitable distribution of income. Therefore, while the virtues of Islam have always advocated corporate governance, the challenge to us lies in its application. For Islamic banking institutions, good corporate governance should have already been embedded in all aspects of their operations. The issue of corporate governance is therefore not foreign to Islamic banking. In Malaysia, the principles of corporate governance have been well documented and applied across all business entities, particularly public listed companies. As good corporate governance is part of Islamic values, Islamic banking institutions need only to adapt to the code of ethics of the corporate governance to their business. In the Malaysian context, the same good corporate governance practices are applied for both conventional and Islamic banking institutions. To enhance the standard of corporate governance in the banking sector Bank Negara Malaysia has introduce measures including among others, specific guidelines on the code of conduct for directors, officers and employees of the banking institutions and guidelines on the directorship and the prohibition of loans to directors, staff and their interested corporations. The main objective of these guidelines is to engender public confidence in banking institutions and to ensure that the management and board of directors exhibit integrity and professionalism in the running of the banking institutions. Banking institutions are prohibited from the extension of financing and credit facilities to related parties including its directors and staff as well as family members and interested corporations. Such prohibitions are aimed at preventing misconduct and irregular practices in provision of finance whilst ensuring fair and equitable treatment to the public. These governance are universal in nature and therefore, Islamic banking institutions would not be faced with any difficulty in adopting these values. Secondly, the objective is to prevent conflict of interests and accord responsibility on the banking institutions to provide complete and accurate information. Bank Negara Malaysia has undertaken a number of initiatives in promoting transparency and good banking practices in Islamic banking 
 BIS Review 35/2002 3 institutions. To achieve these objectives, Bank Negara Malaysia has adopted an all-encompassing approach which is focussed on strengthening the institutional capacity of the Islamic banking institutions, broadening the range of financial products and services and deepening the Islamic financial markets by intensifying research and development efforts as well as creating awareness in addition to strengthening the regulatory framework for Islamic banking. One aspect that has been carried out by Bank Negara is the introduction of a structured framework in the determination of the rate of return for Islamic banking operations. Previously, there were various modes of framework in the disclosure of the rate of return used by the Islamic banking institutions and it has, to a certain extent, made it difficult to assess the performance of the Islamic banking industry. It also created distortions in the rate of return as the spreads can vary significantly among Islamic banking institutions. The new framework addresses the issue of uniformity as banks are required to observe a single framework, thereby reducing the potential for distortions in the rate of return, and generating a more equitable distribution of income, as well as increasing the level of transparency. On the part of the regulator, it has provided us with better means of assessing the efficiency of Islamic banking institutions as well as their profitability, prudent management and fairness. In a dual banking system as that operating in Malaysia where conventional banks also provide Islamic banking facilities, the regulator is accountable to instil confidence to the public of the existence of firewalls between the conventional and Islamic funds. Since the introduction of a dual banking system in Malaysia and the inception of the Islamic banking institutions participating in Islamic Banking Scheme (IBS banks), Bank Negara Malaysia has made it mandatory for the Islamic banking operations in these institutions to be separated from the conventional banking operations. Apart from the requirements for the internal separation of the accounting books, the further step has been taken to require the conventional banks to disclose the fair and true value of the Islamic banking operations in the form of Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Statements as part of the Notes to the Accounts in the principal financial statements of the conventional banks. This is to duly reflect the different risks and unique characteristics inherent in the Islamic banking as compared to conventional banking. A distinct feature of Islamic banks vis-à-vis conventional banking is the requirement to set-up a Syariah advisory council within the Islamic bank. From the perspective of corporate governance, the establishment of Syariah advisory council is important to instil public confidence on the purity of the operations of the Islamic banking institutions. The Syariah advisory council serves as a check and balance to ensure that the management and operations of the Islamic banking institutions does not deviate from the Islamic principles in the formulation of the policies. Towards this end, Bank Negara Malaysia is currently drawing up the guidelines to strengthen further the existing Syariah advisory committees at Islamic banking institutions. Amongst others, the guidelines will outline the role and responsibilities of the Syariah advisory committee of the Islamic banking institutions with the view to ensuring that the decision-making process that require Syariah inputs have undergone the necessary thorough and rigorous process. Ladies and Gentlemen, With the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB), it is envisaged that the level of transparency and quality of corporate governance of Islamic banking institutions will be further enhanced. The IFSB is expected to play a prominent role in promoting prudent, transparent and the robust development of the Islamic financial services industry through the promulgation of international prudential standards that are consistent with the Syariah principles. We are honoured that Malaysia has been chosen to be the IFSB secretariat and hope that the IFSB will achieve its noble objectives as an effective prudential standard setting body for Islamic financial institutions. Ladies and Gentlemen, While significant progress has been achieved in Islamic banking there remains much to be undertaken both by the regulators as well as the industry if the true potential is to be realised. This Seminar is one of the platforms for regulators and financial institutions to come together to share views and experiences in regulatory issues particularly pertaining to accounting standards, financial framework and transparency in the Islamic banking operations. I also hope the participants would take the opportunity to acquire as much knowledge as possible during these two days from the invaluable insights presented by the distinguished speakers. On that note, I wish you a successful Seminar. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 1 Masaru Hayami: The economy - recent developments and challenges Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at Kisaragi-kai, Tokyo, 30 May 2002. *      *      * Introduction There have finally been some positive signs that Japan’s economy has begun to stabilize as we enter the new fiscal year. However, our more than ten years of experience tells us that sustainable growth cannot be realized unless growth potential is strengthened through productivity growth. While economic activity is showing signs of improvement, we should not be complacent. Rather we should take advantage of this favorable development and further promote structural reform through specific measures. Such efforts will no doubt augment resilience of our economy through rejuvenating business activity and improving consumer confidence. In this sense, this fiscal year will be crucial for our economy in order to return to a sustainable and stable growth path. Today, I would like to review recent economic developments and monetary policy management, followed by some of the main issues our financial system now faces. Recent economic developments Developments in domestic and overseas economies Amid the synchronous deceleration in world economies, Japan’s economy continued to deteriorate from the beginning of last year. Yet, the pace of deterioration has recently somewhat moderated, with production starting to pick up reflecting an increase in exports and the progress of inventory adjustment against the backdrop of a recovery in overseas economies. The US economy had been confronting a contraction phase since around end-2000 such as retrenchment in the information-technology (IT) sector, and the tragic events of early September further increased uncertainty. However, due to stabilizing forces such as the progress of inventory adjustments in the IT sector and resilient consumer spending as well as effects of monetary and fiscal policy stimulus, there have been increasing signs recently that the US economy is beginning to recover. In March, the Federal Reserve Board thus revised its assessment for the foreseeable future from saying that “the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness” to “the risks are balanced” with respect to prospects for price stability and sustainable economic growth. In response to indications of US economic recovery, exports and production in East Asian economies, which are highly dependent on exports to the US, have started to increase and the decline in domestic demand is nearing an end. European economies are also showing some signs of recovery. Japan’s economy has also basked in this movement toward recovery in overseas economies, as evidenced by increased exports to East Asian countries and the US. Inventory adjustments have further progressed in many industries, leading to a gradual recovery in production. But we have yet to see unequivocal movement toward the recovery of domestic demand, which will play a key role for a sustainable recovery. Capital investment continues to decline and consumer spending remains sluggish because of the cumulative worsening of the employment and income environment. April ‘Outlook Report’ What is the outlook for Japan’s economy? The Bank of Japan released, exactly one month ago, ‘Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices’ - the so-called ‘Outlook Report’ - which gives the standard scenario for the economy for about one year ahead and entailing risk factors. The economic outlook for fiscal 2002 and early fiscal 2003 described in the report can be summarized as follows. First, should the recovery in exports and production continue, it will lead to an improvement in corporate profits and capital spending, particularly in the manufacturing sector. Therefore, the 
 2 BIS Review 35/2002 standard scenario for Japan’s economy is that the economy is expected to stop deteriorating towards the latter half of fiscal 2002. Second, even though this might be the case, it will take some time for the export and production recovery in the manufacturing sector to spread to the economy as a whole, including the non-manufacturing sector, small firms, and households. This is because, given the high level of labor’s relative share (wages/value added output), the corporate sector continues to pursue restructuring efforts and thus persistent pressure on employment and wages is expected to remain. Consequently, even after the economy stops deteriorating, an autonomous recovery is not likely to gain much momentum. Third is the outlook for price developments under the aforementioned prospects for the economy. Indications of change have also been emerging on the price front recently. The Domestic Wholesale Price Index (WPI), which represents upstream developments in the price transmission process, has been leveling off reflecting the progress of inventory adjustments and rise in oil prices, thereby narrowing the decline in the index on a year-on-year basis. How such changes affect overall price developments, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in particular, deserves our deliberate review. As I previously mentioned, however, it will take some time for domestic demand to exhibit a distinct recovery, and supply-side factors such as the import of low-priced goods, technological advances, and deregulation are likely to remain forces pushing prices down. How wage declines affect service prices will also warrant attention. Bearing these factors in mind, it will likely take a long period before various price indexes, especially CPI, turn positive on a year-on-year basis. In relation to this standard scenario, the Outlook Report identifies risk factors which might induce deviation both on the upside and downside. Recently, downside risk triggered by overseas economies has certainly diminished substantially, but it is undeniable that the outlook for overseas economies is still difficult to pin down. In particular, sustainability of the recovery of the US economy is still uncertain given the low personal savings rate of the household sector, the high level of household debt, and existing pressure to adjust capital stock in the private sector. A somewhat weak US stock market of late might mirror market participants’ lack of confidence with respect to prospects for corporate profits. Due attention continues to be required for the global economic implications of developments in oil prices and instability in some emerging economies. In addition, while the yen depreciated against the dollar from the end of last year, it has started to appreciate since early spring this year. Some correction of the once optimistic prospects for the US economy and expectations for the recovery of Japan’s economy might be factors behind such a development. Careful monitoring is thus also warranted with respect to developments in the foreign exchange market and international capital flows. Domestic factors, including the resilience of domestic demand, effects from the disposal of non-performing loans (NPLs) and structural reform, as well as prospects for long-term interest rates and stock prices should also be deliberately assessed. A detailed explanation of each of these factors is in the main text of the Outlook Report 1. What I would like to convey today is that these domestic factors are closely related. For example, the disposal of the NPLs of financial institutions and structural reform of the economy are two sides of the same coin, and are also deeply related with financial market and asset price developments. On the one hand, should long-term interest rates rise in the absence of an economic recovery or stock and land prices plunge, there would be an adverse impact on the management of financial institutions and their financial intermediary function, which would result in hampering the smooth pursuit of structural reform on the corporate front. On the other hand, how positively the disposal of NPLs and structural reform developments will be received by the financial markets offers a key to the smooth implementation of structural reform. The NPL problem, structural reform of the economy, and asset price and financial market developments are eventually critical factors which have a decisive influence on the resilience of the recovery of domestic private demand. Firms and households can only reactivate spending such as investment and consumption when clear prospects of a demand recovery following the resolution of various structural problems are in sight, future uncertainties with respect to employment and wages are dissolved, and a stable financial environment is in place. Such thinking again highlights the importance of structural reform, through which resources will be efficiently reallocated and growth potential strengthened. As assumed in the standard scenario, our economy is expected to stop deteriorating led mainly by improved exports and production, but there still remain various structural adjustment pressures. In other words, cyclical factors and structural factors are locked in battle. I will now address this issue. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 3 Business cycle and structural problem Cyclical recovery and structural problem Although our economy has followed a daunting road since the 1990s after the bursting of the bubble, there were some periods when the economy expanded. According to the government’s official business cycle turning point, there were two recovery phases: from the end of 1993 and also the beginning of 1999. During the former, after experiencing a temporary standstill due to effects stemming from the rapid appreciation of the yen in spring 1995, the economy realized more than 3% growth in 1996. In retrospect, the economy entered a recovery phase triggered by monetary easing and fiscal expansion after the bursting of the bubble, followed by an increase in personal consumption and capital investment partly supported by the prevalence of mobile phones and personal computers. The economy rapidly deteriorated in the latter half of 1997 against the backdrop of a slowdown in overseas economies due to the Asian crisis, increased uncertainty with respect to the domestic financial system, and downward pressure from the fiscal front. The next recovery phase, from the beginning of 1999 to the latter half of 2000, is still clear in our memories. Against the backdrop of the global boom of information technology (IT), exports played a leading role and capital investment centering on IT-related industries also increased. However, since adjustment pressure in the IT-related area had intensified worldwide before domestic consumption, another engine of the economy, gained momentum, Japan’s economy deteriorated again after entering 2001. What the two recovery phases in the 1990s have in common is that although the economy started to recover there was no autonomous and sustainable expansion of private demand as a whole. This was principally because the economy was directly hit by a cyclical slowdown in overseas economies and was also vulnerable to shocks such as financial system instability. The fundamental reason for such vulnerability is that excess debt, facilities, and employment, which firms had shouldered during the bubble period, were not thoroughly resolved, and forward-looking business activities which might have led to an increase in productivity and strengthened competitiveness, did not appear. This can be interpreted as the NPL problem in the banking sector not having been completely solved. Such a problem becomes increasingly difficult to solve once the economy enters a downturn and tends to get caught in a vicious circle. Our economy is about to see the third recovery phase since the bursting of the bubble. As I mentioned previously, recent developments can be interpreted as a cyclical movement triggered by the progress of inventory adjustment worldwide in IT-related sectors. However, a precious lesson derived from our experience in the 1990s is that the autonomous and sustainable growth of domestic private demand can never be achieved without an improvement in growth potential. In other words, structural reform of the economy and strengthening of the financial system are more important than anything else in order to see current cyclical recovery movements develop into full-scale economic growth. Monetary policy Monetary policy over the past year Let me now turn to the issue of monetary policy management. One year and two months have passed since the Bank adopted a new monetary policy framework which aims at ‘quantity’ - the outstanding balance of current deposit accounts (reserves) held at he Bank - as its main operating target. The past 14 months can be characterized as a period when not only economic activity but also financial markets have been under enormous stress stemming from such factors as the further deterioration of the economy, the tragic events in the US, and increased financial system uncertainty in the face of the partial ending of the blanket guarantee with respect to deposits. Amid these economic and financial developments, the Bank timely and flexibly took monetary easing measures such as increasing the target reserve amount. Such policy management has played a substantial role in ensuring financial system stability, thereby preventing the economy from further deteriorating. 
 4 BIS Review 35/2002 Conditions for exerting monetary easing effects However, we have to face the reality that even such drastic monetary easing has not been sufficiently effective in igniting private demand. To understand this point, it is perhaps useful to review actual developments in the financial markets and real economy. In the financial markets, not only the overnight call rate but also short-term interest rates have been at extremely low levels. For example, the yield of one-year short-term government bonds is less than 0.01%, virtually a zero interest rate, in the secondary market. The financing environment has been more or less favorable for firms. Credit spread, which is the difference between yields on CP and corporate bonds issued by major private firms and those on government bonds, generally widened from last autumn centering on firms with a lower credit rating but has recently started to gradually narrow. Although a severe financing environment continues for small and medium-sized firms, it would seem that such deterioration is nearing an end. One noted development of late is the high growth of monetary base which shows the amount of money directly provided by the Bank. Year-on-year growth of monetary base exceeded 10% from September 2001 and has been around 30% since entering 2002. Such recent high growth matches that during the runaway inflation period immediately after the first oil shock. Overall, financial conditions in Japan have been extremely easy. But the growth rate of the economy and various price indexes has been negative. In other words, despite an extremely accommodative financial environment, real economic activity has not been rejuvenated. Various structural adjustment pressures lie in the background, which can be summarized from the viewpoint of firms, the financial system, and households as follows. First, on the part of firms, they cannot activate business activity such as capital investment no matter how easy monetary conditions are since the problems of excess debt and industrial structure are yet to be solved. Second, forces to lift the economy from the financial side are not likely to emerge since the intermediary function of financial institutions has been eroded against the backdrop of the NPL problem. Third, households are cautious to increase spending even under easy monetary conditions because of uncertainties with respect to the future course of the public pension and social security system. For the Bank’s monetary easing to exert powerful effects, it will be necessary to solve such problems. Once fund demand related to economic expansion emerges, effects of current monetary easing will materialize before our very eyes. Based on such a view, I have been repeatedly emphasizing the importance of strengthening the financial system and promoting structural reform of the economy. The Bank conducted research through its branch network to discover new approaches taken by firms in the various regions. According to this research, in the wake of deregulation and proactive efforts by firms, nationwide we are seeing an increase in new entries to new business areas including the environment, nursing care, and health care. For specific examples, please refer to the report I recently made to the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy 2. To foster such new developments and ensure that they bear fruit, it is important not only to promote deregulation decisively, but also for private firms to take advantage of new business chances utilizing their management resources to the extent possible. Now, let me move to another important issue, that is, the financial system problem. Recent developments and challenges facing the financial system Current assessment of the financial system The blanket guarantee for time and savings deposits was terminated in April this year and will be totally terminated for all deposits from April 2003. Simply put, the world will shift from perfect protection of depositors with the public sector shouldering the burden to self-responsibility in principle, and, in this sense, fiscal 2002 will be a turning point for Japan’s financial system. It is ten years since the first bankruptcy of a financial institution was resolved by deposit insurance in April 1992. Six years have passed since the framework of government guarantee was introduced to the deposit insurance system, and four years have passed since a framework to cover losses was established by the government. In the meantime, deposits with failed financial institutions have been fully protected. In addition, various arrangements have been devised for the sake of financial system 
 BIS Review 35/2002 5 stability such as the injection of public funds to financial institutions and establishment of safety nets with respect to securities and insurance companies. The development of such arrangements has, of course, been closely related to various problems associated with the bursting of the bubble and many financial institutions being forced to fail. In fact, the number of financial institutions - banks, shinkin banks, and credit cooperatives - has decreased by more than 30% from about 1,000 ten years ago to less than 700 at present, partly reflecting the progress of integration such as mergers. In our estimation, the amount of NPLs to be disposed of by financial institutions, that is the sum of write-offs and loan-loss provisioning, has reached more than 80 trillion yen over the past ten years. This figure suggests that financial institutions have disposed of a substantial amount, more than 17% of the loans they held ten years ago. Stated differently, with the NPL problem unresolved, Japan’s financial system has significantly contracted in terms of the number of players and volume of assets. However, despite the painful experience of the past ten years, we have yet to restore credibility in our financial system that still receives harsh criticism from both home and abroad. Financial statements for fiscal 2001 In fact, all major banks went into the red as shown in their financial statements released last week. Such results evidence that major banks have continued to dramatically dispose of their NPLs in an amount more than their operating profits, which should be taken positively. However, at the same time, the results also remind us of the severe situation Japanese financial institutions now face. In addition, financial institutions do not have enough of a buffer left due to the past disposal of NPLs and decline in stock prices. For them, the source of revenue that can be used for the disposal of future NPLs is basically operating profit, and, in this regard, an improvement in profitability is an extremely important challenge which financial institutions urgently need to tackle. Challenges for the financial system Bearing such a situation in mind, I would like to summarize the challenges the system now faces. There are two challenges. One is the NPL problem. The outstanding balance of NPLs has not shown any marked decrease and new NPLs continue to emerge at a high rate. The other relates to the profitability of financial institutions or, more broadly, to financial system infrastructure and markets. These two challenges are mutually related and we need to tackle them simultaneously in order to restore financial system credibility both at home and abroad and to regain strength. Recent developments of the non-performing loan problem I would like to start with the NPL problem. When discussing the NPL problem, we should also look at the borrower side, since the claims of financial institutions are the debts of firms. There are various background factors to the NPL problem depending on the environment surrounding corporate management. The main factors behind the generation of NPLs just after the bursting of the bubble have been the excess debt of firms and the price decline in real estate purchased, but factors stemming from structural changes in industries have gradually became dominant in recent years. The number of firms which are forced to undergo drastic restructuring is expected to increase from now on as structural reform progresses, and there is concern that banks’ loan assets will deteriorate in the process. To make loans to small and medium-sized firms becomes an important future challenge. In response to the ‘special inspections’ conducted by the Financial Services Agency since last year, various measures such as the drawing up of management rehabilitation plans and organization changes through mergers have been taken by large firms carrying a large amount of debt and seeing a noticeable weakening of business performance. Although careful follow-up will be necessary with respect to rehabilitation plans, it is arguably one step forward from the viewpoint of the disposal of NPLs and corporate rehabilitation. 
 6 BIS Review 35/2002 Measures have increasingly been adopted for small and medium-sized firms such as rehabilitation under the Civil Rehabilitation Law and out-of-court procedures based on the activities of newly established sections within individual banks to exclusively support the rehabilitation of client firms. However, as a whole, small and medium-sized firms, especially those in the non-manufacturing sector, are facing harsh business conditions and how to cope with the situation has become a big challenge also for the sake of restoring credibility in the financial system. Effective capital adequacy ratios take into account unrealized gains and losses on land and shares, and, looking at them as indicators to see the actual financial conditions of borrowing firms, we find that the current level for all firms is about 30% lower than that before the bubble period, confirming the decline in management strength. And, looking at the ratio by size of firm, the effective capital adequacy ratio of large firms is about the same as before the bubble period, but that of small and medium-sized firms has declined to almost half. Particularly noteworthy is that, within the category of small and medium-sized firms, those in the non-manufacturing sector such as distribution, services, and construction are in a more severe situation than those in the manufacturing sector. Given the fact that about 80% of Japan’s labor force works for small and medium-sized firms, the NPLs of small and medium-sized firms are a serious problem. Things to be considered when dealing with small and medium-sized firms Since the management of small and medium-sized firms varies, the actual management conditions at individual firms should be carefully grasped by considering different aspects. For example, one should look at not only the indicators used in assessing large firms, such as the capital adequacy ratio, but also the financial position of owners, business areas, human resources, and skills. Therefore, financial institutions should have more thorough dialogue with individual small and medium-sized firms than in the case of large firms with respect to their financial conditions and management prospects. In the case of Japan, financial institutions extend loans to a firm as a whole, known as corporate lending, rather than to individual projects as in the US. Consequently, the viability of the firm becomes an important factor when assessing the adequacy of each loan or conducting ex-post assessment. Since small and medium-sized firms have limited access to direct financing and almost exclusively rely for funding on bank borrowing, careful follow-up of individual cases becomes all the more important for financial institutions. In this regard, as has already started in some cases, it might be a meaningful approach in the process of dialogue between firms and financial institutions if financial institutions disclosed their credit rating of borrowing firms, share points of concern, and together explore ways to solve them. Such an approach might contribute to putting in place risk-based loan pricing for financial institutions. At any rate, bearing in mind the economic outlook for the foreseeable future and progress of structural reform, we should anticipate that, at least for some time to come, there is the risk new NPLs will emerge and existing NPLs further deteriorate. In this regard, it is critical that financial institutions are well prepared for such risks and review in a timely fashion their classification of borrowers and collateral conditions, and make appropriate provisions. Removal of non-performing loans from the balance sheet As a matter of course, increasing provisioning is not enough to overcome the NPL problem. Based on dialogue with borrowing firms, financial institutions need to remove NPLs from their balance sheets if the borrowing firms are not likely to be rehabilitated. The Financial Services Agency released a guideline regarding the disposal of NPLs which states that newly generated NPLs should be disposed of within three years, with, in principle, 50% being disposed of within one year and most removed from the balance sheet within two years. At the same time, in the event financial institutions themselves cannot cope with firms which are likely to be rehabilitated, the functions of the Resolution and Collection Corporation (RCC) have been strengthened, such as by the establishment of an investment fund. From now, financial institutions will be requested to make efforts to utilize their own know-how as well as such arrangements. In order to rejuvenate our economy as a whole, it is my strong hope that concerned parties will make every effort to realize the rehabilitation of firms which are viable but facing difficulties due to pressures stemming from structural adjustment. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 7 Treatment of insolvent/undercapitalized financial institutions As a result of such disposal of NPLs and their removal from balance sheets, insolvent financial institutions have no choice but to exit from the market. In such cases, non-viable financial institutions should be disposed of in an orderly manner. Even in cases where financial institutions have excess assets, it becomes necessary to expand the business base and improve profitability through measures such as merger if they are not likely to survive on their own from a medium- to long-term perspective. As previously mentioned, although the number of financial institutions has already decreased substantially, further integration should not be ruled out if necessary. The government recently announced it would consider merger promotion measures and I hope they will be implemented expeditiously. Thorough preparation is also needed to avoid credibility in the financial system being substantially eroded or system stability questioned in the process of disposing of NPLs. The idea that appropriate measures, including the injection of public funds, might be necessary in such a case is what I have repeatedly advocated. At the same time, the Bank, together with government measures such as capital injection, is ready to discharge its responsibility as lender of last resort in providing liquidity when deemed necessary to maintain financial system stability. Introduction of fixed asset impairment accounting My bottom line thinking is as I have explained so far, and now I would like to consider challenges for financial institution management from different viewpoints such as the accounting system, which is a financial system infrastructure, and also strengthening the profitability of financial institutions. The precise amount of NPLs has always been a matter of debate, and thus various improvements have been made such as clarification of the definition of NPLs and also the recognition process centering on the introduction of self-assessment. However, for financial institutions to precisely grasp detailed conditions of borrowers, it is imperative that balance sheets correctly reflect their financial conditions. The improvement of accounting rules is quite an important task in order to pursue dialogue between financial institutions and borrowing firms. Although Japan’s accounting rules recently underwent substantial change because of, for example, the introduction of mark-to-market accounting for financial products, there still remain challenges, especially the introduction of fixed asset impairment accounting. When the profitability of fixed assets is lower than anticipated, fixed asset impairment accounting rules require firms to recognize differences from initial plans as losses, thereby aiming at narrowing divergence between balance sheets and the actual business conditions of firms. The Business Accounting Council released an exposure draft this April and fixed asset impairment accounting rules are scheduled to be introduced from fiscal 2005. The introduction of the new accounting rules will impact corporate management, but in view of their significance I hope for their early introduction following thorough discussion. It goes without saying that such accounting principles are also applied to financial institutions. Because of balance sheet regulations, especially capital adequacy requirements, accounting rules have extremely important meaning for financial institutions. In this regard, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, an international forum on bank supervision, is considering revising international capital adequacy requirements with a view to implementing revised requirements from end-2006. The most important point of the revision is the introduction of a mechanism that recognizes any deterioration in the value of loan assets at an early stage and that requires a proportional increase in capital corresponding to such deterioration or the risks adhering to projects. Under the current Basel Capital Accord, financial institutions are required to hold 8% of capital against corporate loans, while the new Accord tries to estimate the probability of default according to the business conditions of borrowing firms and imposes required capital based on such estimates. Leading banks in Western countries have already adopted practices to promptly recognize any deterioration in the value of loan assets within their credit risk management framework. There is still some time until the implementation of the new Basel Capital Accord, but the idea that bank capital should be held as a cushion for risks corresponding to the business conditions of 
 8 BIS Review 35/2002 borrowers seems quite reasonable, and I believe it necessary that Japan’s financial institutions should, regardless of the existence of regulations, actively pursue sophistication of such risk management. Strengthening of profitability As far as bank management goes, risk-based pricing is as important as holding capital to cover risks. Stated another way, it is important to secure lending profit margins. In the business world, it seems quite reasonable for financial institutions to receive interest from borrowing firms based on negotiations and the risks involved. However, in order to do so, it is quite important for financial institutions to reach an understanding with the borrowers who pay the interest. For example, in the US, many firms ranging from large firms to those with lower credit ratings and medium-sized firms, widely issue corporate bonds to obtain funding, and a resale market for loan assets is in place. Yields of corporate bonds issued and those in the secondary market for loan credits are mutually arbitraged with lending rates, thus forming an environment in which lenders and borrowers can easily agree with respect to interest rate conditions. Improvement in terms of direct access by small and medium-sized firms to capital markets and expansion of the secondary market for loan credits including NPLs are also important tasks in Japan. Once a secondary market for loan credits starts to function, removal of NPLs from balance sheets can be made more efficiently, and will have a positive effect in improving capital efficiency. And, It is important to continue improving the secondary market for loan credits by exerting steady efforts to reduce legal costs such as by standardizing contract formats and simplifying the procedure to transfer legal rights. From the viewpoint of strengthening conviction with respect to interest rate setting, some point out that credit assessment by Japanese financial institutions has put too much emphasis on judging whether there is default risk or not and has disregarded viewpoints such as the probability of default and what interest rate would be necessary to make a loan profitable. In order to set interest rates based on credit risks, I hope our financial institutions will take a more forward-looking attitude in dialogue with their customers. From the viewpoint of improving financial institutions’ profitability, there are other important tasks. To begin with, cost reduction and retreat from unprofitable business sectors are fundamental ways of increasing profits, and thus financial institutions should constantly review their business and drastically pursue such measures if deemed necessary. In addition, not to go as far as seeing entry to other business sectors, I believe that chances to develop various financial services are substantially increasing with the arrival of a full-fledged high-tech society. Individual financial institutions will be rewarded if they use their ingenuity and make unremitting efforts toward improving the quality of their financial services. The issue of public financing Of course there is a problem which cannot be solved through responses by financial institutions alone and that is the existence of public financing. The existence of institutions that provide public financing is extremely large in Japan compared with other countries and there are not a few areas in which they compete with private financial institutions. Viewed from the aspect of setting appropriate loan rates to cover risks, it seems necessary to review the role of government-affiliated financial institutions. Structural reform should proceed based on the idea that business activity be left to the private sector to the fullest extent possible. Concluding remarks Today, I have talked about recent economic developments and financial system problems. With respect to economic developments, I have explained that our economy has finally started to witness some cyclical bright signs. On the financial system front, I have explained that, under a new environment where the blanket guarantee of deposits is scheduled to be terminated, there still remain many challenges financial institutions have to tackle. What I wanted to emphasize most in today’s speech is that, for our economy to realize autonomous and sustainable growth, we should not be complacent about the cyclical improvement of the economy but seriously tackle resolution of the NPL problem and structural reform of the economy. These are the important challenges which Japan’s economy could not accomplish during the 1990s and which have been carried over to the 21st century. 
 BIS Review 35/2002 9 I believe that, if not only the government but also financial institutions, private firms, and each and every citizen make efforts to derive and enhance the growth potential of Japan’s economy, we can form the foundation for renewed economic development. The Bank of Japan will continue to make every effort on the monetary policy front to achieve price stability and sustainable economic growth, as well as to discharge its responsibility as a central bank from the viewpoint of financial system stability. 
 BIS Review 34/2002 1 Mervyn King: The Monetary Policy Committee - five years on Speech delivered by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Society of Business Economists, at the Royal College of Pathologists, London, 22 May 2002. I would especially like to thank Claire Lombardelli, James Proudman and James Talbot for their expert help in conducting and analysing the experiment reported in this paper. I have also benefited from useful comments from Charlie Bean, Mark Cornelius, Spencer Dale and Peter Rodgers. Richard Geare provided help with the data. *      *      * Five years ago, the power to set interest rates in this country was given to a new Monetary Policy Committee (the MPC). That decision is still widely regarded as the most important taken by the incoming new Labour Government. At the time, the decision to create the MPC was controversial. That is hardly surprising. Few decisions have as much economic impact as the level of short-term interest rates. They attract the interest of politicians and the media, yet when the MPC sets interest rates, it acts independently of government. The government sets the target, but the Committee sets interest rates to meet that target. Compared with many other countries central bank independence in the UK is relatively recent, although not unprecedented. The most famous cartoon of the Bank of England - Gillray’s The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street - shows Pitt, Prime Minister at the time, ravishing an old lady - personifying the Bank - whose dress is made of one pound notes. The Pitt Government had made repeated demands on the Bank of England for gold to pay for the wars against France. Eventually, the fall in the Bank’s reserves forced it to suspend convertibility of its notes into gold, and low denomination notes were issued for the first time. The Gillray cartoon - which appeared in May 1797 - was the origin of the moniker, the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street. Was it mere coincidence, or divine retribution, that it was exactly two hundred years later, to the very month, in May 1997, that the Bank of England regained its independence? In an age when governments are increasingly held responsible for more and more aspects of our lives, there are not many examples of major decisions being delegated to a non-political body. The Monetary Policy Committee has broken new ground in British constitutional history. Only three months before the MPC was set up, Peter Hennessy described the British system of government as dependent upon “a handful of inside advisers spinning between them what Phillip Ziegler has called ‘instantly invented precedents’ from the warp and woof of past constitutional practice and experience”. For much of the past forty years there have been rather too many “instantly invented precedents” in the conduct of monetary policy. But, very occasionally, a constitutional reform occurs which leads to a new piece of machinery. That was the case with the MPC. The Committee itself has an interesting and unusual structure: five executive members of the Bank and four external non-executive members, all chosen for their expertise on monetary policy and not as representatives of different interest groups. You may wonder whether the nine members of the MPC have any historical antecedents. If you look carefully you can see them in one of our few remaining great Jacobean houses - Aston Hall in Birmingham. In the Great Dining Room there is a frieze, a marvellous example of early seventeenth century plasterwork, showing a set of nine warriors. These are known as the “nine worthies”, described as “high-relief figures in their own niches separated by scrolling”, a pretty good description of the MPC. The Nine Worthies of Chivalry as they are known, comprise three groups: three honest heathens, three Old Testament heroes and three champions of Christendom. It is interesting to speculate into which of these groups various members of the MPC fall, but I will leave that to you. But, wait a moment, there are two additional figures in the frieze. One is Perseus - presumably the minute taker. The other is described as a “so-far unidentified figure, certainly a later pastiche”. This must be the Treasury representative. Sadly, the debates among the nine worthies, presumably recorded in the minutes and reported to Sir Thomas Holte who commissioned the frieze, are lost to posterity. In contrast, the debates among the MPC are published in the monthly minutes and are the subject of much commentary in the press. I want, this evening, to pose four questions about the role and record of the MPC. First, why give the power to decide interest rates to a committee rather than an individual? Second, does it matter that the MPC frequently disagrees about its decision? Third, has the Committee communicated clearly the reasons for its decisions? Fourth, does the MPC require reform? Let me try to answer those questions in turn. 
 2 BIS Review 34/2002 1. Why give the power to decide interest rates to a committee? The academic argument for central bank independence is well established, but why delegate monetary policy to a committee rather than an individual? In many other situations where expertise is crucial, groups of experts are often regarded as superior to individuals. So one motive could be that committees make better decisions. The technical nature of the monthly interest rate decision gives a natural division of responsibilities between a democratically elected government that chooses the target and an appointed group of experts who set rates to meet that target. One dissenting voice comes from Sir Alec Issigonis - inventor of the Mini - who once said, ‘A camel is a horse designed by a committee’. Despite this view, there is a wide range of evidence to suggest that in many other real-world scenarios, a committee is often the preferred decision-making body. Really important people are treated by teams rather than a single doctor, and when legal decisions reach the highest level of appeal it is to a panel of judges such as the Law Lords and the Supreme Court, not a single individual, to whom the case is referred. Decisions that depend on technical knowledge seem, by revealed preference, to be given to groups rather than individuals, and setting interest rates by committee is no exception. A wide-ranging survey undertaken by the Centre for Central Banking Studies at the Bank of England found that 79 central banks out of a sample of 88 use some form of committee structure when setting monetary policy.1 But there is, by its very nature, rather little empirical evidence on the relative merits of decision-making by individuals versus groups. And, even if one accepts that some decisions should be delegated to technical experts, what is the best way to weight together the opinions of those experts? This problem motivated Alan Blinder - a former Vice-Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board - and his colleague John Morgan at Princeton to adopt a different approach: carrying out two ‘laboratory experiments’ using groups of Princeton students to test whether groups do indeed make decisions differently.2 Their first experiment was purely statistical: subjects were asked to identify when a one-off change in the proportions of red and blue balls in an electronic urn took place. The second asked participants to play a simple monetary policy game, setting a short-term interest rate in order to minimise a loss function described by deviations of unemployment and inflation from desired target levels. The data generating outcomes for this hypothetical economy came from a two equation macroeconomic model of a fairly standard kind. Again a structural change - this time to the “natural” real rate of interest - would occur at some point during the game, and, by observing data generated by this economy, players would need to learn about the change in structure in order to set the appropriate interest rate. All the students who participated played both as individuals and in a group. In both experiments success could be measured on a quantitative scale, and both led to a common conclusion: that decisions made by committees were superior to those of individuals. How robust was this result? And what explained it? Last year, a team from the Bank of England attempted an exercise very much like Blinder and Morgan’s monetary policy experiments using a sample of just under 200 economics students from the London School of Economics.3 Using a simple macroeconomic model that was broadly representative of the UK economy, the experiments examined how the performance of groups differed from that of individuals. And again they found striking evidence that committee decisions were superior. In the Bank study, each participant was asked to play a simple, computer based, monetary policy game sixteen times: four rounds as individual policy makers, followed by eight rounds in a committee of five players, and finally a further four rounds as individuals. The committee stages were divided into two parts: four rounds where committee members were not allowed to discuss their decisions - although they could observe the unattributed votes of other players - and a further four rounds where discussion was permitted. As a control for learning, the order of the ‘discussion’ and ‘no discussion’ set of games was randomised across the committees.                                                       1 Fry, M, Julius, D, Mahadeva, L, Roger, S and Sterne, G (1999),“Key issues in the choice of monetary policy framework”, in Mahadeva, L and Sterne, G (eds.), Monetary frameworks in a global context, Routledge 2 Blinder, A S and Morgan, J (2000), “Are two heads better than one: an experimental analysis of group vs individual decision making”, NBER Working Paper, No. 7909, September 3 Lombardelli, C, Proudman, A J and Talbot, J I (2002), “Committees vs individuals: an experimental analysis of monetary policy decision-making”, Bank of England Working Paper (forthcoming) 
 BIS Review 34/2002 3 Each game consisted of ten periods of play in each of which the individual or committee had to decide what interest rate to set in response to the data for output and inflation generated in the previous period. In the committee stages, the majority - or more precisely the median - vote was implemented once all committee members had entered a vote into their respective computers. Participants were told nothing at the start of the experiment about the structure of the economic model with which they were playing, or the disturbances that it was subject to, other than that a structural change occurred at some point during each play of the game. In short, they were operating - much like real-life monetary policy makers - in uncertain conditions, doing their best to identify the shocks that hit the economy and offsetting their impact by adjusting the short-term interest rate. To quantify their performance, players were scored according to their ability to keep inflation close to a pre-specified target and to minimise output fluctuations, and were paid a modest amount for doing so. Chart 1 shows the pattern of average scores over the different stages of the game. Three features are striking: (i) The significant upward trend in the results. Players clearly learned how to play the game as time went on. (ii) The large upward movement in scores when players moved to committee decision-making. (iii) The large downward move in scores when participants returned to playing as individuals. These results support the idea that committee decisions represent a significant improvement over those of the individuals that comprise them. What might account for these results? The Blinder and Morgan and Bank studies suggest two main reasons. First, collective decision-making appears to give more weight to the better and less weight to the worse committee members, as judged by their scores when playing the game as individuals, than would be implied by taking the mean of individual performance. The best player had some influence on the decisions of the group of which they were a member. And the impact of the worst player was offset by majority voting. In other words, the median score of the players in the individual rounds was significantly above the mean, implying that the average was being pulled down by a minority of relatively bad players. Second, there was also evidence from the experiments consistent with the hypothesis that committees enable all members to improve their performance by sharing information and learning from each other. And it was striking that the performance of committees was on average somewhat better than that of the performance of the single best player on the committee when playing alone. So in terms of group decisions, it appears that the whole is different from - and generally better than - the sum of its parts. Producing the perfect design of a committee structure that would make the best decisions is a task with no simple answer. But the MPC embodies several features that seem desirable. First, there is a clear objective given to the Committee from outside, in this case by the government. Second, the members are chosen for their technical ability. Third, the votes on the MPC are transparent, and hence members can be held accountable. The merit of individual accountability is that each individual in the group has a genuine incentive to reach a good decision. This aspect leads us directly into my second question. 2. Second, does it matter that there are differences of view among Committee members? From the outset, commentators have been unable to resist labelling members of the Committee as either ‘hawks’ or ‘doves’. I have argued before that it makes no sense to use these descriptions because each member of the Committee has the same objective. Members of the MPC cannot entertain closet views about their desired inflation rate because they will be held personally accountable for their judgments about the level of interest rates necessary to meet the mandated inflation target. As circumstances change, it is easy to imagine that ‘hawks’ shall be ‘doves’ and ‘doves’ shall be ‘hawks’. But that is not to say that differences of opinion do not, and should not, exist amongst committee members. If part of the reason for the improvement of groups over individuals is their pooling of knowledge, then differences of opinion during the discussion that takes place at each MPC meeting should be central to the Committee’s performance. As The Economist put it back in 1998 (when there were only eight serving members):4                                                       4 Economist, 18 April 1998, p. 28. 
 4 BIS Review 34/2002 ‘With the economy on the turn, the MPC has to sift mixed evidence… It would be remarkable if eight intelligent, well-briefed economists could be of one mind.’ But this point is not always readily understood, even by the most astute commentators. In July 1998 the Financial Times suggested: ‘…the MPC bears a closer resemblance to a post-graduate seminar than to a forum for strategic decision making… To put [several] economists in the same room is to invite what one commentator has called paralysis by analysis.’ And in the same month, The Times described the MPC as ‘a committee bursting to the brim with individual opinions’ implying that ‘periods of badly co-ordinated and erratic behaviour are only to be expected’. But it is precisely the exploration of alternative views about what is happening in the British economy, and the discussion of these views by the Committee in a spirit of investigation not advocacy, that is central to the pooling of knowledge through which committees reach decisions that are superior to those taken by individuals. I think that is increasingly understood by commentators, and helps to explain why split votes are now regarded as normal and not a source of great excitement. It is, nevertheless, important that there are no ideological differences among Committee members that would make rational debate difficult, and, in this respect, the Committee has so far been fortunate. A famous 1970s laboratory experiment also showed the value of a frank exchange of views within a committee.5 It featured groups of senior managers working together to solve a complicated problem in a game called ‘Lost on the Moon’. Subjects were asked to rank a list of objects in order of their necessity for survival after their spaceship had inadvertently crash-landed on the moon. It was found that the best-performing groups - or those which got closest to the ranking suggested by experts at NASA - were those which were least consensual in the early stages of discussion, exploring all possible avenues and ideas. Groups which established a common consensus quickly were often ineffective, suggesting that at least some disagreement is beneficial for committee performance because it stimulates discussion and hard thinking. Differences of view on our Committee are an honest reflection of the uncertainty about both the data and the structure of the economy. To date there have been 61 meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee. The votes cast at those meetings are summarised in Table 1. It includes the votes of this month’s meeting which were published this morning. At those 61 meetings, interest rates were raised on nine occasions, were lowered on 14 occasions, and left unchanged at 38. At the first seven meetings during 1997, decisions were reached unanimously. The number of voting members varied between five and eight as the membership of the Committee built up. The first dissenting vote was cast in January 1998. Since the beginning of 1998, the voting has been divided reasonably evenly among all possible combinations of votes (remember that there were nine voting members only from June 1998 following the passage of the Bank of England Act.) Of the 54 meetings since January 1998, four dissenting votes have been cast on six occasions, three on seven occasions, two on eleven occasions and one on 16 occasions. At only 14 meetings has the vote been unanimous, and no one - sensibly - has seen fit to abstain, so that during the past five years the frequency of unanimity among the Committee has been little more than one in four. Differences of view have become accepted as the norm, and this appears to have done little damage to the credibility of the Committee. Nor has there been much sign of “blocs” of votes, whether internal or external. There have been 15 occasions on which members of the executive of the Bank have been on opposite sides of the vote, and 37 occasions when externals have found themselves divided. It is true to say that dissenting votes have been more common among external than executive members. Of the 83 dissenting votes cast during the history of the MPC, 25 have been cast by executive members and 58 by external members. But of these 58, no fewer than 44 are accounted for by three of the eight external members, Willem Buiter, DeAnne Julius and Sushil Wadhwani. For the remaining five external members, the propensity to be in the minority has been very similar to the Bank executive (excluding the Governor), with dissenting as a proportion of total votes at 12% and 11% respectively. Moreover the differences in votes have been small. On only four occasions has the difference between the highest and lowest interest rate voted for exceeded 25 basis points, and, interestingly, all four were between August 1998 and April 1999, a period of great uncertainty about whether there would be a downturn in the world economy that did not in fact materialise. Since then differences of view have                                                       5 Hall (1971), “Decisions, decisions, decisions”, Psychology Today, November. 
 BIS Review 34/2002 5 never exceeded 25 basis points. The average difference between the interest rate cast by the member voting for the highest average level of rates and the member voting for the lowest average level of rates is less than 15 basis points! Such a small difference hardly corresponds to a major difference of view about the outlook for inflation. 3. Third, has the Committee explained clearly the reasons for its decisions? Transparency has been at the centre of the monetary policy framework since 1992 when it was recognised that clear explanations of policy would help to anchor inflation expectations on the target. The first major step in enhancing transparency was the Bank’s Inflation Report, which first appeared in February 1993, and was subsequently enhanced by publication of the minutes of the meetings between the Chancellor and Governor. That transparency was given a further boost by the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee where the votes of all members are published along with the minutes of the discussion at MPC meetings. Despite its record on transparency, questions have been raised about whether the MPC could go further. Do the published minutes reveal enough about individual views? Should there not be individual paragraphs in the minutes explaining the position of each member? Why does the Committee not publish a forecast corresponding to the path of interest rates that it feels most likely to be necessary to meet the inflation target? Why does the central projection of the forecast always seem to end up at close to the target of 2.5%? It is helpful to step back and ask three more fundamental questions. First, what is the MPC trying to communicate? Second, how should it communicate? Third, what is the role of the inflation forecast? The basic message which the MPC is trying to communicate is that, over the medium term, inflation should be expected to average 2.5%, and that the Committee will respond to events as they unfold in order to keep inflation on track to meet that target. Hence the Committee needs to explain its view of the current state of the economy, how and why it has reacted to events that have already unfolded, and what it believes are the risks lying ahead. All of this can be encapsulated in its “policy reaction function”. Commentators and others may form their own views about the likelihood of various economic shocks occurring, and in that respect it is more important for them that the Committee explains its policy reaction function than attempts to provide guidance on the likely future path of interest rates. And when the Bank of Canada tried to anticipate the likely future path of monetary conditions, it found that, despite its clear explanations of why the future could not be easily anticipated, markets took those anticipations as commitments, and were surprised when unforeseen events resulted in different policy outcomes. In contrast, the MPC does not attempt to anticipate its own decisions. In addition to explaining the Committee’s views on the economy, and the balance of risks to inflation, there is a second important role for communication. That is to explain the views of the nine individual members of the Committee so that they can be held accountable for their judgments. There is, therefore, an inherent tension between a system of nine individually accountable members, with their associated views, and a Committee from which a single decision emerges that requires a clear explanation each month. The former produces, as I have argued, better decisions; the latter is important for the predictability and thus the efficiency of monetary policy. The communication strategy of the MPC must provide a balance between these two objectives, a point acknowledged in the report by Don Kohn on the procedures of the MPC. The need to achieve such a balance leads directly to the question of how the Committee should communicate its thoughts. The minutes of the MPC meetings, now released only 13 days after the decision itself, provide a detailed explanation of the issues that confronted the Committee and the arguments that were made during the meeting. They also contain the votes of individual members. The Committee has discussed, but rejected, the proposition that the minutes should contain individual paragraphs summarising the views of each member in turn. The reason is that such a procedure would alter the nature of our meetings quite radically. At present, they are a free-flowing discussion in which members discuss propositions and counter propositions in a spirit of mutual enquiry rather than an exchange of fixed and conflicting views. Discussion focuses on the relative merits of different possible explanations for the current state of the economy. If each member faced a deadline by which they had to produce a polished paragraph summarising their views, members would enter the meeting with such a paragraph in draft form and the spontaneity of the discussion would be lost. 
 6 BIS Review 34/2002 For the same reason, it is not clear that the publication of transcripts of meetings enhances transparency. The Federal Reserve provides a useful case study. Prior to 1994, members of the FOMC were largely unaware that monetary policy discussions were being transcribed verbatim from audio recordings of the meetings. Congress learned of the availability of the transcripts shortly after this, and in February 1995, insisted that they be published with a five-year lag. Once committee members became aware that their meetings were being recorded, the structure of the discussion appeared to change. Before 1995 meetings had begun with prepared speeches followed by a free-flowing debate characterised by a frank exchange of ideas. But after 1995, there appears to be a much greater tendency for meetings to become an exchange of prepared statements, and some of the colour of the previous discussion may have been lost. Explanations of decisions in the form of press statements issued at the time of the announcement of decisions on interest rates have become less frequent. But this is principally because there have been fewer interest rate changes recently. In its first three years, the Committee moved rates 16 times and issued press statements on 14 of those occasions. It also issued two statements when it had not moved rates. Over the past two years the Committee changed rates seven times, accompanied by six statements, with no statements when rates were left unchanged. The purpose of a press statement is to explain a decision reached, by definition by a majority of the Committee. Because it is brief it cannot do justice to the richness of the discussion at the Committee, and the balance of views is not represented. Hence the Committee has come to the view that, by and large, it is better to wait until the publication of the minutes when a fuller view of issues and views can be provided. That is not to say that press statements will not appear in future, but to stress that their purpose is limited to explaining a decision that might be unexpected, irrespective of whether that is a change or no change in rates. On the whole, the minutes have been successful in creating a wider understanding of the issues discussed by the MPC, and have a devoted, if small, following. The Inflation Report, which pre-dates the MPC, has a broader objective in setting out a comprehensive view of the current state of the economy, and describing the outlook for inflation in terms of a forecast over a two-year horizon. The Committee puts great weight on explaining the forecast in terms of probabilities. Hence it has adopted the famous coloured fan charts for its forecasts for both growth and inflation. But there remains some confusion about the role of the forecast. With the advent of the MPC, the tensions between explaining nine individual views and presenting a coherent account of the Committee’s view of the economy have complicated the production of the forecast. The Inflation Report now contains an explicit description of differences of view among the Committee in respect of both the central projection and the risks to the forecast, as well as the “best collective judgment”, or majority view, of the outlook. But the main focus of the Inflation Report is to present a collective view. To publish nine individual fan charts would hardly increase transparency, and the differences of judgment have to date been sufficiently small that it would be difficult for commentators to observe significant differences among those charts. This tension between the need to explain the diversity of members’ views, and the need to provide a clear rationale for the single decision, suggests that the Committee may need to explore further ways of putting across its collective view. It should be clear that there are both benefits and costs to a group decision-making process. The transparency and accountability of individual views helps to make better decisions. But it also complicates the communication of the decision to a wider audience, whose expectations of inflation matter for economic behaviour. The avoidance of confusion requires some forbearance by individual members of the Committee, and a clear understanding of which forms of communication are appropriate to explain individual views and which forms are suitable for explaining the reasons for a collective decision. I am sure that the Committee will learn more about how best to achieve this balance as time goes by. 4. Fourth, does the MPC require reform? Despite its youth, at least in central banking terms, the MPC has not suffered from lack of advice on how to improve itself. There have been six reports from the Treasury Select Committee, two reports from the House of Lords’ Committee on the MPC, reports by a commission of the Conservative Party and by the Liberal Democrats, a report by the Engineering Employers’ Federation, recommendations by many economists, including former MPC members, and, last but not least, the report commissioned by the Bank of England itself by Don Kohn, a senior staff member of the Federal Reserve Board and recently nominated by the President for appointment to the Board of Governors. Overall, the verdict on the Committee has been broadly positive. For example, in his 2001 review of the operation of 
 BIS Review 34/2002 7 monetary policy in New Zealand, Professor Lars Svensson describes the Bank of England and the Swedish Riksbank as examples of “best practice” monetary policy. Suggestions for improvement from the various groups cover the following areas: the definition of the inflation target; terms, appointments and composition of the membership of the MPC; arrangements for publication of the minutes; the forecast produced by the MPC; and, finally, a miscellaneous collection of technical matters. The precise definition of the inflation target, and its numerical value, can be debated at length. What is important is that the target is for inflation and not additional objectives that would lead to confusion about the Committee’s aims. On the Committee itself various suggestions have been made: to extend the terms of appointment of members of the MPC, to make those longer terms non-renewable, and to appoint people with more diverse backgrounds. By far the most fundamental of these suggestions is the proposal to appoint representatives of different industries or regions to the Committee, as opposed to monetary policy experts. That would change the nature of the debate and undermine the mutual confidence of members of the Committee in each other if it were felt that some were representing a specific interest group. With experience of the MPC, I think that this argument has come to be accepted. The proposal that the minutes of MPC meetings should include more description of individual views I discussed earlier. The Committee has been opposed to such a change for the reasons I gave. In its early days the Committee was sensitive to the view that the minutes, then published six weeks after the meeting, should be published earlier, and it shortened that lag to 13 days in October 1998. The forecast process has attracted much attention, and was discussed at length in the Kohn Report. Presenting the forecast in terms of a fan chart, in order to highlight the balance of risks to the outlook, has proved successful. But it has proved more difficult to explain the role of a projection conditioned on the assumption of constant official interest rates. So the Committee also publishes a forecast conditioned on market interest rates, in order to provide a guide as to how the forecast depends upon the profile of short-term interest rates. The Committee has had more problems in trying to explain that there is no mechanical link between the central projection of the forecast for inflation two years ahead and the policy decision. This is for several reasons. First, the view of inflation both prior to and after the two-year horizon is important too. The optimal horizon over which to bring inflation back to target depends on the shock which moved inflation above or below target. Second, the risks to inflation around the central projection (defined as the mode of the distribution of inflation at future points) are also relevant to the policy decision. Third, there may be some risks to which the Committee does not wish to respond until they have materialised. But the Committee will continue to explain how its outlook for inflation relates to the policy decision, and, over time, we hope that this educational effort will pay off. Finally, there have been several miscellaneous suggestions for change to the MPC. First, the MPC has been accused of meeting too frequently and, as a result, changing rates too often. The EEF report suggested that the Committee meet only eight times a year, as does the Federal Reserve, because “meeting once a month could lead a central bank into changing interest rates too often in response to potentially misleading monthly data”. In fact, since June 1997 the MPC has changed interest rates 23 times and the FOMC 20 times. Changes in rates reflect economic developments, not the frequency of meetings. In any event, the Bank of England Act 1998 states that we must meet at least once a month, and that we shall continue to do. Second, there has been a suggestion that a more formal voting procedure be adopted for MPC meetings. The current voting procedure of the MPC is straightforward: discussion continues until each person’s views are clear. The Governor then puts a proposition to the Committee which will command majority support. Some have questioned whether this procedure is robust and might bias the outcome. For example, the issue has been raised by the House of Lords Select Committee. But I think this is a misunderstanding of the way we work. It is important that our views are known to each other before we cast our votes because that is part of the process of making up our mind. The only complication with the current procedure would be if the Committee was split equally between three different courses of action. In theory, this could lead to a “voting paradox”. The Governor would then need to decide which course was eliminated, leaving two policy choices for the Committee to choose between. That would normally be straight forward provided that, in the economist’s jargon, preferences between interest rates were “single-peaked”. When this is the case the voting paradox does not apply. For preferences not to be single-peaked members of the Committee would have to prefer, for example, both no change 
 8 BIS Review 34/2002 and a rise of 50 basis points to an increase of 25 basis points. It is not easy to see under what circumstances this would represent rational preferences. Third, the set, or as we call it suite, of models used by the Committee should be improved. They are in fact under continuous improvement and the Bank has commissioned Adrian Pagan to carry out a review of the technical aspects of modelling in the Bank. That review will be published in 2003. Fourth, it has been suggested that the MPC should meet outside London. The Court of the Bank does indeed meet once a year at a destination outside London, and these occasions have proved invaluable in expanding contacts between the Bank and the MPC on the one hand, and the local community, on the other. But MPC meetings themselves, as highly market-sensitive occasions surrounded by a purdah period, are quite unsuitable as opportunities to interact with the local business and other community. There would be little point in holding an MPC meeting outside London if the Committee were unable to speak and meet with local people. All members of the MPC travel widely around the UK outside of purdah, making some 50 visits during the past year, and these contacts are an important part of the process by which the MPC is informed about the state of the economy. During its short life-time the MPC has made changes in its procedures and remains open to the possibility of further improvements. But unnecessary tinkering would be a distraction from its main purpose. One does not have to go as far as Lord Falkland, who said in 1641 that “If it is not necessary to change something, then it is necessary not to change it”, to believe that, at least for the time being, major changes to the MPC are unnecessary. And if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then the Government can draw comfort from Michael Howard’s speech in March of this year when he argued that “Nor, given the importance of stability and continuity, do I think it right to propose any major changes in either the remit or the composition of the Monetary Policy Committee”. The fact that there is a broad, cross-party consensus on the objectives and broad framework of monetary policy is one reason to think that the stability we have experienced in the first five years of the MPC will continue in the future. 5. Conclusions The idea behind the MPC was to take day-to-day politics out of monetary policy. It is now widely accepted that this was desirable. Macroeconomic policy in Britain had been much too exciting for comfort for most of the post-war period. In the 1970s, inflation averaged over 13% a year, and reached a peak of 27% in August 1975. During the 1980s inflation averaged 7% a year, and it is only since the inflation target regime was adopted in late 1992 that inflation has returned to both low and stable levels. Britain tried most types of monetary regime: targeting monetary aggregates both narrow and broad; shadowing an exchange rate target, and an explicit exchange rate target through membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism. None was pursued for long, and none carried real credibility. It was following our exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992 that the opportunity arose to put in place a new monetary framework based on an explicit target for inflation and a floating exchange rate. The aim of the MPC is to keep both inflation and inflation expectations at the target level of 2½%. It is no small part of a central bank’s role to create confidence and credibility in the belief that it will respond to any change in economic circumstances in order to maintain a broad degree of economic stability. In the economists’ jargon, the public must believe that the central banks “policy reaction function” is consistent with stability, and if it is predictable, then announcements on interest rates should not come as news. The economic data will have led to expectations about the likely course of interest rates which, in most instances will prove a reasonable guide to the course of policy. A clear sign of the success of the MPC will be when we are no longer news. The MPC has proved to be one of those rare “instantly invented precedents” that seem to have worked. It may not achieve the cult status of the Nine Worthies who, in the Middle Ages, inspired poetry, sculpture and stained glass windows. As one writer has remarked, “If one reviews the list of virtues that contemporaries found valuable in a knight - courtesy, loyalty, prowess, hardiness, largesse, and frankness - the Nine Worthies seem to meet the standard”. If that level of achievement is no more than an aspiration for its nine members, at least the MPC can claim a record of reasonable competence during its first five years. As Stephen Bayley remarked in 1986, “civilisations are remembered by their artefacts, not their bank-rates”. 
 BIS Review 34/2002 9 Chart 1: average committee scores over time1 01020304050607080012345678910111213141516Individual gamesCommittee gamesIndividual gamesGame NumberAverage scoreTrendScore 1 Players are scored according to their ability to keep inflation close to a pre-specified target and to minimise output fluctuations across each of the sixteen, ten period games. The Chart shows the evolution of scores over time: • For the individual games, numbers 1-4 and 13-16, each diamond represents the mean individual score across the 170 participants. • For the committee games, numbers 5-12, the diamonds represent the mean score across the 34 committees. In these stages, the five members of the committee vote in each period and the ‘majority’ - or more precisely - the median interest rate is set. Each committee is then scored according to this median outcome. 
 10 BIS Review 34/2002 Table 1  CUMULATIVE MPC VOTING RECORDVOTING STATISTICS  EddieHowardMervynDavidIanJohnWillemCharlesDeAnneAlanSushilStephenChristopherCharlesKateActual(SINCE JUNE 1997)GeorgeDaviesKingClementiPlenderleithVickersBuiterGoodhartJuliusBuddWadhwaniNickellAllsoppBeanBarkerMEETINGS ATTENDED6126158612836364518372525211361VOTED UP92178910171225330009VOTED DOWN1401214137107186167108414VOTED NO-CHANGE3803236391191725718151513938VOTED WITH MAJORITY61251545623193331142422212013-VOTED DIFFERENT TO MAJORITY0010455173144133410-VOTED NO-CHANGE WHEN CHANGE002120003010000-VOTED CHANGE WHEN NO-CHANGE008335173114123410-
 BIS Review 34/2002 11  
 BIS Review 33/2002 1 David Carse: Documentation risk, operational risk and the New Capital Accord Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Asia Pacific Loan Market Association Documentation Launch, Hong Kong, 24 May 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I am very pleased to be able to speak at this special luncheon to launch the APLMA Standard Documentation. I am told that there has been an unprecedented demand to attend this event. I would like to think that this reflects my own attractions as a speaker. But I am realistic enough to recognise that the real star of the show is the documentation itself; and your attendance here today reflects the level of interest in the outcome of the Association’s hard work in bringing the first phase of this project to fruition. My purpose today is to stress the importance of good documentation and to place it in the more general context of the increased regulatory focus on operational risk that is a feature of the Basel Committee’s proposed New Capital Accord. I will also briefly describe the latest developments in the New Accord and bring you up to date on the revised timetable. The work of the Association It is over three years since I spoke at the inaugural luncheon of the Association in Hong Kong. I said on that occasion that the Association promised to become a vital part of the market infrastructure in Hong Kong. I noted particularly that the Association could play a role in three main areas: by acting as an industry representative and interlocutor with regulators; by establishing common standards and documentation; and by promoting market transparency and efficiency. I am glad to say that the Association has delivered on its promises in each of these areas. Its website is, for example, now up and running, and is an important source of information for both members and non-members. If I could put in a plea, however, it would be for more market statistics to be made available on the parts of the website that are open to non-members - or honorary members such as the HKMA. In its representational role, the Association offered very helpful comments last year on the draft guideline that the HKMA prepared on the management of the risks associated with syndicated lending. Our initial draft generated a certain amount of heat. This was I think largely due to a feeling on the part of the industry that we had overplayed the inherent risks of syndicated lending. We therefore made it clear in the final version of our guideline - which we issued in non-statutory form - that syndicated loans are not necessarily riskier than other types of lending. Indeed, the distribution of lending among participants is designed to reduce risk by sharing it. However, the very fact of sharing and the multiple parties involved can give rise to risks of their own - particularly of a legal nature - which means that the documentation in syndicated loans needs to be as watertight as possible. The benefits of standardised documentation This is why the Association’s initiative in producing a suite of standard loan documents is so important, and is probably the Association’s major achievement to date. Good documentation is not glamorous and is generally not fascinating reading, but it plays a vital role in underpinning the growth and liquidity of markets in financial products. This is not a theoretical proposition. The explosive growth in the derivatives market is to a large extent due to the role played by the International Swaps & Derivatives Association (ISDA) in the development and maintenance of its derivatives documentation. The most recent testimony to this is the emergence within the space of the last few years of a US$ 1 trillion credit derivatives market, built on the platform provided by the Standardised ISDA Default Swap Documentation. Why is standardised documentation such a powerful driver of market growth? The answer is that it creates more predictability and certainty about the characteristics of the financial contract in question. 
 2 BIS Review 33/2002 People are better able to understand what their rights and obligations are under the contract, and this gives them more confidence to enter the market and transact. I would therefore encourage as many market participants as possible to begin to use the Association’s new documentation. This should help to boost the liquidity of the primary market in syndicated loans, but it should also serve to increase turnover in the secondary market which is still relatively underdeveloped in Hong Kong. It is easier to trade a product whose terms and conditions are homogeneous. The Association’s intention to move on in the second phase of its project to develop standardised documentation for secondary loan trading will give further impetus to this market. This is something that the HKMA would particularly welcome since it would give banks greater flexibility to manage their loan portfolios and adjust their liquidity. Apart from its impact on the market as a whole, standardised documentation has clear benefits at the level of the individual firm. Lending banks are better protected against the risk that contracts will turn out to be unenforceable, and that they will be left with a credit exposure that they did not anticipate. Moreover, the whole process of negotiating loans becomes more streamlined. There should not be a need to haggle over the standard “boilerplate” of the loan agreement, so that resources can be freed up to concentrate on the issues that are unique to the particular transaction. The reduction in the number of idiosyncratic terms and conditions also means that the loan should be easier and safer to administer after the loan agreement is signed. Operational risk is therefore reduced. Nor are the benefits one-sided. Borrowers will benefit from documentation that is easier to understand because it is written in (relatively) plain English and strikes an appropriate balance between the interests of lender and borrower. I understand that the Association’s documentation embodies both these concepts. It is important that the borrower community should buy into the new documentation. In this connection, it is reassuring to know that the new documents are based substantially on those of the Loan Markets Association (LMA) in London. These have already been widely adopted in the European loan market and were developed in association with the UK Association of Corporate Treasurers. I believe that it is also intended to seek input from the borrower community in Hong Kong to help further develop the documentation. Standardised documentation can therefore be described almost unreservedly as a good thing. This is subject to only two provisos. The first is that the basic documents will still need to be tailored to suit individual transactions - and the documents leave gaps for this to be done. This means that banks should not be lulled into a false sense of security. Legal advice will still be required for individual transactions, which should be good news for at least some of the people in this room. Second, the standard terms will need to evolve and be revised to take account of changing market circumstances and particular issues that arise. They may on occasions need to be tested in the courts. The recent experience of the credit derivatives market shows that ambiguities can arise even in standardised documentation, and the sponsors and users of the documentation need to be alert to this and make changes where necessary. The link with operational risk But the bottom line is that standardisation will reduce the risk that something goes wrong with the documentation. This feeds in turn into reduced legal risk, which is included within the definition of operational risk adopted by the Basel Committee. This defines operational risk as “the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people or systems or from external events”. This definition focuses on the causes of operational risk - internal processes, people, systems or external events. Operational risk losses can be further classified into various “event types” and assigned to each of a bank’s major business lines. By classifying losses in this way, banks are better placed to identify appropriate risk controls and to assess the impact of these. In its draft paper on Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk, the Basel Committee has identified seven main loss event types for operational risk. These include losses related to “execution, delivery and process management” within which resides documentation risk. Why has the Basel Committee decided to focus on operational risk? The answer lies in the growing diversity and complexity of banking operations arising from well-known phenomena such as globalisation, the growing sophistication of financial technology and outsourcing. This has shown up in 
 BIS Review 33/2002 3 concrete form in the severe operational losses suffered by a number of international institutions. The Committee has therefore decided to take the lead in promoting greater understanding of operational risk and more consistency in the way in which it is measured, managed and controlled. This would by itself be relatively unobjectionable. However, the Committee has decided to put some teeth into its recommendations by proposing an explicit capital charge for operational risk in the New Capital Accord. This is controversial for two reasons. First, there is no firm consensus on how to measure the capital required to support operational risk - the Committee is currently proposing three approaches to this, which range from the very basic to the quite sophisticated. Second, the amount of capital charge that the Committee originally had in mind was considered to be much too high. In response to this, the Committee is proposing a reduction in the proposed target of operational risk capital from 20% to 12% of minimum capital. A further reduction would potentially be available to those banks which use the more advanced measurement approaches. This is an example of how capital requirements can be used as an incentive to banks to improve their risk management practices. This, in our view, is where the real value of the New Accord lies. Among other things, the increased focus in the New Accord on internal ratings and risk-adjusted pricing might encourage a more sensible approach to the setting of margins on syndicated loans. I know that many banks in Hong Kong think that margins are now too low to fully compensate for expected loss, the cost of capital and operational costs. However, more rational pricing policies are currently hindered by the lack of consistency among banks on how they price risk and allocate capital. The New Accord should go some way to correct this. Under the internal ratings based (IRB) approach, banks will be required to use internal ratings as a factor in the pricing of credit risk. Progress on the New Accord As part of the process of creating incentives for better risk management, the Basel Committee is now engaged in a more general effort to recalibrate the New Accord to adjust the amount of capital charge under each of the main approaches. The aim of the revised set of proposals is that, on average, the total amount of capital required under the standardised approach to cover both credit and operational risk should be the same as that required under the current Accord to cover credit risk only. Modest capital relief would be available to those banks that move to the foundation IRB approach, with still more relief for those which opt for the advanced IRB approach. These, and other revised proposals of the Basel Committee, seem to have got the New Accord back on track. As you know, the project has suffered significant delays, and only a few months ago the chances of it going ahead seemed to be only 50-50. However, a number of the logjams have now been cleared and a revised timetable has been announced. The intention is now to release a revised set of consultation papers in May of next year. This would take account of a further quantitative impact study which will be held later this year to test the calibration of the revised proposals. If all goes well, the final Accord would be released before the end of 2003 with implementation targeted for 2006. I know that there have been a number of false alarms on the New Accord, and that some of the banks here today may be inclined to take a wait-and-see attitude. To such banks, I would say that the pendulum has swung in favour of implementation. It would therefore be sensible to plan on the basis that the New Accord will now go ahead on the revised schedule, and that it will include an explicit capital charge for operational risk. This does not leave all that much time for those banks which might want to use the advanced approaches in the New Accord to measure credit or operational risk to get themselves ready. I would advise such banks to start their preparations now if they have not already done so. I would particularly recommend that banks begin to collect default data for credit risk and loss data for operational risk. A framework for doing the latter is set out in the Basel Committee’s Sound Practices paper in the form of the two-dimensional matrix I described earlier, which assigns losses arising from the various loss event types to the major business lines of the bank. Conclusions Operational risk has many facets, and the events which give rise to it cover a huge range from high-frequency low-impact at one end to low-frequency high-impact at the other. There is a correspondingly wide range of controls and techniques that can be used to prevent or at least mitigate losses. Sound 
 4 BIS Review 33/2002 documentation lies at the more bread and butter end of the spectrum of such controls and techniques. But it is no less vital for all that. The Association is therefore to be congratulated for its initiative in putting in place an essential building block in the form of the standardised documentation that is being launched today. This will help to promote the development of the syndicated loan market in Hong Kong and in the region more generally, and will also serve the objective of enabling banks to better manage their operational risk. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 1 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The Malaysian banking industry - gearing up for excellence Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Malaysian Banking & Financial Services Summit 2002 - “Gearing up for excellence”, held in Kuala Lumpur, 20 May 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, The drive for excellence in the banking industry is a matter of priority, given that the well being of the banking sector is integral to the health and prosperity of the Malaysian economy. The advanced progress achieved in the restructuring and consolidation of our banking system in the recent year, has provided us with the strong foundation on which to develop and strengthen further the banking sector so that, it is better positioned to respond to the new and changing requirements of the economy and better abled to become more efficient and competitive. The focus of our strategies has therefore shifted from financial restructuring to that of capacity building and to ensuring the soundness and stability of the system. In essence, our drive for excellence in this phase of our development of the financial sector is to achieve an enhanced level of effectiveness and competitiveness in the banking sector. The issue before the banking industry is therefore the strategies and actions needed to gear up for this excellence. Ladies and Gentlemen, It is my pleasure to be here again at this year’s Malaysian Banking and Financial Services Summit organised by ASLI. This Summit indeed provides an opportunity for bankers and the private sector to discuss the issues facing the banking industry. It is now just over a year since the release of the Financial Sector Masterplan. It is therefore also a good time to undertake stock taking. Today, I would like to take the opportunity to discuss the progress that has been achieved over the recent year. I would also like to discuss some of the critical issues in the strategies that are being adopted by the banking institutions in charting their strategic course to enhance capacity and capability to achieve improved effectiveness and competitiveness. During the period of slower economic growth in 2001, following the global downturn in the technology sector, the banking sector clearly demonstrated its resilience and underlying strength. During this period, domestic sources of growth was important in sustaining the economy. Access to financing in this environment was therefore particularly important. The strengthened position of the banking sector in terms of quality of portfolio, capitalisation and profitability enabled them to continue to perform their intermediation function without disruption. The banking sector generally remained profitable and financially sound during this period. At the end of this first quarter, the risk weighted capital ratio was sustained at 12.5%. Profitability of the banking industry had also continued for the third consecutive year since the Asian crisis. While profits for the calendar year 2001 was affected by the higher level of provisioning during the year, the banking system has recorded a higher profitability of RM 2.4 billion in the first quarter of 2002. This represented a 72.3% increase over the preceding quarter. It reflected the lower loan loss provisions and the lower overhead expenses during the period. Of importance is that financing activities during this period was sustained. Financing by the banking system increased by 5.2% in 2001. Consumer credit extended by the banking system rose by 11.9% supporting further the strong consumer spending. Similarly, loans for the purchase of transport vehicles recorded a strong growth of 27.4% while loans for the purchase of residential property expanded by 9.3%. There was also strong demand for loans by the retail sector reflecting the positive response to the low interest rate environment and the fiscal stimulus measures to spur the domestic economy. Loans disbursed to the manufacturing was also high accounting for 27.7% of the total loans disbursed. Important aspects of enhanced effectiveness and competitiveness of the banking institutions is whether there is enhanced access, convenience, timeliness, and customised service, and whether the treatment by the banker and the quality and price of the service has improved. The changing nature of the industry has forced banking institutions to augment traditional product offerings with new products and services designed to be more solution oriented. However, in most cases, there are barriers, or reluctance, to phasing out the older products. The result is a widening of the total product array and confusion for customers and amongst employees. Competition is forcing many banks to take a 
 2 BIS Review 33/2002 defensive posture. In many instances, the banking institutions do not have the financial information systems capable of measuring the true profitability of individual products and services. There needs to be an ability to monitor and identify the products and customer relationships that may make a questionable, or even negative, and those that contribute to earnings. As customers become increasingly aware of alternative solutions, institutions will understandably feel compelled to fill gaps in their offerings to maintain relationships. The critical success factor will be to ensure that this is done at a profitable pricing point - and that the addition of new products does not decrease the profit contribution of existing products and services. For these reasons, it will become increasingly important to have a comprehensive product or service profitability measurement system. A significant progress achieved in the recent year, is the enhanced network of delivery channels over and above the network of branches throughout the country. Eight domestic banking groups are now offering the full range of banking services through the internet. In addition, four foreign banks are offering transactional internet banking services. Malaysia has had significant foreign presence in our banking system since the 1880s. Unlike several of the East Asian economies that have liberalised only recently, Malaysia has always had a significant foreign presence that has represented an important benchmark against which the domestic banks can be measured. While the domestic banking institutions have moved in a deliberate manner to build up their capabilities to expand and provide new services, foreign banks have for the most part been able to move much faster. The more innovative foreign banks have in fact continued to grow their business despite the branching restriction. They are able to leverage on the research and development initiative, expertise and off-the-shelf products or inherit new delivery systems already tested by their parent banks. As such, the foreign banks have generally been better abled at identifying and reacting to changes in the market much faster than most domestic banking institutions. They are able to open new distribution channels that operate beyond the traditional delivery methods for financial services. Using new delivery systems and largely relying on new technologies, foreign banks have generated a more competitive environment for the domestic banks. Progress has nevertheless been achieved as the gap between domestic banks and foreign banks in terms of return on assets has narrowed. On an annualised basis, the ROA of the domestic banks has improved to 1.2% for the first quarter this year compared with 1.5% for the foreign banks. The gap was 1.1 percentage points in June last year. More importantly, the ROA of the top quartile of the domestic banks is even higher at 3%. Ladies and Gentlemen, In these competitive and challenging times, excellence in marketing capabilities, innovative and efficient distribution network, product development capabilities and customer relationship and care require the ability to harness these different competencies, formulate a coherent enterprise-wide strategy, that is then executed effectively. For that to happen, banks have to look within their organisations for the answers. Before resources are allocated, before a marketing direction and strategy is established, before the organisation is restructured, the bank needs to decide what its strategic business will be within the context of its markets - exactly what type of financial service provider it will be. As part of the efforts to enhance efficiency and thus alleviate the level of competitiveness, significant strategies were initiated during the year. This included the consolidation, the rationalisation of common functions and operations across institutions in the group, outsourcing of non-core activity and leveraging on cross- selling of the products and services within the group. Following the consolidation of the 54 domestic banking institutions into ten banking groups, there was significant rationalisation of the wide range of common functions and operations across institutions in the group. Six banking groups have also now leveraged on cross-selling of their products and services across institutions in the group. A further impetus towards achieving this would be the merging of the commercial banking and finance company businesses in the banking group into one single entity. In this phase of development of the financial system, the commercial bank in the banking group would hold two licences, a commercial banking licence and a finance company licence. Under this arrangement, the domestic commercial banking institutions would in addition to its banking business, be able to undertake finance company business. Commercial banks would therefore be able to leverage on the opportunities presented by the two licences to take advantage of economies of scale, diversify and strengthen their earning base and create an enhanced market presence. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 3 Other areas of improvement in respect of operational efficiency was in terms of the average core system downtime which showed that for the first quarter this year, seven domestic banks did not experience any computer downtime or disruptions in their payments system matching the performance of the foreign banks. Of significance is that in the operations of the ATM networks where seven domestic banks reported downtime of not exceeding 2 hours compared to four foreign banks. In terms of turnaround time for retail loan applications, an indicator of customer service standards, during the final quarter of 2001, the top quartile domestic banks took 2 days on average to approve a housing loan application compared to 2.5 days taken by the top quartile foreign banks. Meanwhile, lost credit cards were replaced within a day for both the domestic and foreign banks in the top quartile. While the gaps in operational efficiency and productivity have improved, there remains great scope for further improvement particularly in areas where the domestic banks are evidently behind the foreign banks. For instance, productivity standards of the counter personnel as measured by the number of counter transactions per counter employee for the domestic banks averaged approximately 5,000 compared with 11,000 for the foreign banks. Meanwhile, the number of domestic banks that did not experience any disruption in their retail deposit and loan initiation systems is significantly lower than that of the foreign banks. In terms of the time taken to approve new credit card applications it averaged 8 days for the domestic banks compared with 6 days for the foreign banks. As can be seen from the scorecard, the consolidation programme for the domestic banking sector was a necessary pre-requisite to enhance the sector’s capacity to compete. Size alone however, is not a sufficient condition that will result in producing efficient and competitive banks and it does not offer guarantee of success. Being a large bank is however, an important enabler to achieving enough scale to be able to invest in cutting-edge technology and management systems and to attracting the talent required to compete with the best players in the market. Domestic institutions need to be able to meet the range of products offered by foreign competitors. But the larger scale and wider range of activities will demand stronger management teams. With the completion of the merger programme in December 2000, the banking groups are at various stages in building up their management team and enhancing corporate governance. A number of measures have been implemented to ensure that banking institutions’ Boards and key committees have sufficient representation of independent directors and that the Boards are encouraged to appoint qualified professionals to run the banks. Towards this end, Bank Negara has liberalised the remuneration package of the chief executive officers of banking institutions and left it to the Boards to formulate appropriate packages to attract the necessary talent and determine their remuneration package. In the final analysis, a more competitive banking system should produce benefits to their customers and the business in terms of easy access, quality choices and competitive prices. An indicator of the improved level of competitiveness has been the narrowing of margins. During the year 2001, gross interest margins of banking institutions have narrowed to 3.86% for the commercial banks from 4.3%. This reflected the larger reduction in the average lending rate vis a vis the average cost of funds. Competitive interest rates were particularly evident for mortgage and hire purchase loans reflecting strong demand for credit for these sectors. The competitiveness of the domestic banks in terms of the gross interest margin has also improved. The gap between the domestic banks and foreign banks has narrowed from 0.92 percentage points as at the beginning of year 2000 to 0.69 percentage points as at the end of 2001. Ladies and Gentlemen, Banks which do not make investments to take advantage of the new technology may find themselves losing customers to the better-quality or lower-cost products of banks that do. Investing in IT however, entails high cost and an uncertain payoff. The changes brought about by IT - new products, more sophisticated customers, changing cost structures, and enhanced competitive pressures - have all combined to transform the structure of the banking industry. And with further development of new technology, the industry will likely continue to evolve. Advances in IT have also resulted in new database technology and data-mining techniques that can expand the range of services that banks may offer their customers. The winners will be those who are able to harness on the capability of ICT in making strategic decisions - in terms of enabling better alignment of businesses, enhancing organisational capacity and capability such as in risk management, and building better customer relationships. Today, decisions on ICT investments demand a more thorough assessment, extending beyond the cost implications, to include better human resource redeployment, more efficient work flow process and system interface, expandability of the technology platform and the level of complexity to users and customers. 
 4 BIS Review 33/2002 As banking institutions continue to adopt greater sophistication in the application of ICT, efforts must also be intensified to develop ICT-savvy employees and to increase customers’ understanding and acceptance of the new approaches. While the efficiency of electronic means of doing banking, such as electronic kiosks and internet banking is valued, the need for personal attention cannot be ignored. While being engrossed in the technology race this is a factor that should not be neglected. Banking business after all is about cultivating relationships, which will become more challenging as customers become more well informed and knowledgeable as they move up the income curve. Ladies and Gentlemen, In this period of rapid change, where change is the only constant, the successful organisations will be those that are able to recognise and identify the forces of change and how it affects them and make the required internal adjustments in response. This is by no means an easy task. Change mandates a need to create a new organisational mindset, capable of identifying opportunities and responding to them. Such organisations will be those comprising individuals with a clear sense of mission and empowerment and in which every level of the institution is motivated and focussed on achieving a consistent set of corporate objectives. In a service organisation, it will always be the type of talent that is hired and retained that will make the difference. This is perhaps the greatest challenge facing banks. The level of knowledge and expertise is vital to achieving excellence in providing the required services. Currently, the skills and expertise are insufficient compared to the global providers. In assessing how well a customer is served, quality is a key factor especially when dealing with service operations. The role of quality, and its inter-relationships with operational aspects of a service organisation has been expressed in what has been described as the “service-profit chain” as follows: (i) profit and growth are stimulated primarily by customer loyalty; (ii) loyalty is a direct result of customer satisfaction; (iii) satisfaction is largely influenced by the value of services provided to customers; (iv) value is created by satisfied, loyal and productive employees; (v) employee satisfaction results primarily from high-quality support services and policies that enable employees to deliver results to customers. Superior insights on customer needs will be an important advantage. This will involve recognising the diverse needs of the different customer segments. There is now already a discernable change in the pattern of customer behaviour. There is now an increasing shift towards a customer base that has less need for the standard distribution systems for most banking services. “If you build it, they will come” used to be the by-word for domestic banking institutions. A new branch would naturally attract new customers. Now, while customer relationship is of vital importance, these needs to be addressed in the context of the needs of the younger customers for retail services who do not want the “inconvenience” of a branch. The preference is for services as much as possible over the telephone, ATM or Internet. Writing cheques has become an inconvenience. This new generation of customers have their own ideas of what a bank should be and successful banks need to respond to this change. A further segment that will gain in importance is that of the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) given its growing significance in the economy. The main concern with respect to banking for the SMEs is access to credit. Among the issues that have been raised is the quality of service delivered in terms of accessibility, the lack of responsiveness, lack of understanding of their business, poor branch level service, and poor turn around time. Other complaints have centered on the high collateral demands and the general perception of a lack of willingness to extend financing by the banking institutions. While the recent year showed an encouraging trend with loans to SMEs increasing by 3.1%, the issue of the overall services provided to SMEs need to be enhanced. Bank Negara Malaysia has undertaken a survey through the banking institutions on the SME profile and requirements. This will represent an important database for the development of a comprehensive framework for the development of SMEs initiated by Bank Negara. The survey findings will also be useful for the banking industry in formulating its own strategic plans with respect to this segment. With the advances in technology, banking institutions should be in a position to enhance access and quality of service for the SMEs. Ladies and Gentlemen, The performance of the banking institutions is also being gauged from the perspective of the shareholders. There are several significant issues affecting shareholders in the current environment. The global trend is being driven partly by an increased focus by banks on the financial performance and on the creation of shareholder value. In essence, the potential for growth lies in the value of their investments. This would be the right thing to do in the interest of long-term survival. There are enough 
 BIS Review 33/2002 5 examples of companies around the world that had lost track of the true reason for venturing into a particular business and as a result, they find themselves no longer in the business. Despite narrowing of interest margins and high costs, the banking industry has been able to increase their returns with the average return to shareholders in 2001 being 14.5%. Banks, like other companies in a free market economy, have a responsibility to generate returns for their shareholders. It is in the interests of the community as a whole that they do so, otherwise we could end up with a weak banking sector. But any company maximises shareholder value subject to constraints. These may be imposed by laws and regulations, or by the expectations of society. This means that if banks wish to preserve their reputation and the confidence of their customers, on which ultimately the strength of their franchise depends, they should act in a way that is seen to be fair and reasonable. To do otherwise, may in the long-term, be inconsistent with the objective of creating shareholder value. Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me take a moment to say a few words on Islamic banking. Today, Islamic banking in Malaysia has firmed its position as a viable and vibrant component of the banking system. Bank Negara Malaysia has been in the forefront in providing the necessary and required infrastructure for the sector to grow further. From a market share of virtually nil a decade ago, Islamic banking has captured more than 8% of the assets of the banking system and is poised to reach 20% by 2010. We capitalized on the dual banking system which we believed is the right approach, and we will continue to embark in this direction. There are currently two Islamic banks and 33 conventional banks with Islamic windows offering the full range of Islamic financial services, and the industry has recorded commendable growth at an annual rate of 48% in terms of assets. At the end of March 2002, the assets mobilised by the Islamic banking sector amounted to RM 59 billion. Deposits and financing mobilized during the same period amounted to RM 48 billion and RM 30.1 billion respectively. Islamic banking in Malaysia is now at the threshold of entering its next stage of development, to expand on a global basis, to gain greater acceptance as an effective and efficient means of intermediation and to contribute to the overall wealth creation. Policies and measures will be formulated to not only increase the capacity and the capability of the Islamic banking players but also to set the stage for Malaysia to be an active player in global developments in Islamic banking and finance. Ladies and Gentlemen, New players, new technologies, the push to globalisation and continuing deregulation are still driving change in the financial services industry. Productivity, service quality, customer satisfaction and cost are key factors that drive the performance in a financial services organisation. In this uncertain world, the drive towards excellence can only be realised if strategic steps are taken today to enhance capability and capacity, thereby securing the well being of the banking industry and thereby the ability of the industry to contribute to the overall economic prosperity of our nation. On this note, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you a successful Summit. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 1 Guy Quaden: The Euro - a milestone on the path of European integration and a contribution to world economy stability Keynote address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the OECD Forum, Paris, 14 May 2002. *      *      * It is a great honour and pleasure for me to address this important Forum of the OCDE on the theme of the euro. On 1 January 2002, the euro was physically introduced in the form of banknotes and coins. This event marked the conclusion of the changeover to the single currency, which had been initiated three years earlier, on 1 January 1999, when the non cash euro was successfully introduced in the money and financial markets. With effect from 1 March 2002, the euro has become the sole legal tender in the 12 countries of the euro area. The success of the euro cash changeover has surpassed all expectations. That such an unparalleled logistical operation took place almost without a hitch bears witness to Euroland’s operational capability. Such a massive and complex project could in fact only be successfully completed thanks to meticulous preparation and the all-out efforts of innumerable people, authorities, enterprises and associations working together in a constructive and co-operative spirit, in the public and private sector alike. European citizens have accepted their new money rapidly and enthusiastically and have chosen to be actors and not merely spectators in the changeover. They have helped to write a decisive page in the history of modern Europe whose significance far transcends the purely monetary field. In my presentation today I first would like to analyse the implications of the introduction of the euro, both as a completion of the single market and for the creation of a new framework for economic policy. Thereafter, I would like to explore three important challenges for the euro area: firstly to increase the growth potential and growth performance of Europe’s economies, secondly to reinforce policy co-ordination and political cohesion between the countries of the zone, and thirdly to prepare for and to succeed its enlargement and the accession of new members. I would conclude with some comments on the international aspects of the euro. *** European monetary union pursues two, interrelated economic objectives: more efficiency and more stability. Let me start off with more efficiency. The euro is, in the first instance, a completion of the single market. The introduction of the euro has created one of the world’s major economic areas. The young euro area is an important economic power, with a population of around 300 million people, having a considerable purchasing power, which is only exceeded by the United States. Thus, the Member States of the euro area together represent some 15% of world GDP, which is less than the United States - with about 20% - but twice as much as Japan. By way of comparison, the biggest country of the euro area by itself is estimated to represent only 4.5% of world GDP. Monetary union also implies that some exchange rates do no longer exist, as for instance the rate of the Belgian franc against the German mark or the Italian lira. In the past, the volatility of these exchange rates has been most harmful to the closely interdependent national economies of the European common market. Let’s think back for instance to the ERM-crises in 1992 and 1993. The single currency has completely removed exchange rate risks for exporters and importers, debtors and creditors across the 12 countries of the euro area and has thus eliminated the costs of hedging exchange rate risks vis-à-vis other euro area countries. I notice in passing that this “internal exchange rate” stability has often been overshadowed by a disproportional interest in the floating of the US dollar-euro exchange rate. The dollar/euro exchange rate movements have, in fact, been comparable with the dollar’s historical fluctuations vis-à-vis the European currencies (in particular the German mark) prior to the introduction of the euro. The euro is leading to an increased transparency of prices and greater competition and a thorough integration process has taken place in the area. The integration of the money market and the 
 2 BIS Review 33/2002 disappearance of the exchange rate risk have provided a boost to the integration of other financial markets, such as the bond market and the equity markets, be it to a lesser extent. The stability effects which the euro’s arrival has brought about and which have improved growth potential in the zone, cover other types of stability: price stability and fiscal stability. 1. There can be no doubt that both deflation and inflation are harmful for both output and welfare in the medium term: they distort the information contained in the price system, imperceptibly change the real value of contracts and savings and heighten uncertainty. They consequently disturb the allocation of resources, the investment process and the income distribution. In the case of Europe, this consensus on the contribution of price stability to promoting long-term growth is explicitly enshrined in the Treaty of Maastricht which states unambiguously that the primary objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. The Eurosystem, which associates the European Central Bank and the national central banks of the 12 euro countries, is convinced that by fulfilling this mandate, monetary policy is making its most effective contribution to the realisation of strong output growth as well as to sustainable employment prospects.  As part of its monetary policy strategy, the European Central Bank has published a quantitative definition of price stability. It aims to create a stable anchoring point for price expectations, making it also easier for the public to judge its actions. Price stability is defined as an annual rise in the harmonised index of consumer prices for the euro area of less than 2%. It must be maintained in the medium term.  Central bankers cannot avoid that external shocks, such as a rise of commodity prices on the international markets, lead to a temporary increase in inflation. However they do have to prevent second-round effects and must ensure that the internal value of the currency will be maintained in the medium term.  That the policy of the Eurosystem has been convincing in this respect can be seen from the moderate inflation expectations as evidenced, among other things, by the level of long-term interest rates. Together with the present easy monetary conditions, the continuance of low risk premiums in euro long-term interest rates is one of the factors from which the economic recovery in 2002 can draw strength. 2. Another stability-related aspect in the new European economic policy framework is the discipline of fiscal policies.  The convergence criteria leading to the last stage of Economic and Monetary Union have played an important part to ensure a stable environment. In addition, the institutional set-up and different permanent procedures within the European Union aim to promote the stability-oriented policies further. The Stability and Growth Pact, multilateral surveillance and peer pressure are important tools to this end.  Monetary policy decisions are centralised but fiscal policy is still conducted at the level of the Member States, in accordance with the subsidiarity principle. This leaves room for manoeuvre regarding the composition of public spending and revenues, in line with national preferences and with possible differences in the cyclical positions. However decentralised fiscal policies had, within the eurozone, to take into account the potential for spillover effects.  The present framework has been designed to minimise the risk of negative spillovers (across countries and across policies) from inappropriate fiscal policies. Crucially, the Treaty contains an obligation to avoid “excessive deficits”. This constraint, together with procedures for a multilateral review of national fiscal policies, has been further specified by the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact stipulates quantifiable deficit rules, which provide a clear policy orientation for the budgetary authorities in the Member States.  It is not correct to describe the Pact as a fiscal straitjacket. In a monetary union a more prominent role is generally assigned to fiscal policy in dealing with cyclical movements. If correctly applied, the Stability and Growth Pact certainly offers the necessary scope for this. Indeed, the obligation for the EU Member States to aim for a budget which is “close to balance or in surplus” “over the medium term” does make it possible to allow the nominal budget balances to fluctuate according to the changing cyclical circumstances. The so-called economic stabilisers can operate freely in a period of economic slowdown in the countries having structurally balanced their budget at the top of the cycle. 
 BIS Review 33/2002 3 *** The changeover to the physical euro has concluded a chapter in the history of the European integration but not the book. After the introduction of the new currency, the countries of the euro-zone are facing three main challenges. 1. The economic outlook remains subject to uncertainties but after a disappointing year 2001 globally business confidence has markedly improved in the euro area over the last few months and the conditions for a sustained upswing are in place, including favourable financing conditions. While the recovery is expected to initially proceed at a gradual pace, real GDP growth rates should gravitate towards potential growth later this year.  The growth problem has however two dimensions: short term and long term. Potential growth in the euro-area is estimated at between 2¼ and 2½%, still noticeably less than in the US. This growth potential needs to be increased. Yet the solution is not necessarily, I think, to duplicate the American “model”. The experience of some countries in Northern Europe (Scandinavia) indicates that it is possible to combine a level of social protection conform to the European preferences with high rates of participation to the workforce, technological innovation and economic growth comparable to those of the US.  Monetary unification is in itself a major structural reform, which has already stimulated other reforms. Yet further strides are necessary in order to increase overall productivity and to include in working life those who are still unemployed.  The euro area countries must raise the “speed limit” of their economies by continuing to improve the efficiency of labour and products markets, to encourage the entrepreneurship and to foster a knowledge-based economy. 2. A question often asked is whether it was appropriate to introduce monetary union between different European countries before political union. It is true that in the case of the US for instance, political unification preceded monetary unification. There is however no precedent or pre-set scheme for the construction of Europe.  The single currency was the desirable complement to the single market and European leaders took advantage of an exceptional political momentum in the late 1980s to proceed with monetary union.  This monetary union can operate - and it has been proven for more than three years - in the current institutional framework with monetary policy determined centrally by the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, with a high degree of independence and a clear mandate, and national fiscal policies which, though autonomous, are bounded by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. The soundness of the euro is essentially based on the strength of the area’s economy (the largest trading bloc in the world) and on price stability which safeguards the euro’s internal value, given that its external value inevitably fluctuates on account of differentials in growth and interest rates, particularly vis-à-vis the US.  Having said that, I add, speaking in a personal capacity that new progress in the economic policies co-ordination among the Member States of the euro-area and more political cohesion among them inside and outside Europe would be welcome to consolidate monetary union and deepen European integration. 3. The prospect of enlargement is another reason to adapt the EU’s institutions and procedures. The EU is indeed facing another major challenge: many countries in the rest of Europe are knocking on its door.  The accession criteria to the European Union were defined at the European Summit in Copenhagen in 1993. The political criteria concern the existence of stable institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights and protection of minorities. According to the economic criteria these countries must be viable market economies. In this connection it is necessary to verify whether prices and trade have been liberalised and whether a binding legal system, including property rights, is in place. These countries must also be competitive, i.e. capable of withstanding competitive pressure and market forces within the Union. Finally, an institutional criterion concerns the adoption of the “acquis communautaire”. 
 4 BIS Review 33/2002 Moreover the accession criteria to the monetary union are well known: there are the famous Maastricht criteria relative to the moderation of inflation, the avoidance of excessive public finance deficits and the stability of the exchange rate. In many accession countries substantial progress has already been achieved in different fields and one can expect the participation of over ten new Member States to the European Union in the coming years and later on to the monetary union. However a lot remains to be done. *** I shall now move on to the last topic of my speech: the international role of the euro. In the past, for economic and political reasons, some countries have adopted an active stance with regard to the internationalisation of their own currency, by either fostering or hindering its external use. For its part, the Eurosystem has adopted a neutral stance. This means that it neither pursues the internationalisation of the euro as a policy goal, nor does it attempt to hamper its use by non residents. The international role of the euro is and will be determined by the choices of market participants in the context of increasing market liberalisation and integration. There is place for at least two international currencies: in that field too competition is beneficial. Given the weight of the euro area in the world economy and the legacy of the former national currencies of the area in financial markets, the euro has already become the second most widely used international currency behind the US dollar. As an anchor currency, the euro has largely inherited the role played by some of its legacy currencies (e.g. the German mark and the French franc). The euro plays a role as a peg in 55 countries outside the euro area, mainly in countries in the rest of Europe, Africa and the Middle East having close trade and historical links with the euro area countries. Arrangements adopted range from very close links to the euro to looser forms of anchoring. With regard to other functions, the euro’s international role has remained more limited. The US dollar remains the main reserve currency and the dominant pricing and quotation currency. The predominance of the dollar is attributable mainly to the combined and reinforcing effects of network externalities and economies of scale in the use of the leading international currency. Future developments in the international use of the euro are likely to be influenced by two main factors - size and risk. With regard to the size factor, a broad and liquid euro area capital market may lead to greater use of the euro through lower transaction costs. This may, in turn, facilitate the development of the euro as a vehicle currency for trade and commodity pricing. In addition, if international investors and issuers consider the euro to be a stable currency, they will hold more euro assets to minimise risks in their internationally diversified portfolios. Two processes of great significance for the world economic and political order have unfolded in the last decades: economic globalisation and European integration. They are partially linked. Yet they have different roots. One is the fruit of technological process and the free forces of the markets. The other has been motivated by political will and vision. Regional integration and international co-operation are surely appropriate means to promote more stability and economic growth in the different parts of the world and to contribute to humanise the process of globalisation. *** The euro banknotes show windows, gateways and bridges. These symbols of openness and communication will help both to promote a feeling of shared identity and to further strengthen exchanges among the nations of Europe. At the same time, these symbols are a reflection of the European attitude towards the rest of the world. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Glenn Stevens: International economic and financial issues - an RBA perspective Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian Banking & Finance News Magazine, Asia Australia Investment Conference & Expo, Sydney, 16 May 2002. *      *      * Let me begin by thanking Australian Banking & Finance News Magazine for the invitation to speak to you today. It is very pleasing to see such a distinguished group of speakers talking about the financial services industry in the region, an activity in which Australia, and especially Sydney, is very heavily involved. I have been asked to give a perspective on the international economy. This is something of a change of gear from most of the other presentations you have heard today, and as I set out to prepare these remarks I wondered what I might say that would retain your attention. On reflection, however, I think the current state of the world economy is of quite some interest for those who are involved in the financial services sector. Moreover, there are some long-run trends where the financial services sector’s role will be critical. I’d like to explore some of these issues briefly in the time available. I will not say much at all about the Australian economy, because the focus here is on the region and the world. Of course, the Bank’s views about the Australian economy were spelled out in detail in the Statement on Monetary Policy released last Friday. This week we have also had the Budget. That is surely enough to digest on Australia. What’s happening in the global economy at present? Let me begin by talking about where we are. The global economy, and especially the Asian region, has seen its share of fluctuations over the past few years. On the latest estimates it appears that, as measured by the IMF, the world economy expanded by about 2½ per cent in 2001. This was about half the pace recorded in 2000, which was an exceptionally strong year.  Growth in the major industrial countries (the G7) was even lower. Over the four quarters to the end of 2001, real GDP for this group of countries recorded almost no growth, which was the weakest result in any twelve-month period since the early-1980s global recession. This reflects, of course, the fact that the US economy experienced a recession during last year, and so did Japan and Germany. Yet this outcome was better than might have been thought likely. During the second half of 2001, people began to worry that the US in particular would encounter a more severe and protracted recession than has, in fact, turned out to be the case. We at the RBA became quite concerned about 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 this as well, not so much because of the terrorist attacks per se - whose direct short-term economic impact we thought likely to be relatively small - but simply because economic problems can accumulate towards the end of long expansions, which then intensify any subsequent downturn. Arguably, the US economy had acquired some such imbalances - with some asset values falling from very high levels, an unusually high level of business investment raising the question of whether there might have been over-investment, and questioning in some quarters about whether consumer spending had run too far ahead of income.   As things have turned out, fears of a sharp slump have not been realised. On the contrary, as of May 2002, it seems that the US has begun to recover from what now appears to have been the shallowest recession in recent history, at least as measured by the behaviour of GDP. Using the metric of unemployment, if it wasn’t the shallowest recession in recent times, it was close. This is a better outcome than most thought likely during the second half of last year, and is much better than the “downside risk” scenarios which were contemplated at that time. Reflecting these outcomes, forecasters stopped continually downgrading their assessments about the future earlier this year, and have become more confident over recent months that global economic activity will strengthen as 2002 progresses and that 2003 will be a pretty good year. They expect this to be led by an improving US, with Europe and East Asia turning up as well. Not much contribution to growth is expected from Japan in the short term, but at least performance there is not expected to worsen. There is, of course, a long way to go to see whether those expectations turn out to be correct, but they are not unreasonable expectations to hold in the present circumstances. The US turning point is clearly already behind us. It is pretty obvious, furthermore, that macroeconomic policies in the US are exerting a considerable expansionary impetus. In fact, monetary policies in almost all countries have been quite easy over the past year, which in itself increases the probability that growth will strengthen rather than fade away. In short, while it is not time to throw our hats in the air about the world economy, things look distinctly better than six months ago. Aspects of the US economy It is worth dwelling for a little while on the recent experiences of the US, and not just because it is the world’s largest national economy in terms of production of goods and services. The US economy is also a dominant force affecting global capital markets, and in the past five years it has been subject to some unusual influences which are still running their course. There has been a remarkable degree of investment in information technology and communication capacity in the US. This has been a feature of other countries too, but it was most pronounced in the US, raising the share of overall business investment in GDP to historically high levels in the late 1990s. Expectations about returns to this investment have, until quite recently at least, been very optimistic. For that reason, the US has been a powerful magnet for capital, and much of America’s 
 BIS Review 32/2002 3 additional investment has been funded with savings sourced in other countries. Associated with that has been a rising level of the US dollar, high levels of domestic asset prices and hence substantial gains in household wealth. That, in turn, helped to support a prolonged period of strength in household consumption spending. All of this contributed to a robust and lengthy period of economic expansion until early 2001. It is striking, moreover, that this long expansion followed a pretty mild recession in the early 1990s, which had itself followed a pretty good expansion in the 1980s. So, in fact, the US has had a good two decades by the standards of other advanced economies, with its performance outstripping those of Europe, or Japan, with the margin quite wide during the 1990s. This persistent out-performance by the US economy has made it the benchmark for most things economic and financial. The dominance of the US model of market capitalism seemed, by the end of the 1990s, to be unassailable. The role of the financial sector in all this, moreover, was pivotal. US equity and debt markets channeled vast quantities of capital into the corporate sector, and especially the high-tech sector, at quite low cost. In 2000, equity market issuance by US corporates was eight times the rate just three years earlier, at price-earnings ratios which were exceptionally high. This rapid increase in the supply of almost costless equity capital seems to have been driven by the conviction that returns from some of the new technologies would be enormous for their producers and, dispersed across the US economy, their users in terms of productivity. The financial services sector provided the machinery for all this to happen, itself using the improvements in information and communications technology to lower its costs. Up to a point, this was a model of what the financial sector is supposed to do: allocate capital, and by seeking out the highest returns, maximise the growth potential of the economy. Regrettably, as often happens in a prolonged boom, excesses emerged. Investors increasingly tended to become mesmerised by the apparent success of firms with business models whose worth, in more sober times, would have been regarded as dubious. In addition, practices developed in some areas which, in hindsight, are pretty hard to defend. Statements of corporate earnings, for example, turned out to be quite misleading in some celebrated instances, raising questions about the behaviour of management, and the role of auditors. Distorted incentive structures and accounting rules are seen as having contributed to this process, and to the fact that the advice given by analysts to their clients was, in a number of cases, less than impartial. And so on. I do not recount this to point fingers of blame at anyone in particular - it is, I fear, part of the human condition that such things happen near the end of most booms, even ones whose initial development is well based in fundamentals. The temptation to talk up prospects, and the desire on the part of investors to believe the talk, becomes almost irresistible. But these things do have real costs: capital is misallocated, or simply lost; as a result, someone’s savings are depleted, and the economy is the poorer for not having used those resources more wisely. Hence the importance of the financial sector’s role in the economy. What appears to be occurring now is that pressure is building in the US for reforms to the problem areas. Without wanting to speculate about the outcomes, most would agree that some reforms will help to re-build confidence, which is beneficial for the finance industry in the US and, by extension, globally. We should keep in mind, though, that that will not stop the tendency towards extremes of optimism and pessimism - that’s just human nature. All that said, any legacy from all this has not stopped a recovery in the US economy from beginning, even though it may well have some impact on the shape of it. Over recent months, people have switched from debating the possible size of the downturn to talking about the likely strength of the upswing. The spurt of US growth in the March quarter was largely driven by a rise in production in the goods-producing part of the economy, where previous levels of production had been sufficiently low that inventories of goods had been falling. The current level of production can be sustained, but for ongoing growth in production what is needed is expansion in demand and prospects for demand are regarded as, to use the current language of choice, “uncertain”. It is not that demand is falling - it is growing. The issue is to what extent, and how soon, it might accelerate. In this context, the behaviour of business investment has been nominated (by the Federal Reserve, for example) as crucial. After such a prolonged period of massive capital investment, there was a very sharp fall-off in capital spending by US businesses during 2001. It was this component of demand which was responsible for pushing the US into recession. The pace of decline looks like it began to abate in the early part of 2002, but it is not clear when investment spending might actually pick up again. 
 4 BIS Review 32/2002   Central to the outlook for investment will be the state of US corporate profits. The chart shows the best available measure of economic profits, from the US national accounts, measured as a share of US GDP. There was a period of strong profit growth from 1994 to 1997, but then the profit share tended to drift lower, before falling sharply during the first nine months of 2000. US corporations acted to reduce costs with alacrity over the past year. Profits then began to recover in the last quarter of 2001 and, based on preliminary information for the March quarter, that has probably continued. Equity analysts who make forecasts are expecting continued very strong growth in earnings over the coming year. Those inclined to have reservations about the robustness of the US recovery would wonder whether earnings growth expectations might be somewhat optimistic (and, for that matter, whether profits were actually as strong as commonly believed in the late phases of the expansion). That is not to argue that the US recovery, which is clearly under way, will peter out, just that it might be a fairly moderate affair compared with some other recoveries. Nonetheless, it is apparent that a pick-up of some degree is under way in profits, and even a moderate overall recovery after a fairly shallow recession is a good outcome. Furthermore, given that the US economy has surprised many by its resilience to date, there has to be the possibility that it will continue to do so. Aspects of the Asian region Turning to the Asian region, we have seen encouraging evidence that a number of countries have turned the corner on economic growth in the second half of 2001, after a period of contraction. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 5 For the region as a whole, the global downturn of 2001 was much less traumatic than the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and 1998 (though this is not true for every individual country). There are a number of reasons for this but one contributing factor, in my view, was that economic policies responded differently. Floating exchange rates were allowed to decline when under pressure, which helped to avoid any sense of crisis and associated contagion from one country to another. Monetary and fiscal policies were generally eased, something which, in many instances, was not possible during the initial phase of the earlier crisis. This meant that while the global slump did affect East Asia, the effects were ameliorated, rather than exacerbated, by the policy structures and responses.   Nonetheless, the recent experience may prompt some of the East Asian economies to think about the extent of their exposure to the high-technology sector. A notable feature of performance after the Asian crisis was the way in which the global boom in that sector drove growth for the exposed economies. And in the subsequent downturn, there seems to have been, not surprisingly, some association between the degree of technology exposure and the extent of the economic slowdown across countries (see chart). A question which these countries may face - probably they are already asking it of themselves - is whether the sorts of growth rates they want to sustain can be so reliant on a relatively concentrated, export-led approach in industries where the products are increasingly commoditised, or whether a more diversified approach, including more growth in domestic demand, would be better. The answer which emerges will no doubt be important for trade and capital flows in the region in the future. No less important than that set of issues, and in many respects quite related to it, is the potential long-run impact of the rapid growth and internationalisation of the Chinese economy. China’s economic growth, at least as recorded by the official data, is remarkable for its pace and consistency during the past decade. China is fast becoming quite large as both a source of, and a destination for, goods and services. It is the second largest regional economy after Japan, for example, by a large margin. It is also a very large destination for international capital, receiving a significant share of the world’s cross-border flows of direct investment in recent years (see table). Annual private direct capital flows to emerging markets US$ billion; 1999-2001 average Asia  56    of which China  38 Western hemisphere  38 “Transition” countries of Eastern Europe  23 Other  47 All emerging markets  164  
 6 BIS Review 32/2002 Some of my colleagues in the RBA point out that the associated build-up of manufacturing capacity in China must have something to do with the tendency for international prices for manufactured products to decline over recent years, even in periods where global growth was pretty strong. Equally, the rapid growth of income and wealth in China will boost demand from that country, and presents opportunities for foreign companies, not least in financial services and communications. So China is becoming increasingly important for the international, and especially the regional, economies. Other countries have an increasing interest in the success of the efforts of the Chinese authorities to achieve balanced growth, financial stability and efficient allocation of the capital resources which are flowing into China from abroad. The Japanese economy remains in a very difficult position. A decade ago, no-one would have predicted that Japan, an economy which recorded extraordinary growth for a generation, would struggle to grow by an average of 1½ per cent per year during the 1990s. The mix of factors at work is quite a potent one, and includes again the aftermath of a period in which the financial system (among other things) did not function as it should have. Asset prices have fallen massively since the heady peak reached in the “bubble economy” period a decade or so ago. Hence the value of collateral for bank loans has also collapsed, putting enormous strain on corporate borrowers and the financial system. The general level of prices is declining. Government finances are strained to the limit after a long sequence of fiscal packages. Monetary policy has lowered short-term interest rates to zero, and pushed an enormous quantity of cash into the system in an attempt to get some expansionary impetus to an economy where there has been no appetite for borrowing. In this respect, the debate about macroeconomics in Japan has seen the return of a number of themes prominent in the 1930s, and it is proving much more difficult to get Japan’s growth moving and its prices back to small positive rates of increase than most people would have expected. The US authorities have observed these problems and my belief is that their desire to avoid encountering such a scenario helps explain the aggressive nature of the monetary policy reaction of the Federal Reserve during 2001. The world economy would surely be better off were Japan to be able to make a decisive return to solid growth, but in the short term, forecasters seem to have little confidence that that will occur. Still, if Japan performs in future like the average of the past few years, a pick-up in growth in other countries will see better global conditions. Europe Europe’s economies slowed noticeably in 2001. Germany, in years past the strongest of the major European economies, has under-performed some others in recent years, such as France or the UK, and in 2001 saw a contraction in output in the second half of the year. In recent months, there have been some encouraging signs of a turn for the better, with surveys of business confidence generally looking firmer. Most people expect that trend to continue, though business people in Europe are presumably concerned about the current industrial unrest. The financial services sector and regional economies Other speakers today have no doubt talked at length about the growth prospects for the financial services sector around the region, so I will not say much on that, but a few remarks are possibly in order. As an economy develops, the wealth of the community increases, and an increasing proportion of it is held in the form of financial claims. Banking systems develop and, usually later, capital markets where companies and governments can tap savings directly. In the old western industrial economies, this process typically took quite a long time. In Asia, these developments have been accelerated, as part of the rapid industrialisation and development of these economies in the past generation. By now, in some cases the sizes of financial systems are getting pretty large. In countries such as Malaysia, China and Korea, some very crude calculations (shown below) suggest that financial assets are, relative to the size of the respective economies, getting to be as large as those in many high-income countries. In Singapore and Hong Kong, operating offshore financial centres, financial systems are also, of course, fairly large. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 7 Gross financial assets*  US$ billion % of GDP Japan  14,026  338 China  2,288  198 Hong Kong  910  562 Korea  842  199 India  533  111 Australia  790  221 Thailand  203  177 Singapore  257  291 Malaysia  296  338 Indonesia  105  72 Philippines  66  93 USA  28,451  279 *  Calculated as monetary assets, plus bonds and equities. Data for 2001-02. Sources: IMF; BIS; FIBV. In several countries, a good deal of repair work is being done on banking systems whose net worth was seriously eroded by the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998. While this has often been labelled as a currency crisis, at its heart it was also a banking crisis. Banks - and not just the ones on the ground in Asia - did not perform the function of allocating capital and managing risk as well as they should have. Lest this comment sound patronising, I hasten to add that we in Australia had an experience of a similar nature, though thankfully of a smaller order of magnitude, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Indeed, most countries have had this happen at some stage, and usually more than once. In the past ten to fifteen years, the experience in the old industrial countries has resulted in a strengthening of risk management in banks and in the supervisory process, something which is now being worked on in Asia. The authorities in a number of Asian countries are also seeking to promote capital market development so as to lessen their high degree of reliance on banking systems. It has been suggested that in times of stress, having more than one conduit for the provision of funding is a handy degree of diversification. Share markets have long been a feature of the Asian financial landscape and now bond markets are developing more quickly. China again features here, with a stock of bonds outstanding now second only to Japan’s in size in the region. The future seems likely to involve considerable further growth in the financial systems of many of the countries of Asia. I would think that Australian market participants are particularly well-placed to take part in the development of these markets, given the maturity and sophistication of our markets for sovereign and corporate debt, and derivatives markets which are quite active and reasonably large in world terms. Conclusion The world economy appears to be gradually improving, and we are seeing this reflected in better conditions for many of the Asian region’s economies. We are still unsure how things will pan out in the US, but the fact that we can debate the strength of an upswing, as opposed to the depth of recession, is a clear indication that things have been going better than expected. In this region, there remain some short-term problems, but there are also some quite important medium-term trends - of which I would nominate the rapid growth of China as probably the most important. The role of the financial services sector is key in accommodating these trends and in 
 8 BIS Review 32/2002 helping savers and investors alike to maximise their opportunities. I am sure you all have fascinating challenges ahead. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Community and regional banks - increasing complexity and risk-management needs Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the 106th Annual Convention of the North Carolina Bankers Association, White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia, 21 May 2002. *      *      * Good morning. I am pleased to join you today. Though I am not here to discuss financial and economic literacy, I would be remiss if I did not commend the North Carolina Bankers Association for sponsoring Camp Challenge, your summer camping and financial literacy program. A forum like this provides an opportunity to discuss the evolving nature of community and regional banking, the traditional strengths of such banks, which many of you represent, and the challenges you face, day to day, in managing them in an era of rapid change. More and more, it seems clear that future success will depend on your continuing to use some of banking’s traditional advantages as well as on your ensuring that key aspects of risk management effectively address the new complexities of your business. In short, community bankers must remain cognizant of the traditional means by which they have controlled and managed risks, continuing to do well what has been effective in the past, and invest both resources and effort in understanding and managing new features of the regional and community banking landscape. Role of regional and community banks in our economy It’s useful for a moment to consider the importance of community and regional banking in this country. Although a small number of the largest banks in the country control the majority of the nation’s deposits and banking assets, regional and community banks remain vital to our economy. Time and time again, we have seen the larger banking organizations concentrating resources in a given market segment, reducing their efforts in others, even sometimes pulling out of communities that don’t easily fit into their plans. As a result, in many parts of the country, regional and community banks are the dominant financial institutions actively serving the local trade area. But even where they are not the dominant players in a market, smaller banking organizations are traditionally very effective competitors. One enabling factor, to be sure, is that regional and community banks are quick to embrace the benefits brought about by technological change. However, a truly key competitive advantage, which smaller banks continually seek to leverage, is their personal contact with their customers. Successful community bankers affirmatively seek to be seen as neighbors and supporters of their depositors and borrowers. It is in large measure through such contact and personal knowledge of customers and community that successful bankers, small or large, maintain a significant presence in the market and demonstrate commitment to their communities. Indeed, time after time we have seen that community banks have gained market share when large banks entered their market by acquisition; anecdotal evidence indicates that the gains have gone to existing community bankers and de novo entrants, both faring well in competition with their large out-of-market rival. Moreover, regional and community banks are bankers to many small businesses. More than 99 percent of all employers in this country are classified as “small businesses.” Small businesses as a group employ fully one-half of all private-sector workers and provide the lion’s share of net new jobs in the economy. With small businesses as primary commercial customers, regional and community banks have long been, and will continue to be, an element of strength in our economy. Consequently, the safe and sound operation of regional and community banks must be ensured. At the same time, these banking organizations must be encouraged to be innovative in meeting the needs of their customers. The competitive advantages of smaller institutions are not without accompanying benefits for the management of traditional risks in the banking business. The management of credit risk, historically the most significant exposure of banks, is the obvious case in point. Personal knowledge of customers--their character, opportunities, competence, resources, and capacity for repayment--not only is the competitive “leg up” in establishing a sound and mutually profitable credit relationship, it also helps a successful community banker in setting the baseline for serving the customer (and the bank) by gauging the appropriate extent and the terms of that relationship. Misfortune will occur 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 sometimes, and business conditions will periodically weaken, as those events have occurred routinely in the past. But no one in the community--customer or bank--is served by the extension of credit that would be judged unsound in the light of the customer’s capacity to perform when that credit was granted. Increasing complexity of regional and community banks  Traditionally, smaller banking organizations have been regarded as subject primarily to credit risk, although interest, funding, and operational risks have also been major areas of concern. Increasingly, however, liquidity and market risks have grown in significance as regional and community banks have gained greater access to less traditional sources of funds. Competing alternatives to core deposits in the 1990s led many regional and community banks, even the smallest institutions, to rely increasingly on intermediary sources, such as deposit brokers, the Internet, and other automated service providers, to raise funding to support asset growth and meet loan demand. Deposits gathered from such sources, even those not explicitly “brokered,” can be less stable than traditional core deposits, since the depositors typically lack any other customer relationship with the institution and could shift funds to a different bank or investment in search of a higher return. In addition, many regional and community banks today rely more heavily than in the past on wholesale borrowings from financial intermediaries, including other commercial banks and securities firms, to supply portions of their funding mix. Indeed, regional and community banks have relied increasingly on the liability side of the balance sheet for funds management. Most observers, for example, have been unaware of how successful community and regional bankers have been at directly raising uninsured deposits in their local markets when loan demands have exceeded core deposit growth. In the latter half of the past decade, the uninsured deposits at these banks grew more rapidly than those at larger banks. To be sure, large time deposits cost more than insured deposits, but community banks have maintained their profits and returns on equity. The creativity that community banks have shown in supplementing their core deposits--deposits that have grown less rapidly as attractive substitutes became available for their customers--has once again surprised those that believe smaller banks can no longer compete in modern financial markets. Such ingenuity in funding supplements their creativity in maintaining and increasing their loan base in the competition with their larger rivals. This ingenuity also increases the need for closer management of funding at the same time that regional and community banks’ investment portfolios have become more complex, with holdings of instruments that are in some cases longer-dated or have more options, than traditional bank investments. Even in terms of the capital base, the widespread use of trust-preferred securities has introduced additional complexity to regional and community bank holding company balance sheets. The expanded use and acceptance of asset-backed securities have also enabled regional and community banks to take advantage of what we, only a few years ago, considered, to be “large bank” opportunities to originate and sell large volumes of mortgages and other consumer loans, either directly to purchasing intermediaries or indirectly through a securitization vehicle. To be sure, the sale and securitization of assets give rise to varying types and degrees of risk to the originating institution. Typically the risk of credit losses from the underlying assets is divided variously among the parties to the transaction, including investors, guarantors, and the originating institution itself. In many cases, the originating institution retains significant credit exposure through the credit enhancements that it provides. These enhancements constitute contractual obligations to protect investors who have purchased the securities generated by the transaction from incurring credit losses. These contractual recourse exposures, as you well know, are addressed in the agencies’ risk-based capital standards, including an interagency rule implemented in January of this year that establishes a concentration limit and imposes a dollar-for-dollar capital charge on certain residual interests. But it may be less well known that banks that engage in securitization activities need to be wary of taking any action, such as providing post-sale support to a securitization in excess of any contractual obligation, that would suggest it has implicit recourse exposure to losses beyond the contractually stated amount. Banking organizations that are deemed to be providing implicit recourse are required, in general terms, to treat the entire outstanding amount of assets sold as though it remained on the books for risk-based capital purposes. Finally, numerous third-party vendors and service providers today offer regional and community banks more and more products and financial services--delivered through traditional channels as well as the 
 BIS Review 32/2002 3 Internet--so that banks, in turn, can meet the increasingly sophisticated needs and demands of their customers. As a consequence, many smaller banking organizations face additional complexities in their business and new or heightened exposures attendant to the on- or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities, and revenues and operating costs, associated with these arrangements. New funding sources and activities are critical in carrying on the traditional community banking business and in profitably serving customers. But the Federal Reserve has supervisory responsibilities, and I would be remiss if I did not note that the development of these new sources is a mixed blessing. New funding sources, while enabling community banks to meet loan demand, challenge the institutions to manage the potential volatility and price sensitivity of these funds. The increased complexity of investment portfolios and off-balance-sheet activity similarly subjects institutions to increased liquidity and market risk. The issuance of trust preferred stock through pooled securities has enhanced the access of smaller banking organizations to capital, though it leverages common equity of the parent company and, in some cases, puts pressure on insured subsidiaries to support the increased cash-flow requirements of these instruments. Reliance on large time deposits requires that offering rates remain competitive with the market, creating interest-rate risk that must be managed. Securitization activity, as noted above, can provide a hugely significant alternative funding for, even to some smaller banking organizations, but it entails certain recourse obligations and exposures and may involve additional liquidity, market, and reputational risks. The use of third-party vendors and service providers, while expanding the menu of fee-based products and services that can be offered by regional and community banks, presents numerous challenges, particularly in terms of operational risks. Risk management Banking is a highly leveraged and often relatively low-margin business. The loss from a single significant credit relationship or a material breakdown in controls can offset the gain on many other transactions. Losses stemming from a concentration of sources--related borrowers or activities--can threaten the viability of the bank. Bank managers as well as supervisors need to remember, therefore, that the benefits of the new developments mentioned above--access to funding alternatives, potentially higher-margin investments and activities--are counterbalanced in part by higher risks associated with increasing complexity. Successful risk management today implies some additional cost and investment to ensure that systems for measuring, monitoring, and controlling risk are fully capable of addressing the new complexity of regional and community banks. A key advantage of smaller banking organizations in managing credit risk--close knowledge of their customers’ prospects and capacity to service debt--is less relevant in addressing many of the new risks they face. Many of these new risks are market-driven or entail complexities with which the bank has little experience. Indeed, I urge community and regional bankers to recognize that the same market realities that created the need to adopt new funding sources and activities also require that these banks invest in appropriate new risk-management techniques. I realize that these often look like pure cost increases, but I assure you that they go hand in hand with the new activities and will ensure the continued ability of community and regional banks to successfully adapt to changing markets. Indeed, the traditional characteristics of many small and even regional institutions--including local ownership and control by interested and involved individuals, a limited span of relatively simple operations, and effective management--still can be relied on to ensure that new risks are properly identified and effectively managed. The need for traditional prudential policies will not be obviated by new risk-management techniques. Federal Reserve examiners will continue to look at four key components of risk-management systems in evaluating the management of supervised institutions. These components are: • the effective identification, monitoring, and reporting of risks, • the sufficiency of policies and limits for controlling those risks, • the adequacy of internal controls ensuring adherence to approved limits, and • active oversight of these processes by directors and senior managers. These four elements, taken together, provide a widely applicable framework for assessing risk management, though the detailed components of risk management can vary considerably among institutions. For example, when a bank’s exposures to credit, market, and operations risk are routine, 
 4 BIS Review 32/2002 well understood, and limited in their dimensions, fairly simple risk-management processes can suffice. More complex assets, liabilities, and business activities, however, will demand more elaborate processes and internal controls. And concentrated exposures of any kind, whether to credit or to funding risks, need to be identified and made subject to well-considered and reasonable limits. Whatever the complexity and design of the processes, however, the four core elements are interdependent. As a consequence, each of the four components must be comprehensively addressed for the entire system to be effective. Effective risk-management processes are also a strong deterrent to fraud. Irrespective of the level of risk inherent in bank activities, we must remember the fact that banks, particularly those with less robust risk-management and internal controls, are highly susceptible to customer or insider fraud and to mismanagement or, occasionally, insider abuse. More often than not, it is the failure or absence of basic internal controls and risk-management processes that permits such losses, or fails to bring them to light before serious damage results. A sound and comprehensive internal control system is based on the core principle of separation of duties and naturally includes a fully effective audit program. But--importantly--it also encompasses ongoing procedures for the independent reconcilement and certification of bank records to ensure that basic controls are functioning effectively. Conclusion In closing, I emphasize the need for risk-management processes in community and regional banks to advance sufficiently to meet the risk-management challenges of the banks’ current environment. Though often those challenges might be met by adapting sound practices long pursued in the organization, for an increasing number of banks, new systems and procedures may be needed to keep pace with the more-complex risks associated with an evolving or a growing business. As bankers, bank supervisors, and policymakers, we should strive to work together to ensure that those risk-management processes are sufficiently robust and that they have been tested to ensure their effectiveness. A final word may be in order after so much discussion of the need to adopt more-sophisticated risk management at community banks. You have no doubt heard about the changes in capital processes being discussed in Basel by the supervisors of the major industrial countries. These changes are being proposed mainly for the large, complex, internationally active banking organizations of the world, whose operations and business needs have developed beyond the intended reach of the current capital requirements. However, the capital and regulatory structures being developed in Basel will not affect the rules under which most, if not all, of the banks in this room will operate. Indeed, for most banks in this country, Basel II will have virtually no effect. I want to thank the North Carolina Bankers’ Association for the opportunity to speak to you today. 
 BIS Review 32/2002 1 Nout Wellink: Monetary unions in Europe and the US - just how different are they? Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Institut International d’Etudes Bancaires, Amsterdam, 17 May 2002. *      *      * Introduction First of all, thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. Now that we have a monetary union, there has been discussion about the role of national central banks in the euro area, including some questions about their ongoing relevance. Clearly you regard us as relevant or you would not have invited me to speak! It will come as no surprise that I also think that national central banks are relevant, and will continue to be so. Today I would like to briefly compare monetary policy in the euro area and in the US. Of course there are differences between the two areas, but there are also important similarities. This comparison can help us understand the reasons behind our differences and may provide some useful insights into the institutional implications for euro area monetary policy in the future. I will structure my remarks around three themes: the policy goals of the two monetary unions, their organisation, and the monetary policy decision-making process in each system. Goals and philosophy  Let me begin by comparing the goals or mandates of the Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve System. Here in Europe the primary focus of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. In contrast, the Fed has multiple objectives for monetary policy. Their goals are to achieve maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. An important explanation for our different mandates can be found by looking at our economic histories. In Europe, monetary union is the most recent step in an ongoing process of political and economic integration. The hyperinflation experienced in the first half of last century in some European countries, in particular in Germany, has played an important role in ensuring that European monetary policy is focussed on price stability. Our experiences in Europe contrast with those in the US. A key US event that commentators frequently refer to is the Great Depression. Monetary policy is often blamed for adding to the severity of the Great Depression in the US. I think that is a reason why employment and interest rate objectives remain in the Fed’s mandate, and why policy makers there react so quickly to signs of slowing economic growth. Under normal circumstances, policy makers on both sides of the Atlantic are likely to take similar decisions. However, around the time that the economic cycle is changing and growth is slowing rapidly, you might see different decisions being taken in Frankfurt and in Washington - reflecting our different mandates. In addition to the influence of history, the Eurosystem’s mandate reflects academic insights from the last 20 years or so. This research tends to support the view that monetary policy should only focus on price stability. Other central banks around the world that have reviewed their mandates in recent years have tended to move towards having price stability as their sole objective. Similar proposals have also been made regarding the Fed. If the Fed’s mandate were to change in the future, I expect it to also be in the direction of a more explicit focus on price stability. Organisation of the two monetary unions A second area in which our different histories have played a role is in the way in which the Eurosystem and Fed are organised. While the Fed was created ‘from scratch’ by the Federal government for a single country, the Eurosystem was established when twelve sovereign states voluntarily gave up their monetary autonomy. This is reflected in the fact that the Eurosystem is some ways more decentralised than the Fed. Greater decentralisation is consistent with the EU-wide principle of subsidiarity, under which decisions are taken at the country or regional level where possible. This greater degree of decentralisation is apparent in areas such as monetary policy decision-making and operation, banking supervision and statistics. However, the Fed can also be considered decentralised in other areas. In 
 2 BIS Review 32/2002 fact, when you exclude staff working on tasks unrelated to the monetary union, both systems have roughly the same number of employees. Clearly, this does not tell us much about the potential for efficiency gains, except that it is around the same in both systems. The European monetary union is made up of sovereign countries. That means that it is not politically or publicly acceptable to carry out all central banking tasks at the ECB. Our preference for subsidiarity also implies that there are limits to potential efficiency gains within the system. The pace of further centralisation is linked to the speed of further political integration in Europe. As long as there is no federal European state, I expect that providing an independent view on national and euro area economic developments, within the context of area wide monetary policy, will be a key task for the Dutch central bank. Tasks related to financial stability and banking supervision will also remain part of our core business. In order to carry out these tasks effectively, we have to remain closely connected to the formation of monetary policy. We also have an important role in explaining policy decisions to our citizens. Given the language, cultural and historical differences between countries, we should not underestimate the importance or difficulty of this task and the role of national central banks in carrying it out. These factors help explain the inclusion of national central bank governors in the ECB Governing Council, which brings me to my third theme. Decision-making in the two monetary unions  The final area of comparison between the Fed and the Eurosystem I want to make concerns the process of monetary policy decision making. Both areas include representation from regions as well as from the centre. But, it is clear that in this area the US also has a more centralised system than the euro area. Washington-based board members form a majority on the committee that makes US monetary policy decisions. In contrast, the ECB Executive Board members form a minority in the ECB Governing Council. In both monetary unions, all decision makers, whether regional or not, are expected to make their decisions on the basis of prospects for the whole monetary union. This area wide approach is strengthened in Europe by ensuring that Council members are prohibited from taking instructions in their decision making. At the same time, national or European bodies are not allowed to put pressure on Council members. These provisions reinforce the fact that we are in the ECB Council on a personal basis, and not to represent national or other interests. In a few years, the size of the euro area will probably increase significantly. As you will all be aware, European history also lies behind our desire for enlargement. Most accession countries have announced that they want to join the euro area shortly after entry into the EU. Whether they should join the euro area so quickly is a point we could debate another day. Regardless of our views on that issue, the fact remains that we have to be prepared for a substantial enlargement of the Eurosystem in the next five to ten years. Consistent with the provisions in the Nice Treaty, the ECB Council is preparing its proposals on changes to voting procedures to accommodate enlargement. The reason for considering a change is to guard against the perception that our decision making could become inefficient, and that it could potentially be dominated by governors from small countries. In making changes, we must find a solution that retains the supranational character of decision making and does not renationalise monetary policy. This implies that the governors of all the national central banks should continue to be treated equally. At the same time, the Council must represent the Eurosystem as a whole, and be seen to do so - implying that it must not become too centralised. A solution that meets these criteria could involve some form of rotating membership for the governors of the national central banks, so as to limit the number of voting governors. This could be a variation on the Fed system, albeit more decentralised. There, all of the regional presidents participate in the discussions, but not all of them have a vote at any point in time. Finding a solution that meets the criteria I have set out is especially important, given that changes here could set a precedent for other areas of supranational European co-operation Concluding remarks Let me briefly conclude. In my view, differences in mandates between the Fed and the Eurosystem are important in understanding our respective decisions, and this is often forgotten. In addition, comparing the two systems sheds some light on where each institution may head in the future. Regarding our 
 BIS Review 32/2002 3 mandates, it seems to me that any changes in this area are likely to be in the direction of the Fed moving closer to where we and other central banks are, rather than the reverse. For organisation and decision making, the future is more difficult to predict. Any changes here need to take account of the political realities of monetary union between sovereign countries. Euro area monetary policy is supranational, so decision making has to be based on the euro area as a whole, and not individual countries. At the same time, the euro area consists of independent countries. That implies that there is a limit to how far the Eurosystem can centralise in advance of any political union. This reality has to be clearly reflected in our decision-making body. I wish you success with the rest of your conference and an enjoyable stay here in Amsterdam. 
 BIS Review 31/2002 1 Tony Latter: Who or what determines monetary policy in Hong Kong? Speech by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, to the Hong Kong seminar on Financial Services in Asia, organised by Lovells and the Pacific Rim Advisory Council, 13 May 2002. *      *      * You may think this a rather naive question, to which the answer is obvious, but my experience is otherwise. Who is responsible? Let's start with the "who" question. I have encountered people who variously believe the answer to be the Beijing government; the People's Bank of China; the US Federal Reserve Board; some combination of HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank and the Bank of China (which are the note-issuing banks in Hong Kong); the Hong Kong Legislative Council; the Hong Kong Government; or the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. Article 110 of the Basic Law – often referred to as Hong Kong's constitution – includes the statement that "The Government of Hong Kong shall, on its own, formulate monetary and fiscal policies". This makes it clear that neither the Mainland government nor the PBoC has any powers in relation to our monetary policy, and that the policy responsibility lies firmly with Hong Kong's own government. Since China resumed sovereignty over Hong Kong some five years ago, there has been absolutely no erosion of this principle.1 As regards the Federal Reserve, although it is true to say that under the present regime chosen for our monetary policy – namely a currency board with the US dollar as anchor currency – the Fed's monetary policy has a major and direct influence on monetary conditions in Hong Kong, it was certainly not the Fed which determined that Hong Kong should operate a monetary policy of this nature. It was Hong Kong's choice, and we do not require any permission from Washington or New York to continue or discontinue it. With regard to the Legislative Council, while members of LegCo take a keen interest in monetary policy and related issues, and although the HKMA maintains a dialogue with LegCo, more particularly with its Financial Affairs Panel, over matters of common interest, LegCo has no locus under existing laws to determine monetary policy. With regard to the three note-issuing banks, that particular status confers no ability to affect monetary policy. The banks issue notes in response to the public's wishes to exchange deposits into currency, and are required to pay over backing to the Exchange Fund in such manner as the Financial Secretary specifies - which has since 1983 been the equivalent value in US dollars calculated at the fixed rate of 7.80. Within this framework the volume of note issuance itself is neutral in terms of monetary policy. There was a time back in history when it could have been claimed with some justification that HSBC, as it is now known, which then served as clearing bank to the banking system, wielded considerable influence over monetary conditions, but that capability was dismantled progressively, by the requirement introduced in 1988 for HSBC to hold a countervailing balance with the Exchange Fund, by the creation of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority in 1993, and by HKMA's subsequent assumption, in 1996, via the Exchange Fund, of the role of settlement institution for the local payments system. Government and Monetary Authority So, having dismissed the possible involvement of a number of other players, we are left with the clear conclusion that it is in essence the Hong Kong government which determines monetary policy. More specifically, the authority rests in the first instance with the Financial Secretary, since the Exchange Fund Ordinance places him in control of the Exchange Fund, which in effect provides the resources for                                                       1  For a discussion, in lighter vein, of the relationship between HKMA and other central banks, including PBoC, see the Viewpoint article "Central Bank Cooperation", 8 November 2001, at www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/viewpt. 
 2 BIS Review 31/2002 the conduct of monetary policy. He is, however, obliged to consult the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee in the exercise of his control of the Exchange Fund. The Exchange Fund Ordinance also provides for the Financial Secretary to appoint a person as the Monetary Authority, to assist him in the performance of these and certain other functions. Moreover, the Financial Secretary delegates various of his duties under the Exchange Fund Ordinance to the Monetary Authority. In fact, the Monetary Authority is a public officer and therefore formally just a single person, but the Ordinance provides for other persons to be engaged to assist him in the discharge of his duties. This gives rise to the institution which is known as the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. The upshot of all this is that it is the Financial Secretary who ultimately determines monetary policy, albeit having taken advice from the Advisory Committee. And it is the Monetary Authority who carries out monetary policy on a day-to-day basis and in accordance with any delegations to him. This does not mean, however, that the Monetary Authority is divorced from the formulation of policy – rather the opposite in practice, since the Monetary Authority has a major influence on the determination of policy through close liaison with the Financial Secretary and membership of the Advisory Committee. Although the Hong Kong arrangement, and in particular the status of our Monetary Authority, is unusual internationally and may possibly be unique when compared to the more typical set-up of a central bank established as a distinct corporate entity, the process of monetary policy may not in practice be greatly different from that in other jurisdictions – with the broad framework being set by the government and with the central bank executing the policy in a transparent and accountable fashion. However, we do not have such a precisely defined framework of autonomy for the central bank as exists in some other jurisdictions, which is sometimes regarded as a necessary formal safeguard to monetary stability. The distinction may be less important under our firmly rule-based currency board system than it might be in other circumstances. Legal parameters Let's turn now to the "what" question. Although, as noted already, the Basic Law clearly states that the Hong Kong government shall determine its own monetary policy, it also sets some very important parameters within which that freedom can be exercised. Thus:- "The Hong Kong dollar, as the legal tender in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, shall continue to circulate." (Article 111) "No foreign exchange control policies shall be applied in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. The Hong Kong dollar shall be freely convertible. …….The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall safeguard the free flow of capital within, into and out of the Region." (Article 112) "The Exchange Fund of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall be managed and controlled by the government of the Region, primarily for regulating the value of the Hong Kong dollar." (Article 113) "The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall follow the principle of keeping the expenditure within the limits of revenues in drawing up its budget, and strive to achieve a fiscal balance, avoid deficits and keep the budget commensurate with the growth rate of its gross domestic product." (Article 107) These stipulations confirm the continuance of the Hong Kong dollar as an independent currency; they confirm that the Exchange Fund is available to regulate the exchange rate; they rule out the use of exchange controls; and they provide some comfort that deficit fiscal financing should not attain a scale that would pose a serious threat to monetary stability. Choice of regime But within these parameters the exact monetary arrangements are not prescribed. We have chosen to operate a currency board with a fixed rate against the US dollar. I have recently written and spoken at 
 BIS Review 31/2002 3 some length on the rationale behind this choice and do not intend to repeat all of that today.2 But let me just reiterate one of my principal contentions – namely that monetary policy, which includes exchange rate policy, cannot determine an economy's competitiveness outside the relatively short term. Competitiveness is determined by the intrinsic efficiency of the economy, which is in turn the result of investment, productivity, structural evolution, and so on; these may in turn be amenable to influence by government policy in various fields, but the role of monetary policy is to provide a stable monetary environment within which those longer-term forces can operate most propitiously, and not itself to attempt short-term fine-tuning. There is one further aspect of this debate which I should like to address, since it seems to be the focus of increasing attention. It is the issue of what should or should not be done with the Hong Kong dollar, were the renminbi to move more flexibly against the US dollar, and, more particularly, whether we should consider pegging the Hong Kong dollar to the renminbi. Adjustment of competitiveness Prices in Hong Kong are observed to be flexible in both directions in response to market forces. One of these forces is the influence of competing prices from the Mainland; our research indicates that there is a gradual process of convergence at work (which includes rises in prices across the border as well as falls in Hong Kong), although this may be weaker than some observers claim and certainly does not mean that prices will or should eventually equalise completely.3 Moreover, prices of tradables in Hong Kong are found to be particularly adept at adjusting to movements in the effective exchange rate. In other words, if our prices become misaligned against foreign prices because of some movement in exchange rates (such as by the US dollar moving against other major currencies and pulling the Hong Kong dollar with it), Hong Kong prices are quick to adjust in order to restore competitive equilibrium. At the same time, it appears that prices in the Mainland are, by international standards, also quite flexible. Two conclusions can be drawn from these observations. One is that prices between Hong Kong and the Mainland are well able to adjust relative to one another without any assistance from the exchange rate. The other is that, if the exchange rate were to move around and create disequilibria between prices, domestic prices would adjust to offset that disequilibrating tendency. In other words, it seems unlikely that shifts in relative price competitiveness would be greatly different under conditions of exchange rate variability than without it – there would simply be a different mix between shifts in relative domestic prices and the exchange rate effect. It is evident anyway that the Hong Kong economy complements the Mainland's more than it competes with it. Hong Kong benefits from a buoyant Mainland economy. If this buoyancy is judged to be best sustained by some increased flexibility in the renminbi exchange rate – and I make no judgement here as to whether that would or would not be the case – then Hong Kong would be likely to benefit. What I have suggested so far is that the exchange rate between the two currencies is probably not something which we need worry greatly about in terms of economic impact via competitiveness and trade. Thus Hong Kong ought not to need to take any particular defensive or offsetting action if the renminbi were to move more widely against the US dollar. There is, however, an important qualification to that conclusion. If financial markets believe differently, and react to those beliefs, we may see disturbances in markets as a result of actual or rumoured developments in the Mainland's exchange rate policy. We have indeed already witnessed some such behaviour from time to time when reports have circulated about imminent adjustments to the renminbi. Yet, as on those occasions, so on future ones I would expect our markets to cope satisfactorily with such disturbances – essentially through the currency board's adjustment mechanism whether to upward or downward pressures on the HK dollar exchange rate – and economic fundamentals ultimately to prevail.                                                       2  See "Why blame the peg?", available on the HKMA website (www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/speeches) and forthcoming in HKMA Quarterly Bulletin, May 2002. 3 "Price convergence between Hong Kong and the Mainland", by Jiming Ha; to be available shortly in the HKMA research memorandum series. 
 4 BIS Review 31/2002 Fixing to the renminbi? However, the conclusion that we should not be too agitated about the HK dollar-renminbi exchange rate begs a further question. If, indeed, the bilateral exchange rate arrangement does not of itself matter much in the long-term determination of price competitiveness, why not anyway tie your currency in some way to that of your closest neighbour or major trading partner, as a matter of convenience, in the expectation of savings in transaction costs and of other synergies which would benefit both sides, independently of any arguments about price competitiveness? There are some fairly compelling arguments in favour of such an arrangement. The elimination of currency exposure and transaction costs would doubtless be welcomed. Prima facie one would expect resultant gains in the generation of mutually beneficial trade. One may recall that this was one of the principal factors justifying the introduction of the euro. For Hong Kong, however, both the United States and Mainland China are major trading partners, so there would, in this context, be offsetting effects from merely switching the peg from one currency to the other. On the other hand, there are some significant examples of economies which retain a currency independent of that of their main trading partner without obvious disadvantage. Take Canada and Mexico for example. The United States is a considerably more important trading partner to both Canada and Mexico than is China to Hong Kong, and the financial linkages are probably stronger too, but the Canadian dollar and Mexican peso remain separate from the US dollar, and the Canadian and Mexican economies do not appear to be disadvantaged. Other pertinent examples might be the United Kingdom's dependence on the euro area, Ireland's dependence on the United Kingdom, Switzerland's links with Germany, and so on.4 Moreover, many of these other currency pairs have exhibited considerable fluctuations when compared with the stability of the cross rate between the renminbi and the Hong Kong dollar in recent years, indicating that exchange rate variability may not be an obstacle to the continuing expansion of mutually beneficial economic ties. On this evidence there would be no obvious advantage in a closer link between the Hong Kong dollar and renminbi. In our particular case, there is a further crucial consideration: the renminbi is not convertible. There would be little logic in trying formally to fix a fully convertible currency against a non-convertible one. One might argue that the constancy of the HK dollar against the renminbi for the past several years amounts to de facto fixing, but it does at least allow for variation at such time as might be justified – for example, in the light of major or sudden structural shifts such as WTO entry or eventual convertibility. It would not anyway be possible to operate Hong Kong's currency board system by reference to a non-convertible currency, since the essence of the system, namely continuous convertibility between the HK dollar and the anchor currency, would be denied. I conclude that an exchange cross rate between Hong Kong and the Mainland which varies, or has the potential to vary, is not a problem for us, and this seems set to remain the case for the foreseeable future. The corollary to this is that there would be no advantage in attempting to hitch the HK dollar to the renminbi in some formal or permanent fashion. Other options? There are of course other alternatives which might be explored. For example, in a perfect world, if we were to set ourselves the narrow objective of sustaining our price competitiveness index at a particular level and we possessed a nicely calibrated model of the economy, and if we then applied suitable methodology, we could derive some formula for the optimal exchange rate, which would doubtless be different from that determined by the present regime, and we could then devise an operational strategy to deliver that exchange rate path. But this sort of desktop solution could be a nightmare in reality. Even if the empirical basis of the formula was entirely reliable (a wholly unrealistic assumption), imagine the possible consequences for interest rates or foreign reserves, and the practical problems in terms of operability, comprehensibility, transparency, credibility, financial market confidence, and so on. Such problems could be particularly acute, and the risks of such a strategy therefore correspondingly high, in such an open economy and open financial market-place as Hong Kong. I have deliberately exaggerated in order to make the point. A monetary policy framework must be viewed in its entirety, and needs to be clear and enduring. Its success should be judged over the                                                       4  Based on average values of trade in goods over the past five years, Hong Kong had a dependence on Mainland China of some 40% (including re-exports on a value-added basis only); Canada on the USA of 76%; Mexico on the USA of 81%; the UK on the 12 countries of the euro area of 64%; Ireland on the UK of 27%; and Switzerland on Germany of 28%. 
 BIS Review 31/2002 5 longer term, while we must accept that what delivers long-term stability may not continuously deliver results to everyone's liking in the short term. In the HKMA we do pay attention to the whole spectrum of possible alternatives. The fact that we support the retention of our current framework of the US dollar peg represents a conscious decision; it does not mean that we are deaf to the counter-arguments or reluctant to debate them. Conclusion In summary, monetary policy in Hong Kong is set by the Hong Kong government within a broad framework provided by the Basic Law, and with the fundamental objective of providing long-term monetary stability. In our judgement it is unlikely that this aim would be assisted by altering the current arrangements, whether by pinning our currency to that of our neighbour or by any other devices. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 1 Hermann Remsperger: Economic outlook and economic policy challenges for Germany Guest lecture by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), Oslo, 23 September 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen Yesterday, we elected a new parliament in Germany. As you are aware, economic matters played a key role in the election campaign. I would like to take up some of these matters today in Oslo. Under the heading “Economic outlook and economic policy challenges for Germany”, I would like, first, to talk to you about the reforms that are needed on the labour market as well as in tax and social policy. Second, I shall also ask the question of whether we need a new policy mix. And, finally, I shall look at the eastward enlargement of the European Union as a major economic policy challenge. My simple proposition is that Germany’s economic outlook depends foremost on coping with the existing economic policy challenges. I am arguing in favour of domestic reforms in Germany, for careful handling of EU and EMU enlargement and for maintaining the fiscal policy rules in the policy mix of European Economic and Monetary Union. Not least, these rules have to be applied in such a way that “budgetary exuberance” is avoided in an upswing. I am therefore less concerned with short-term cyclical movements than with medium and long-term economic trends in Germany. For this reason, I shall start by looking back and, in doing so, have to state that Germany’s economic development over the past decade has often tended to be disappointing by international standards. I.  A look back In saying that, there was indeed some cause for optimism at the start of the 1990s: German unification, the opening-up of the east European markets, progress in European integration and, later, the introduction of the new currency provided a wealth of opportunities for growth. However, at least in some cases, things did not quite work out as had been hoped. Since the reunification boom petered out, Germany has been part of the group of countries with weak growth. While the GDP of the present EMU countries has risen by a total of 15% since 1995, the corresponding figure for Germany is no more than 10%. In line with this, the annual average rate of growth in Germany, at a good 1½%, has been lagging ¾ percentage point behind. Comparing Germany with the euro area as a whole excluding Germany, the German shortfall in growth increases to just over 1 percentage point. In 2001, taken on its own, the figure was as much as 1½ percentage points. Now, there are some commentators here and there who ascribe this performance to increasing globalisation. However, this argument does not hold up under closer examination. Following a period of export weakness in the early 1990s, the German economy achieved extremely good results in foreign trade between 1994 and 2001. Given an overall moderate growth in GDP during the period mentioned of 14½%, real exports increased by 79½% and real imports by 67½%. One of the factors contributing to the positive development in exports since the mid-1990s was improved price competitiveness of the German business sector. This meant that earlier adverse developments were largely reversed. In the early 1990s, by contrast, price competitiveness had been severely affected by large wage increases, not least as a result of bringing pay in eastern Germany more closely in line with west German rates and also due to the sharp appreciation of the D-Mark. Although the German economy has become more dependent on other countries, it has to be said that most of the structural problems in Germany cannot be blamed on developments in the global economy. They are mainly home-made. Among other things, cyclical influences and special factors have contributed to Germany’s relatively poor performance in the euro area. Above all, it should be remembered that, already in the run-up to Stage Three of European monetary union, interest rates had fallen sharply in a number of EU countries with previously fairly high short and long-term rates of interest. For example, interest rates 
 2 BIS Review 55/2002 for long-term government bonds in Italy and Spain, even in 1995, were 5 to 6 percentage points higher than the rates for German Federal Bonds. Besides, improved fundamentals, market expectations of an early participation in monetary union are likely to have played an important role in the interest rate convergence process. As the home of the former anchor currency in the ERM, Germany did not benefit directly from this process of interest rate convergence. Another cause of relatively weak growth in Germany to be mentioned is, of course, the crisis in the construction industry, especially in eastern Germany. In this sector, the capacity that was built up immediately after reunification exceeded the longer-term ability of the real estate market to absorb such capacity. Reduced construction activity depressed German economic growth. Without the decline in investment in construction since the mid-1990s, the shortfall in German growth compared with the euro area as a whole would therefore not have been so substantial. By contrast, construction activity in other European countries remained an important pillar of economic growth. Finally, consideration also has to be given to the fact that living standards in the monetary union are still very disparate. Since the poorer countries are supposed to catch up with the EMU average, they have to go on growing more strongly than those countries which have already achieved a high level of income. A comparatively low level of growth in an already advanced country should therefore not have too much importance attached to it. II. Labour market problems One very important - if not the most important - reason for the inadequate pace of economic growth in Germany is the continuing heavy burden of taxes and social security contributions as well as strict regulations in parts of the economy. However, these reasons cannot explain the differentials in growth among the core countries of European Union, which have similarly serious deficiencies in terms of reform. Rather, they are a major cause of the shortfall in growth vis-à-vis the United States. Above all, there is too little labour market flexibility in Germany. Also, wage rate policy was indeed characterised by restraint in the second half of the 1990s, but its overall stance was, at best, neutral. Furthermore, differentiating pay in terms of skills, sectors and regions is not enough. Wage policy did not make a major contribution to the creation of new jobs. In periods of a cyclical downswing, the rise in unemployment in Germany was far sharper than the fall during periods when there was an upturn. For instance, the number of people out of work in western Germany rose from its cyclical low point between 1991 and 1997 by some 1.3 million to around 2.5 million. By 2001, the number of unemployed had been reduced by no more than just over half a million. An additional factor to contribute to the high level of persistent unemployment is that, as firms see it, the skills to work evidently decrease the longer unemployment lasts. For non-working members of the labour force, the incentives to take up employment were limited by the high-level marginal burden imposed by taxes and other public levies. Most types of household in Germany have a marginal burden of taxes and levies of 50% or more. In other words, from every additional euro that is earned, around 50 cents are deducted. Moreover, social benefits which are at a high level by international standards act as a reservation wage. In Germany, it is difficult, especially for low-skilled persons, to find a suitable job. The “wedge” between gross and net wages also led to the emergence of a considerable black economy. Furthermore, the skills profile of those seeking work often fails to match that of the jobs on offer. Unemployment would thus remain high even if the number of vacancies corresponded to the number of people looking for work. The German labour market is characterised by a high level of mismatch unemployment. The proposals of the Hartz Commission, which was set up by the previous Federal Government, and the embryonic reform of the labour exchanges, which is already under way, are an attempt to tackle that situation and to increase the efficiency of the job placement process. The most pressing tasks of labour market policy from my point of view can be split into three categories: first, measures to increase the supply of labour; second, proposals on strengthening the demand for labour and, third, changes in the wage-formation process. One of the things to be examined with regard to increasing the labour supply is whether, say, the period of time for drawing unemployment benefits does not lead to people remaining in unemployment longer than is absolutely necessary. As I have mentioned, in empirical terms, it is evident from the perspective of the enterprises that the skills of the unemployed rapidly lose their value the longer unemployment continues. For that reason, purportedly generous arrangements may even become 
 BIS Review 55/2002 3 “poverty traps” for the unemployed. Combining social assistance and unemployment assistance also has to be considered. Neither of these types of state benefit is an insurance benefit. Rather, they are granted according to specific need. They should therefore be merged. Many experts agree that the demand for labour in Germany also suffers from the very complex legal arrangements relating to work contracts. Enterprises are so cautious in recruiting labour because it is so difficult to make redundancies. If there is to be a sustained decline in unemployment, some elements of the wage-formation process have to be subjected to more scrutiny. Collective pay agreements should set only general framework conditions in order to take greater account of the individual situation in which firms find themselves. We should now admittedly not overlook the fact that initial cautious steps have already been taken towards making the German labour market more flexible. The strict principle of regionally agreed pay deals has already been relaxed somewhat by opt-out and opt-in arrangements. Furthermore, the labour market has been made more adaptable with the extension of part-time work. Finally, with the help of Germany’s training system it has been possible to keep youth unemployment at a comparatively low level by European standards. According to Eurostat figures, the unemployment rate among under-25-year-olds amounted most recently to 9.3%, compared with 16.4% in the euro area as a whole. III. Tax and social policies All things considered, the underlying conditions for the German economy have also been improved by the tax reform that was adopted two years ago. For incorporated enterprises, corporation tax was lowered from 40% for retained profits (and 30% for distributed profits) to 25%. For non-corporations, the previous burden imposed by trade tax has largely been removed. Furthermore, their situation is also being eased by the fact that the income tax scale is to be lowered in stages until 2005. The tax reform makes restructuring in the corporate sector easier because profits from sales of corporations’ participating interests are no longer subject to taxation. However, the tax depreciation facilities for spending on fixed assets have been made worse. There has been progress in Germany in the field of old-age pension provisions. The pension reform, which was adopted last year, pursues two objectives simultaneously. First, payments under the state pay-as-you-go scheme are being cut back, and, second, private provision is being strengthened. Pension increases over the coming years will remain below the level of increases in wages and salaries. This means that, in the long term, the increase in the contribution rate will be around 1½ percentage points lower than would otherwise have been the case. The pension reform will mainly benefit the younger generations. They will gain from the lower burden of contributions. They will have greater scope for making their own provision. For those who are older, however, the cutbacks in payments will weigh more heavily. The promotion of private old-age pension provisions nevertheless entails considerable burdens for the public sector budgets. Furthermore, what is known as the “Riester pension” has been constricted by a set of fairly tight regulations. The stock of capital that has been saved up may be paid out, for example, only in regular and life-long instalments. In contrast to this, at company level, a flexible instrument has been created in the form of the pension fund. Not only does this allow largely free decisions on investment, it also makes defined contributions possible for the first time. Precisely because of the associated fiscal strains, there is hardly likely to be a significant increase in national savings as a result of this reform. However, Germany as a location for investment will probably play a greater role in future in the increasingly important market for pension products. All things considered, there has indeed been some economic policy progress in Germany. Unfortunately, it has been moving forward at no more than a snail’s pace. There is still much left to be done. Further reforms of the labour market and the social security system are a matter of urgency in view of the increasingly unfavourable age structure of the population in Germany. The ratio of people aged over 60 to the group of 15 to 59-year-olds was just under 40% in 2000, but this ratio might increase to around 80% by 2050. The higher age ratio will have an adverse impact on the social security system and, given the existing entitlement to benefits, will call for higher contribution rates. 
 4 BIS Review 55/2002 It is by no means certain whether the recent reform of the pension system will be sufficient to cope with these challenges. An additional factor is that demographic developments will place a strain on other parts of the social security system, such as the health insurance institutions and nursing care schemes. The welfare state system will have to be adapted to cope with these challenges if problems for future economic growth are to be avoided. As a general guideline, it may be said that a closer match in social security contributions along with a stronger personal contribution by the individuals concerned will improve economic efficiency and thus open up opportunities for growth. IV.  EU enlargement One of the reasons why I believe that the reforms inside Germany are so important is the fact the we are also facing challenges from outside. The planned enlargement of the European Union is certainly one to be mentioned. The negotiations which are currently being conducted with 12 countries, situated mainly in central and eastern Europe, are now far enough advanced for the first round of enlargement to take place as early as the middle of this decade. Especially from Germany’s point of view, setting the right course for the integration of the new member states is of considerable importance. Both Germany’s geographical location and its close economic ties with its neighbours to the east mean that Germany is affected by EU enlargement more than other countries in the Union. Despite considerable progress in terms of macroeconomic stabilisation and in the implementation of market economy reforms, the erstwhile socialist countries in transition, in particular, still display significant structural differences from the current EU member states. One of these differences is that the accession candidates are in a process of catching-up economically. They generally have inflation rates which are higher than those in the more mature and more slowly growing EU member states. This is an outcome, first, of differences in productivity gains across countries and sectors - known as the Balassa-Samuelson effect - and, second, of shifts in demand. The resulting real appreciation does not pose an obstacle to EU enlargement in terms of progress in the liberalisation of foreign trade and its ensuing welfare gains for the EU as a whole. Nevertheless, if the EU accession candidates participate in monetary union before the existing structural disparities are eliminated, the single monetary policy in the euro area will not meet the needs of all the member states. A hasty enlargement of EMU would therefore harbour stability risks for the euro area and might generate tensions among the participating countries. Accession to the EU, however, does not imply immediate full membership of EMU. Instead, the EU accession countries will participate initially as “member states with a derogation” in the Third Stage of Economic and Monetary Union. The precondition for full EMU membership is that the accession countries achieve a high degree of sustainable economic convergence. The convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty are the yardstick for this. These criteria set unambiguously verifiable requirements in terms of price stability, long-term interest rate levels, the government fiscal position, and participation in the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System, ERM II. In addition, pursuant to Article 121 of the EU Treaty, the examination of the sustainability of achieved convergence “should also take account of ... the results of the integration of markets, the situation and development of the balances of payment on current account and ... the development of unit labour costs and other price indices”. The convergence criteria are designed to guard against inflationary tendencies within the monetary union and to prevent tensions arising from structural divergences in inflation. The task of stabilisation does make stringent demands on the monetary policy of the accession countries, but price stability may be regarded as a sine qua non of sustainable growth. For that reason, the accession countries - not least in their own interests - should not enter EMU until the process of catching up economically has already made significant headway and the adjustment function of the exchange rate can be more easily dispensed with. Such a step-by-step enlargement process would also be in Germany’s interest, since it would enhance the opportunities arising from an enlargement of the Union and limit the associated risks, especially the monetary policy risks. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 5 V. Policy mix After discussing domestic reforms in Germany and my comments on EU enlargement, I would now like to deal with a third economic policy issue: the policy mix in the European Monetary Union. The present division of tasks is based on the insight that each area of policy should concentrate on its relative strengths. The monetary policy of the European Central Bank is geared to price stability, for example. In line with this perspective, wage policy is responsible for achieving a high level of employment and budgetary policy should ensure an efficient supply of public goods and fairness of income distribution but, in doing so, not impair incentives to work, to save or to invest. This - as I see it - generally tried and tested allocation of responsibilities is often the subject of criticism, however. Calls are made to allocate macroeconomic responsibilities differently, accompanied by the demand that monetary, fiscal and wage policymakers should coordinate their operations instead of focusing on their own strengths. According to this “new division of labour”, wage policy would have the task of keeping down inflation. This would be conditional on wage and salary earners and their trade unions forgoing pay rises precisely in periods when the economy is booming - at times when they could easily push through such increases. It is probable that there would then be a wage-price spiral, which also happens to be the historical experience in Germany and in other countries. There was no success in the early 1970s, for example, in restricting pay rises, even though the trade unions were tied into a corporatist alliance called “concerted action”. Frequently, the call is made that monetary policy should not be geared - or not be primarily geared - to price stability, but attempt to stimulate economic activity. That way of seeing things, however, overrates monetary policy’s influence on developments in the real economy. Changes in the monetary policy stance act with varying time-lags on investors and consumers. Furthermore, it is often difficult to diagnose the cyclical situation properly. Finally, monetary policy action would have to be administered in the correct cyclical dosage. In the age of globalisation with open borders and integrated capital markets, that would be very difficult to do. In short, there is little to suggest that the monetary policymakers’ strengths lie in the fine-tuning of the business cycle. Monetary policy is far better suited to the long-term safeguarding of price stability. In considering the appropriate policy mix in the monetary union, the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact mean that the role of fiscal policy undoubtedly occupies centre stage. In the field of budgetary policy, several countries are having considerable difficulties in fulfilling their existing European commitments. These provide for a 3% limit for the general government deficit ratio and, at the same time, a budgetary position that is in surplus or close to balance over the entire business cycle. Since the deficit in Germany, at 2.8% of GDP, already came quite close to the 3% ceiling last year - mainly on account of the tax reform - the risk that it might now exceed that limit in the current year has become greater. Furthermore, there are some doubts as to whether German fiscal policy will be able to deliver on the self-commitment - reaffirmed in spring - to achieve a budget position close to balance by 2004 unless there are further cuts in public payments. Given the budgetary problems that also exist in other EMU countries and in view of the weak cyclical situation, calls are increasingly being made for a relaxation of the fiscal policy rules in European Monetary Union. The main point of criticism about the existing provisions of the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact is their alleged inadequate cyclical flexibility. It is claimed, for example, that these rules force budgetary policy to act in a procyclical manner counter to the requirements of stabilising the economy. Such criticism does not, however, take due account of the rules of the European Stability and Growth Pact. It is, in fact, precisely the task of this pact to ensure that government budgets can “breath” during the business cycle without breaching the deficit limit of the Maastricht Treaty. Such flexibility is to be achieved through a budgetary position which is at least close to balance over the medium term - in other words, when seen over the cycle as a whole. If that condition is met, the automatic stabilisers can develop their full effect within the 3% margin. The fact that there is, even so, only a narrow “safety margin” from the limit in some countries should not be blamed on the fiscal policy rules. It is rather the case that there has been a failure over the past few years to bring about a structurally balanced budget. “Softening” the fiscal policy rules would undermine the credibility of the Maastricht Treaty and the European Stability and Growth Pact. The associated capital market effects would also have adverse implications for economic growth. The existing fiscal rules are necessary in order to counter the even 
 6 BIS Review 55/2002 greater latent incentives to borrow in a monetary union and to prevent monetary policy from being caught up in the slipstream of unsound government finance. The fiscal policy rules strengthen the functional independence of the European Central Bank and thus facilitate a stability-oriented monetary policy in the single currency area. Watering down those rules might give rise to conflict between fiscal policy and monetary policy. Therefore, German fiscal policymakers, too, must not shirk their responsibility to make further consolidation efforts so as to achieve a budgetary position close to balance in the medium term. If one wishes to achieve a balanced budget over the business cycle - in other words, if the intended benchmark for the structural deficit is zero - in order to assess the fiscal position of a single year it is analytically necessary to adjust the budget balance for cyclical effects. This does not require any addition to, or modification of, the Stability and Growth Pact. It is, in fact, a matter of implementing its rules in the stability programmes in a consistent manner. And that naturally also implies not under any circumstance calling into question the nominal maximum limit for the deficit of 3%. As I see it - and I would like to conclude on this point - more attention has to be paid in future to budgetary policy transgressions not being allowed in times when economic conditions are favourable. During an upswing there exists a risk of “budgetary exuberance” - in other words, a lower deficit being interpreted as progress in terms of consolidation, even though it is due solely to an improvement in the cyclical situation. Particularly in periods when the economy is improving, finance ministers who take consolidation seriously have to look not only at the unadjusted budgets. They have to look at the adjusted budgets too. At the same time one should not make the mistake to see the problem with the adherence to the stability and growth pact under business cycle aspects only. In Germany these problems are also a symptom of an insufficient basic dynamism in the economy. We do not need to change the stability and growth pact. What we need are more reforms which lead to higher employment and growth. The newly elected German Parliament should approach these reforms with courage. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 1 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Iceland in a global setting Keynote speech by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Euromoney conference on the Nordic Financial Markets and Investment Opportunities, Stockholm, 13 September 2002. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to participate in this ambitious conference on the Nordic Financial Markets and Investment Opportunities. I will in my remarks today mainly focus on aspects relating to Iceland. Size separates Iceland from the other Nordic Countries, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Other factors separate the Nordic Countries as well. Finland is a member of the European Union and the Economic and Monetary Union, EMU, as well. Denmark and Sweden are members of the European Union but are outside the EMU. Norway and Iceland are outside the European Union but maintain very close ties to it, particularly through the European Economic Area Agreement. That agreement makes Norway and Iceland a part of the single market of the European Union, which entails among other things that they are obliged to maintain financial market legislation, which fully conforms to that of the European Union. The Nordic Countries have different monetary regimes. Finland is a member of the EMU, Denmark is linked to the EMU through an ERM II agreement entailing that the Danish krona is very closely tied to the euro. Sweden, Norway and Iceland have chosen an inflation-targeting regime as their monetary framework (Iceland in March 2001). Thus, price stability is the main objective of monetary policy in all of these countries and has in fact become the recognized single target for monetary policy in numerous countries. The reason for this emphasis on price stability is that it creates the best conditions for balanced growth and increased welfare. The Icelandic financial market has developed very rapidly over the last ten to fifteen years. It is a small market by definition, but has nevertheless the same institutional set-up as larger industrial countries. Aside from the Central Bank, these include commercial banks, savings banks, securities companies, various investment funds, insurance companies, large and important pension funds and last but not least a stock exchange - linked with the other Nordic exchanges - where the shares of 60 to 70 Icelandic companies are listed and traded on regular basis. Supervision of the activities of all of these institutions is in the hands of a unified financial supervisory authority that has broadly the same legal powers and follows the same methods and standards as supervisory agencies in other European countries. Important rationalisation has taken place in the Icelandic financial system. Until a few years ago, two of the main commercial banks were fully government owned and so were a host of so-called investment credit funds. The funds were unified in a single institution, which was subsequently privatised. The Government has also reduced its stake in the commercial banks over the most recent years and intends to have them largely or fully privatised by the end of the current electoral term next year. The privatisation process creates opportunities for continued rationalisation in the financial system creating ample opportunities in the period ahead, including closer ties with foreign financial institutions. It is tempting to put recent economic developments in Iceland into the context of developments in some of the other Nordic Countries about a decade ago. Liberalisation of the Icelandic financial markets was more or less completed in the mid 1990´s when the last restrictions on the movement of capital between Iceland and other countries were removed. Our liberalisation came a few years later than in the other Nordic Countries. You will recall that in some of the other Nordic Countries, liberalisation was followed by a boom period in the economy, partly or largely fuelled by a rapid growth of credit and in some cases large fiscal deficits. At the same time, these countries were pursuing a fixed exchange rate policy vis-a-vis the ECU. Developments in the domestic economies were such that the fixed exchange rate policy was gradually undermined, the rapid credit growth of banks resulted in weakening loan portfolios when asset prices fell, the exchange rate fixety gave way to floating, the currencies depreciated and inflation rose. The current account of the balance of payments also deteriorated. 
 2 BIS Review 55/2002 Developments in Iceland from the latter half of 1990´s until the present time resemble in many ways the experience of some of the other Nordic Countries a decade earlier but differ also in important respects. Soon after liberalisation, domestic demand picked up, fuelled by rapidly rising credit in the wake of intensified competition in the financial sector and a sharp increase in credit availability. At that time, Iceland was pursuing a fixed exchange rate policy but not as rigidly fixed as the other Nordic Countries had done a decade earlier. The expansion in the economy at the end of last decade led to a very rapid rise in the current account deficit, climaxing in year 2000. Through the effects of a tightening monetary policy, the exchange rate of the króna gradually appreciated. In the spring of the year 2000, expectations in the market shifted for a variety of reasons, one of them being concerns about the current account deficit. Subsequently the króna began to depreciate and continued to do so more or less uninterrupted but on the whole in an orderly fashion over a period of a year and a half until the end of November last year. By that time, it had fallen by about a third against other currencies. This large depreciation is not without precedent in other countries. In that respect, I might mention, since we are in Stockholm and since I have drawn some parallel with the other Nordic Countries, that the Swedish krona fell in broadly similar proportions over a period of time after the exchange rate was floated in late 1992. The depreciation of the Icelandic króna fed into domestic prices and inflation picked up significantly. Late last year, the exchange rate had clearly overshot sharply on the downside. Then expectations turned around again. It was clear, among other things, that the economy was cooling down and that the current account deficit was shrinking fast. Optimism also arose once prospects improved that the inflation spike, which followed the exchange rate depreciation, would subside quickly again. The króna began to appreciate and has by now regained an important part of its earlier value. Inflation has subsided sharply again this year and expectations are that the inflation target of 2½ percent will be achieved before the end of the year. The large current account deficit recorded in the year 2000 also began to shrink rapidly, it fell by more than half in the year 2001 and the outlook is for approximate balance this year. These developments demonstrate the resilience and adaptability of the Icelandic economy; moving from a very large current account deficit to virtual balance in the course of two years and reducing inflation from bordering on a two-digit rate to 2½ percent within one year. Although developments in Iceland showed many of the same characteristics as those in some of the other Nordic Countries during the post-liberalisation rapid expansion, such as credit expansion, current account deficit, exchange rate depreciation and so on, Iceland escaped the difficulties suffered by banking systems in some of the other countries. Icelandic bank credit grew very rapidly in the late 1990’s and into the year 2000 and a sizable portion of the credit expansion was financed with credit from abroad. The capital adequacy ratios of banks fell for a while but nevertheless remained comfortably above the minimum required and internationally recognised levels. The year 2001 also turned out to be quite favourable for the banks, a development which continued by and large into the current year. Consequently, the capital position of the banks has improved and all the major banking institutions have relatively strong capital adequacy ratios at present. Loan losses have increased, as was to be expected in the wake of the credit expansion, but nowhere on the scale experienced in some of the other Nordic Countries a decade ago and very much less than they did during the downturn in the Icelandic economy around and after 1990. The conclusion to be drawn is, therefore, that the Icelandic banking system weathered the relatively turbulent post-liberalization boom period of 2000 and 2001 pretty well and is well poised to meet new challenges, including continued rationalisation and intensified competition from foreign banking institutions. In the most recent decades, the Icelandic economy has also seen structural shifts. The importance of fisheries as a generator of foreign exchange revenue has diminished in relative terms - to less than a half of the total - while the importance of other sectors has risen, such as manufacturing industry, information technology and tourism. In these developments, Iceland is among other things drawing benefits from globalisation to strengthen the foundations of the economy. Foreign direct investment regulations are liberal with the exception that such investment is not permitted in the fishing sector. Foreign direct investment is most noticeable in power intensive industry, such as the production of aluminium, which is based on Iceland’s abundance of untapped renewable energy resources. Recent changes in corporate taxation in Iceland, lowering corporate taxes to among the lowest to be found, serve to attract foreign business to Iceland and encourage Icelandic companies with international operations to favour Iceland as the base of their operations. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 3 Direct investment by Icelandic companies abroad has risen rapidly in recent years and in a variety of areas, such as fisheries and fish processing, pharmaceuticals, retail commerce and financial services. These developments also benefit the Icelandic economy in the long run as they integrate Iceland further into the global economy, allow Iceland to draw more easily on the experience of others and bring in dividends. Reflective of this development is the fact that Icelandic banks have begun to grant credit to borrowers in other countries on a measurable scale, particularly in areas where they have a competitive advantage in analysing the soundness of the prospective borrowers. The title of my presentation is Iceland in a Global Setting. What I have briefly described is a country that has followed the path of many countries, including the Nordic Countries, in liberalising its economy, both internally and externally. This has exposed the economy to market forces and competition from abroad and a monetary regime bent on securing a low rate of inflation was chosen. Iceland is, as mentioned, not a member of the European Union and membership is not on the agenda of the present Government. Iceland operates its own small currency on the margins of the US dollar and the euro. These facts place firm requirements on economic policy while at the same time offering Iceland to reap important benefits from globalisation. This is indeed born out by developments over the last few years that were years of rapid growth of GDP and years which tested the ability of economic policy makers to steer the economy in an environment of liberalised markets and capital movements. More generally, the lesson to be drawn from our experience is that countries only stand to gain from full participation in the global economy. Aside from subjecting the domestic economy to competition from abroad, it disciplines economic policymaking. The market is a strict master and serves painful punishment for mistakes or ill-thought initiatives. 
 BIS Review 54/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: The proposed check clearing for the 21st Century Act Speech by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit of the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, 25 September 2002. *      *      * I would like to thank the subcommittee for inviting me to discuss H.R. 5414, the proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act. This bill, which is similar to a proposal the Board sent to Congress late last year, removes existing legal barriers to the use of new technology in check processing and holds the promise of a more efficient check collection system. The Board commends Representatives Ferguson and Ford for introducing this bill.  Technological Advances in Check Processing Check processing is far more efficient than it once was. Less than fifty years ago, clerks hand sorted millions of checks each day. In the 1960s, the banking industry began to use mechanical high-speed check processing equipment to read and sort checks, which had been redesigned for automated processing. Today, banks, thrifts, and credit unions, which I will collectively refer to as banks, process the more than 40 billion checks that consumers, businesses, and the government write each year.  Legal impediments, however, have prevented the banking industry from fully using these new electronic technologies, such as digital imaging, to improve check processing efficiency and provide improved services to customers. This is because existing law requires that the original paper checks be presented for payment unless the banks involved agree otherwise. We can see how this requirement constrains technological adoption by following a check through the collection process. After a bank's customer deposits a check with his or her bank, the bank typically transports the check from the branch or ATM where it was deposited to a central operations center. The check is then usually sent to one or more intermediaries -- such as a Federal Reserve Bank or a correspondent bank -- or a clearinghouse for collection before it is ultimately delivered to the bank on which it is drawn for payment. During each step of this process, the check must be physically shipped to its destination by air or ground transportation. Of course, banks can agree to accept checks electronically, but the large number of banks in the United States makes it infeasible for any one bank to obtain such agreements from all other banks or even a large proportion of them. Therefore, legal changes are needed to facilitate the use of technologies that could improve check processing efficiency, which should lead to substantial reductions in transportation and other check processing costs. H.R. 5414 makes such changes.  Proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act The proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act solves a longstanding dilemma -- how to foster check truncation early in the check collection or return process without mandating that banks accept checks in electronic form. The term check truncation refers to any of a number of arrangements in which the original paper checks are removed from the collection or return process. Currently, under typical check truncation arrangements, electronic information about a truncated check is presented to the bank on which it is drawn rather than the original paper check. The act facilitates check truncation by creating a new negotiable instrument called a substitute check, which would permit banks to truncate the original checks, to process the check information electronically, and to deliver substitute checks to banks that want to continue receiving paper checks.  A substitute check, which would be the legal equivalent of the original check, would include all the information contained on the original check -- that is, an image of the front and back of the original check as well as the machine-readable numbers that appear on the bottom of the check. Under this act, while a bank could no longer demand to receive the original check, it could still demand to receive a paper check. Banks would likely receive a mix of original checks and substitute checks. Because substitute checks could be processed just like original checks, a bank would not need to invest in any new technology or otherwise change its current check processing operations.  
 2 BIS Review 54/2002 Banks could use the new authority provided in this legislation in a number of different ways. For example, a bank would no longer need to send couriers every afternoon to each of its branches and ATMs to pick up checks that customers have deposited. Instead, digital images of checks could be transmitted electronically from those locations to the bank's operations center for processing. Not only would this be quicker and more efficient, but it could permit banks to establish branches or ATMs in more remote locations and to provide later deposit cut-off hours to their customers.  Moreover, the act would give a bank the flexibility to transmit checks electronically over long distances, and create substitute checks at locations near their ultimate destination, for example to the bank on which the checks are drawn, substantially reducing the time and cost associated with physical transportation. By enabling the banking industry to reduce its reliance on physical transportation, the proposed act would also reduce the risk that checks may be lost or delayed in transit. Today, bad weather routinely delays check shipments and there have been occasions when checks have been destroyed in plane crashes. The banking industry's extensive reliance on air transportation was underscored in the aftermath of the September 11 tragedy, when air transportation came to a standstill and the flow of checks slowed dramatically. During the week of the attacks, the Federal Reserve Banks' daily check float, which is normally a few hundred million dollars, ballooned to more than $47 billion. Had the proposed legislation been in effect at that time and had banks been using a robust electronic infrastructure for check collection, banks would have been able to collect many more checks by transmitting electronic check information across the country and presenting substitute checks to paying banks.  Finally, many banks hope to use the authority provided by this legislation to streamline the processing of checks that they must return unpaid. Today, after a bank processes its incoming checks and determines which checks to return, it has to reprocess all of the incoming checks to pull out the less than one percent of checks that are to be returned unpaid. Many banks have indicated to us that they would find it more cost effective to use their image systems to generate substitute checks for return rather than to outsort the returned checks from all the checks presented.  The act might also better position banks to provide new and improved services to their customers. For example, banks might allow some corporate customers to transmit their deposits electronically. Because the act will likely encourage greater investments in image technology, banks might also be able to expand their customers' access to enhanced account information and check images through the Internet. In addition, banks might be able to resolve customer inquiries more easily and quickly than today by accessing check images.  The act is designed to provide banks with additional flexibility in processing checks by requiring banks to accept substitute checks in place of original checks. The act does not, however, require banks to accept checks in electronic form nor does it require banks to use the new authority granted by the act to create substitute checks. This market-based approach permits each bank to decide whether to make use of this new authority. This decision will be based on the bank's internal business case analysis, which will assess the costs and benefits of using the new authority.  We believe the market changes arising from these revisions to check law will result in substantial cost savings. Clearly, because substitute checks can be processed in the same manner as original checks, recipients of substitute checks should incur little or no additional processing costs. Recipients, however, will incur some additional costs relating to the act's customer protection and disclosure requirements. It is difficult, however, to estimate the overall cost savings. Different banks will take different approaches toward using the new authority granted by the act. Each bank's use of the new authority will depend on its technology infrastructure and strategy, its physical infrastructure, and its customer and business profiles. Thus, the magnitude of the cost savings, which will depend on the rate at which banks begin using the new authority, is difficult to determine.  We recognize that the most challenging policy issue in the proposed law, and the aspect of this legislation that has generated the most spirited discussion, relates to customer protections. Current check law protects customers if there is an unauthorized debit to their accounts. A customer already has a claim against its bank for an unauthorized charge, and the bank may be liable for interest on the amount of the unauthorized charge and consequential damages for the wrongful dishonor of any subsequently presented checks.1 The proposed legislation applies these existing protections to substitute checks. There are, however, differing views as to whether additional customer protections are necessary for substitute checks and, if so, how extensive those protections should be. We believe                                                       1  U.C.C. §4-401(a) and §4-402 
 BIS Review 54/2002 3 that, in determining the form these protections should take, the associated benefits and costs will need to be carefully balanced.  Federal Reserve Board Authority to Regulate the Payments System We understand that there is some debate regarding whether the Federal Reserve Board already has sufficient statutory authority to adopt by regulation the concepts embodied in this proposed legislation. Although Congress has given the Board authority to regulate the check system and other aspects of the payments system, we do not believe that this authority is sufficiently broad to enable us to adopt regulations that accomplish the purposes of the act.  In the 1987 Expedited Funds Availability Act (EFAA), Congress gave the Board broad authority to regulate "any aspect of the payment system, including the receipt, payment, collection, or clearing of checks; and any related function of the payment system with respect to checks" in order to carry out the EFAA.2 The EFAA also provides that the Board's regulations supersede any inconsistent provision in state law, including the Uniform Commercial Code.3 In the EFAA, Congress directed the Board to consider requiring, by regulation, a number of measures to improve the check system.4 Many of these measures focused on improving the process by which unpaid checks are returned to the bank of first deposit. Other suggested measures related to check truncation.  The Board has used its authority under the EFAA to make several important improvements to the check system.5 The Board's ability to adopt some rules to improve the check system is hampered, however, by the EFAA's limitation on the Board's ability to impose or allocate the risks of loss or liability related to payment transactions.6 The EFAA authorizes the Board to impose on or allocate among only depository institutions the risks of loss or liability, and only up to the amount of the check giving rise to the loss or liability, except where there is bad faith. These limitations have prevented the Board from adopting by regulation some important innovations that could substantially improve the efficiency of the check system. For example, the Board cannot adopt by regulation the changes called for in the proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, because the bill affects the rights of the end users of checks (including businesses and consumers), in particular their right to receive their original checks, and allocates liability for not only the amount of the check but also interest, litigation costs, and in some cases consequential damages.  Conclusion In conclusion, although an increasing number of payments are being made electronically, it is clear that checks will continue to play an important role in the nation's payments system for the foreseeable future. We believe that, over the long run, the concepts embodied in the proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act will spur the use of new technologies to improve the efficiency of the nation's check collection system and provide better services to bank customers. Because the act should result in substantial cost savings, it would also be desirable to begin obtaining these savings in the near future, ideally before the bill's proposed 2006 effective date.  There are some technical matters in the current version of the bill that could be improved or clarified, and we look forward to working with the Committee as it further considers this legislation. Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer your questions.                                                        2  12 U.S.C. §4008(c) 3  12 U.S.C. §4007(b) 4  12 U.S.C. §4008(b) 5  The Board has adopted rules that substantially revise the process by which banks return unpaid checks, which has expedited the receipt of those checks by depositary banks and ensured prompt notice of large-dollar returned checks. In addition, the Board has adopted rules that enhance the legal abilities of private-sector banks to obtain same-day final settlement for checks presented by a specified time, which has spurred competition in the provision of check clearing services, improved efficiency, and sped the collection of many checks. 6  Section 611(f) of the EFAA states "The Board is authorized to impose on or allocate among depository institutions the risks of loss and liability in connection with any aspect of the payment system, including the receipt, payment, collection, or clearing of checks, and any related function of the payment system with respect to checks. Liability under this subsection shall not exceed the amount of the check giving rise to the loss or liability, and, where there is bad faith, other damages, if any, suffered as a proximate consequence of any act or omission giving rise to the loss or liability." [12 U.S.C. §4010(f)] 
 BIS Review 54/2002 1 Ernst Welteke: Financial market disturbances - a challenge for monetary policy Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at Market News International, London, 24 September 2002. *      *      * I. Playing the financial markets has been anything but an easy thing to do recently. During the late 1990s, many investors enthusiastically embraced the idea of a “new era” of systematically increasing returns. Now that the flaws in that concept have become evident, many of them have had to abandon a significant portion of their wealth. Confidence in financial markets has been severely shaken.  Monetary policymakers are concerned when financial markets are as shaky as they are at present. Monetary policy has a vital interest in the stability of the financial markets. The Maastricht Treaty assigns co-responsibility for the stability of the financial system to the euro-area central banks. The measure of responsibility assigned to them reflects the use that monetary policy makes of financial markets for the transmission of monetary policy. I would like to outline a number of major fields of responsibility in which financial market disturbances affect central banks. II. Let me first put the turbulence in the financial markets into perspective. The turmoil has been felt most keenly in the equity markets. Since peaking in March 2000, major stock indices have been hit hard. The Dow Jones EuroStoxx 50 and the German Dax 30 have both roughly halved since reaching their all-time highs. The US Standard and Poor’s 500 Index has shed about 40 per cent, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite index has shrunk to almost one-quarter of its peak value.  Remember, in an environment of healthy corporate profits, soaring asset prices took price-earnings ratios up to hitherto unknown heights. Equity markets looked overvalued, but the “New Economy” paradigm enticed investors into not regarding them as overvalued. Experience shows that a bubble can scarcely be identified with certainty until it bursts.  The price-earnings ratios for major stock indices peaked at about twice their historical averages. Individual stocks, especially from the bubble-plagued TMT sector, experienced much higher price-earnings ratios. For the EuroStoxx, the S&P 500 and the German Dax 30, the ratios are now close to their historical averages. The bubble has been deflated to a certain extent.  Booming fixed income markets mirror the faltering stock markets. As investors became more risk-averse, they switched from equities to bonds. The upshot of this is that government bond yields are close to their historical lows.  Volatility in equity and bond markets has itself been volatile. We have witnessed a number of pronounced spikes in volatility. In early August and again in early September, volatility was almost as high as it had been during major international financial crises such as the “Russian crisis” four years ago.  For the euro area, the equity market downturn arrived in the midst of an increasing capital market orientation on the part of financial investors and the corporate sector. Should we now write off the markets in the same way as we have written off many of our investments in the past? No, I do not think so. Disintermediation is an unbroken trend, as may be seen in corporate bond issuance, which has held up fairly well.  Furthermore, financial markets have proved they are fit to serve investors’ needs. To some disappointed investors, this may seem cynical. But think of it in the context of the accounting cheats. Once the true figures became known to investors, equity valuations were aligned to the correct fundamentals. Once we had transparency, the markets worked their magic. The markets themselves cannot be blamed for the wrongdoings of some dishonest market participants. But we definitely need to adjust the incentives for better transparency. Balance sheet fraud is a criminal offence, not a trivial one. Tougher sentences might help to make that clear. Strange as it may sound, market turbulence in the wake of faulty accounting is an indication of how effective financial markets are.  
 2 BIS Review 54/2002 III. Turmoil in financial markets is not confined to the equity markets of the advanced economies. Emerging markets have suffered a host of financial crises during the past decade. The most recent crises occurred in Turkey, Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil.  In contrast to earlier financial crises, today’s investors discriminate better between individual borrowers. Emerging market economies can protect themselves to a certain extent from contagion by pursuing sound policies. When Argentina defaulted last December, the vast majority of emerging market countries that had pursued better macroeconomic policies escaped unscathed.  The stability – or instability – of international financial markets owes much to the framework for crisis prevention and crisis resolution. Monetary policymakers have made a major contribution to the international financial community’s thoroughgoing approach to crisis prevention. With regard to crisis prevention, there exists a broad consensus. All necessary steps should be taken to get the incentives right — and that means the incentives both for creditors and for debtors.  What measures can a country take to strengthen its resilience? The basic recommendation is to pursue sound and consistent policies. Liberalising capital flows is beneficial for emerging markets. But the sequencing has to be right. They should start with more stable long-term capital flows, such as FDI, and deregulate volatile short-term capital flows last. As capital-account liberalisation progresses, financial supervision needs to keep pace. Supervision needs to become ever more effective in order to reduce the vulnerability of the domestic financial sector. The Asian countries in crisis, for example, grossly neglected the link between capital-account liberalisation and independent banking supervision.  Prudent public debt management is another key measure in crisis prevention. Governments need to contain short-term external debt, particularly if it is denominated in foreign currency. Over the longer term, stable capital inflows into emerging-market countries can only be secured by pursuing sustainable policies. But that is not quite enough. Transparency counts. Financial market players want to base their decision-making on hard facts. Countries seeking access to financial markets must provide reliable economic and financial data on a timely basis – just like companies do. The Financial Stability Forum has summarised these and other good practices in a list of 12 key Standards and Codes. Implementing such standards and codes is an effective tool for making countries less prone to crisis.  Focusing solely on emerging markets in the prevention of international financial crises gives no more than an incomplete picture, however. It would obviously be helpful if the advanced countries were to grant more liberal access to their product markets. The current round of trade negotiations set in motion at Doha late last year therefore has some bearing on the stability of the international financial markets, too.  During the 1990s, there was a rapid increase in lending to emerging markets. Moreover, the composition of the lending community changed. In the 1990s,  the private sector accounted on average for almost 80 per cent of net capital flows to emerging markets, compared with 35 per cent in the 1980s. As bond issues supplemented – or in some cases all but replaced – international bank lending, the number of creditors increased. Therefore, the days when a handful of creditors could negotiate a debt workout in what was known as the "London Club" definitely belong to the past. Finally, since the mid 1990s private capital flows to emerging markets have been dominated by foreign direct investment flows, which is a more stable external financing source in comparison to volatile portfolio investments and bank lending. Since the mid-1990s, crises have usually been resolved by the provision of – sometimes extremely large – financial assistance packages by the IMF. This practice, however, sets the wrong incentives for all participants. International financial market will only proper function if private creditors and investors not only reap the benefits of their decisions but also bear losses caused by unfavourable developments. Violating this principle by having the IMF inject massive financial aid at times of crisis inevitably encourages excessive risk-taking by investors. Such behaviour – also termed  moral hazard – contributes to emerging market economies overwhelmed by debt and undermines the willingness to reform in borrowing countries.  Therefore, we need to rearrange the incentives in an improved framework for crisis resolution. This framework must provide for an orderly debt workout in the event of a financial crisis and comprise a more balanced burden-sharing between the private and public sectors in line with their respective roles.  
 BIS Review 54/2002 3 Limiting access to official lending will be at the core of any future framework for crisis resolution. Greater ex ante clarity about the scale of official financing will help to guard against both debtor and creditor moral hazard. Exceptional financing should be reserved for truly exceptional cases requiring substantial justification ex ante and ex post.  Strict and credible limits on access to IMF financing call for private sector involvement on a regular basis. This is the key to an improved functioning of the international financial markets. Investors who cannot reasonably expect a bail-out have greater reason to practise effective risk management. In the same way, debtors have greater reason to undertake necessary adjustments and reforms in order to secure access to financial markets. If such a framework is put in place, moral hazard will not distort investment decisions.  Private sector involvement in crisis resolution can and should take a variety of forms. Priority should be given to approaches which foster cooperation between debtors and creditors. That would include voluntary approaches such as “collective action clauses” in private debt contracts. Such clauses can substantially reduce the risk of litigation and asset attachment, once a majority of creditors has agreed on debt restructuring.  The IMF has proposed a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism similar to national bankruptcy codes for enterprises. However, as so many questions of both a practical and legal nature remain open, such a statutory approach will not be available for years. Any reshaping of the international financial architecture should therefore concentrate on adjusting incentives by revamping IMF lending policy in the way I have set out. This would automatically entail an enhanced role for the private sector in crisis resolution.   IV. Financial market turmoil also raises concern about the stability of the national financial systems. Prudent financial regulation and supervision are the foundations of financial system stability. Why and how central banks should be involved requires constant clarification. There are good reasons for advocating central bank involvement in financial regulation and supervision.  Let’s start with financial supervision. Financial system stability is a prerequisite for the efficient conduct of monetary policy. Consequently, the EC Treaty calls for the European System of Central banks to contribute to the stability of the financial system (Art. 105(5)EC). Macro-prudential supervision is in the best interests of central banks. In conducting monetary policy and in operating payment systems, central banks gain valuable information on the stability of market participants. "The marrying of micro- and macro-prudential analysis", as BIS General Manager Andrew Crockett once put it, allows us to exploit synergies of monetary policy and financial supervision.  In the field of financial regulation, the EU is currently deliberating whether to introduce the “Lamfalussy model”, which is now applied in securities regulation in the banking and insurance sectors as well. The ECOFIN Council and the European Parliament would thus make a decision only on the framework for envisaged legislation – known as “level 1” – while a regulatory committee would decide on the technical details of new laws – “level 2”. In the “Lamfalussy model”, this regulatory committee comprises only representatives of the ministries of finance. However, “level 2” needs to draw on the expertise of central banks. Why is that so? For the banking industry, one of the main tasks of European regulators consists in translating internationally agreed standards into European law: Basle II, the new minimum capital requirements, will be next. Central banks are experts on Basle II, since they are substantially involved in negotiating the new Capital Accord in the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. They are truly familiar with the details of the new framework and such knowledge is indispensable for the EU legislative process. But it is not only the details that count. The regulation of the banking industry has an even larger bearing on the real economy than the regulation of the securities industry does. Banking regulation may affect the competitiveness of the overall economy in various ways owing to the national specifics of financial systems. Central banks are experts on the national financial systems. Exploiting the specific knowledge central banks have to offer in the regulatory process – as is currently the case in the well-established Banking Advisory Committee – is something I regard as crucial. Attempts to rid either financial regulation or financial supervision of central bankers’ influence will backfire at some point in the future. Prudent risk management would prevent such a risk from materialising. 
 4 BIS Review 54/2002 V. Besides raising issues of systemic stability, financial disturbances also affect the real economy, irrespective of what generated the turbulence in the first place. Transmission to the real economy works via three main channels.  The channel that received most attention during the latest market downturn is also the least effective one in the euro area: the wealth effect. As their portfolios shrink in line with stock valuations, consumers tend to cut their expenditure, so the theory goes. European consumers hold a smaller portion of their portfolios in stocks. For example, the ECB estimates that a 10 per cent permanent decline in stock prices in the euro area would reduce consumption by a maximum of 0.19 per cent. This compares with significantly higher estimates for the US. As investors’ habits change in the euro area, the wealth effect should be expected to gain slowly in importance. The second channel – and probably the most important one for the euro – is the direct and indirect impact that fickle stock markets have on business financing costs. Equity financing becomes more expensive, as investors are less eager to buy new shares and demand higher risk premia. Bank credit is harder to come by, as potential collateral shrinks in value. And, as investors become more risk-averse, rising spreads for corporate bonds may make capital market financing more expensive. Given surging capital costs, marginal investment projects become unprofitable.  The third channel through which adverse financial developments may impinge on the real economy can be described by “negative sentiment”. A certain sense of crisis will tend to weaken confidence. However, in the current situation it is not entirely clear whether the financial market disturbances are predominantly a cause or an effect of the downward revision of high-flying expectations. The impact, I suppose, works in both directions.  Both financial markets and the real economy are suffering from post-bubble blues. Businesses and consumers are short on confidence and long on worries. Financial, economic and political uncertainty have risen in parallel. After the “golden nineties” the pendulum now is swinging back. It may even swing back too far and overshoot like exchange rates tend to do. Unfortunately, there is no Prozac to alleviate post-bubble blues.  An in-depth analysis of the data may help to clarify the picture. The situation is better than the sombre mood suggests, although admittedly not as good as we had hoped for.  Economic growth in the euro area economy is subdued this year. Expectations were running far ahead of the economic recovery. The downward revision of earlier upbeat expectations has narrowed the unusually large gap between high-flying expectations and the assessment of the current situation. The business and consumer climates now suggest a slower start to a less vigorous recovery. Leading indicators do not, however, point to another economic downturn.  Recent price developments are bolstering consumption. The euro area inflation rate at 2.1 % (August) is almost back in the range which the ECB Council regards as price stability. Both short-term and long-term real interest rates are below average and do not hamper investment. Liquidity is ample, and monetary conditions are favourable. Monetary policy is expansionary.  What, then, is standing in the way of a more decisive economic recovery? We need to be honest: the euro area has not been able to produce a self-sustained economic recovery without the US first pulling us out of the economic trough. This time, our overseas business partners are still struggling to unwind the economic and financial imbalances that built up during the “golden nineties” and the late bubble economy. The unwinding process is taking longer than was expected in the rather optimistic assessments early this year.  Home-grown structural weaknesses are being felt all the more keenly in the euro area. There is no shortage of analysis. There is a “to do” list lying on the desk of everyone concerned. There is a backlog in terms of concrete action, especially in the field of labour market flexibility. Adjusting incentives, reducing regulation and eliminating rigidities should help to unleash the forces of economic growth. The euro area must put itself in a position to kick off a self-sustained economic upswing. Tackling reforms decisively is important not least in terms of bolstering confidence, which is a more appropriate – and, incidentally, more effective long-term – antidote to the post-bubble blues than any “Prozac” might be.  
 BIS Review 54/2002 5 VI. In times where uncertainty abounds, monetary policy needs to be a stabilising factor. Euro area monetary policy is geared to maintaining price stability.  Given financial market turbulence, should monetary policymakers broaden their focus to include share prices in their definition of price stability? Well, in my opinion, that is not a good idea. The objections to targeting asset prices weigh more heavily.  To begin with, there is the issue of defining the appropriate asset price level. There is no way in which central banks can make a “diagnosis” superior to that of the market.  Then, even if the matter of diagnosis issue could be solved to our satisfaction, stabilising consumer prices and stabilising asset prices might call for diverging policy paths. Central banks could well find themselves faced with the dilemma of having to decide to which goal they should give priority. The fact that bubbles tend to occur in periods of low inflation only accentuates that potential conflict.  And, last but not least, there is the question of “moral hazard”. Central banks would need to respond in perfect symmetry to overshooting and to undershooting stock prices. Financial markets would become severely distorted if market participants were to come to the conclusion that the central bank would let them enjoy returns when the markets are up but bail them out once the market goes downhill.  Instead, we should stick to our tried and tested approach of stabilising the general price level in the product and services markets.  Nonetheless, monetary policy contributes to a sound development of asset prices. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy emphasises money supply in the first pillar of its strategy. An adequate money supply – that is, money supply which is in line with potential output growth – is a necessary condition for preventing the emergence of speculative bubbles. Also, a low inflation rate in itself fosters long-term investment and helps to stabilise asset prices.  This summer, euro area monetary policy has been confronted with conflicting signals: monetary growth continues to be strong. Its high growth rate owes much to low opportunity cost and ongoing portfolio reallocation. Given weak final demand, the risk of ample liquidity being channelled into inflationary pressure is regarded as quite low.  A more serious risk to price stability is the price of crude oil, which has begun to climb upwards in the wake of increasing political tension in the Middle East. Further non-negligible risks to price stability stem from a potential weakening of the Stability and Growth Pact. Some European countries, among them my own, need to make intensified efforts to balance their budgets. The pact is symmetrical with a lower limit: balancing the budget over the economic cycle requires governments to run a surplus when the economy is doing well. In the trough of the economic cycle, governments can then allow automatic stabilisers to develop their full effect up to the budget deficit ceiling of 3 per cent of GDP. Not least, demographic developments require the budget to be balanced over the economic cycle as a whole.  Despite these uncertainties, both the markets and the Eurosystem expect the recovery to continue. The euro area cycle is unlikely to experience a double dip. In actual fact, the moderate pace of economic expansion in the euro area is set to continue, not least because macroeconomic policy is supportive: 1. Monetary conditions are favourable to growth: liquidity is ample. Real interest rates, both long- and short-term, are below their historical averages.  2. The euro area does not display fundamental imbalances – the labour market being the notable exception. The balanced current account reflects the sustainable savings rate.  3. The world economy is set to stay on its – admittedly, not very steep – path of growth. 4. Both investors and consumers will soon have to make up for the investment and consumption spending that was put off during the downturn.  Bearing these facts in mind, the Governing Council of the ECB believes the risks to price stability to be balanced. Therefore, we decided to stay on hold when we last assessed the monetary policy stance two weeks ago. 
 6 BIS Review 54/2002 VII. Financial turbulence does not leave monetary policy makers cold. As you undoubtedly knew already, central bankers are a cautious lot. We do not easily buy into market euphoria nor do we buy into gloomy scenarios. In order to contain financial market disturbances, we need to improve the international financial architecture, to conduct financial regulation and supervision in a prudent manner, and to adhere to a stability-oriented monetary policy. 
 BIS Review 54/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Policy coordination Speech by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the opening of the new HM Treasury Building, London, UK, 25 September 2002.  *      *      * Dedication speeches are by their nature forward looking, but lest we believe that in opening this building we should focus solely on future challenges, I feel the necessity of reminding us all that the future is not always new.  I myself was reminded of this by an item on the web site of Her Majesty’s Treasury. “In 1711,” the item notes, “the Treasury unveiled a scheme to secure government debt by authorising its subscription into the capital of the South Sea Company--government creditors received stock in the company. When the South Sea Bubble burst in 1720, however, thousands of investors were affected and the Chancellor of the Exchequer was sent to the Tower of London.” Although the web site does not elaborate, that eighteenth century chancellor was guilty of dubious practices that appear eerily contemporary. Fortunately, modern chancellors, including the eminent incumbent, appear at the Tower these days in a more benign context.  In a more serious vein, I am daily reminded of the special relationship the Federal Reserve has had over the decades with decisionmakers from the British government. Literally twenty feet from my desk are plaques commemorating the numerous World War II meetings in our Board Room between the combined military chiefs of the United States and Great Britain that in the words on one plaque, “... set the pattern for allied collaboration and the successful prosecution of World War II.”  But the Federal Reserve’s association with Britain’s monetary authorities goes back even further. The tie between the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve was cemented during the 1920s in that extraordinary relationship between Benjamin Strong, the President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, and Montague Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England. Their correspondence yields quite fascinating insight into the way they interpreted events that are now important history. The ties developed then between the Federal Reserve and British monetary authorities endure to this day.  The mutual trust reached a point that in 1999 the Bank of England asked Donald Kohn, then head of our Monetary Affairs Division, and now a governor, to review key aspects of the Bank of England’s monetary policy procedures and make recommendations for improvement. We were duly impressed because, to us at the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England projects a nearly mythical presence as the developer of much of the central banking we all practice today.  The Federal Reserve’s close relationship with the Bank of England and other major central banks has been enhanced through periodic meetings at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel since 1963. But it has been over only the past quarter century, with the emergence of regular meetings of the finance ministers and central bankers of the Group of Five, and later the Group of Seven, that interactions between the Federal Reserve and the British Treasury and other major finance ministries have taken on special importance.  Of course, some of us meet under the auspices of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and we all participate in the deliberations of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. But the Group of Seven has surfaced as the most significant forum through which both finance ministers and central bankers from the major countries coordinate on economic issues.  International coordination has also been advanced with the creation of the Financial Stability Forum, an initiative of the G 7 that draws on the Secretariat of the Bank for International Settlements. And the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision that evolved out of initial explorations of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England has broadened international bank supervisory coordination.  In recent years, both the G 7 and the BIS have reached out to expand our contact with ministers and governors of developing countries. A new group, the Group of Twenty, encompasses many industrial countries and a number of developing nations.  Today’s remarkably sophisticated international financial system, that all these bodies oversee, took root several centuries ago within hailing distance of Her Majesty’s Treasury. The rule of law and protection of property rights attracted transactions to the London market and--notwithstanding the one incident of questionable behavior in 1720 noted earlier--the British tradition of trust, integrity, and fair 
 2 BIS Review 54/2002 dealing has been an important component of the City’s success. London, and other British financial centers, had developed by World War I into the dominant lender to the world, accounting for half of the world’s trade financing and, despite its loss of empire, London remains, with New York, at the top of the world’s financial pyramid.  The City has a long tradition of leading the world in foreign exchange trading and currently conducts twice the volume of New York despite the fact that the U.S. dollar is the leading traded currency by far in foreign exchange transactions. London is the world’s center for over the counter derivatives trading--again with double the share of the trading in similar instruments conducted in New York. Moreover, a substantial share of the world’s securities trading is channeled through the City.  London has stayed on top in the provision of financial services despite the emergence of the euro, which some expected would divert a significant share of foreign exchange trading to a single center on the continent. Although financial sector activity in Frankfurt has increased substantially in the past few years, largely reflecting the growing importance of the euro, trading volumes there are still well below those of London and New York.  Another potential challenge to the City’s prominence in the provision of financial services has been the telecommunications revolution, which presumably should diminish the need for physical proximity to conduct financial transactions. If traders can congregate almost anywhere electronically, we might expect traditional patterns of exchange to be dispersed. However, history, together with London’s long, should I say sterling, reputation as a place to do business, seems to have spurred market participants to continue to trade through London.  In closing, let me emphasize what a privilege it has been for me to work with Chancellor Brown and Governor George, who represent the professional best in world finance and who are most worthy custodians of the financial legacy that Britain has bestowed on the rest of the world.  
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 Pakorn Malakul na Ayudhya: Central bank independence - what does it mean? The Bank of Thailand’s experience Remarks by Mr Pakorn Malakul na Ayudhya, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, on the occasion of The Inauguration of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of Ghana, Accra, 10 September 2002. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, Governors, Members of the MPC, Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  I consider it a great honour to be invited by the Bank of Ghana to take part in this very important event, the inauguration of the MPC. I would also like to thank Governor Paul Acquah and the Bank of Ghana for the warm hospitality extended to me and my staffs. It has certainly made our first visit to Ghana a very memorable one.  Before I begin my talk on the assigned topic of Central Bank Independence: What Does It Mean? The Bank of Thailand's Experience, I would like to offer my congratulations. The first one is for Governor Paul Acquah and the Bank of Ghana for the successful launching of the MPC. The ceremony which took place yesterday was very impressive. The message came across very clearly that the Government places great importance upon the Bank of Ghana's independence and that much reliance is placed on the MPC for its successful conduct of monetary policy so that price stability and consequently sustainable growth can be achieved. The exact words used by your Finance Minister were essential pillar for macroeconomic stability. My second congratulation is also for Governor Paul Acquah for having achieved the Central Bank independence. I have noted that the Bank of Ghana was established in 1957. The Bank of Thailand was established in 1942 and we have not managed to gain independence through legal means yet. So, you are one up on us.  Ladies and Gentlemen, the issue of “Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy” is very much closed to the heart of all central bankers, and I am very happy to be able to share some thoughts on it. In Thailand's case this issue has been much discussed among all concerned throughout the 60 years period since the Bank of Thailand's establishment in 1942.  One of the most famous governors of the Bank of Thailand and certainly the longest serving Governor (more than 10 years) had this to say about central bank independence and I quote  “…If the policy in question is so profound that it might undermine principles or lead to catastrophe, the Central Bank Governor may not only voice his disapproval against it, but he also has the ultimate prerogative of resigning from the governorship”.  Dr. Puey Ungphakorn was an outstanding Governor who gave great importance to the Bank of Thailand to carry out its functions as an independent institution free from political and governmental domination, undaunted by any influential powers-that-be. For the sake of his country-and using the delicate art of being a central banker, Dr. Puey protested against the government whenever it did not act righteously.  Dr. Puey believed that the government must have faith in the central bank in providing benefits for the country as a whole. The Governor and senior management should have enough courage to voice their critical, even dissenting opinion when such an action is necessary. His view was that the Governor and his senior management cannot be saints, but must carry out their work adhering to the principles of honesty and integrity. Neither can they act indifferently, because when it is necessary to reprimand the government, they must do so.  Dr. Puey was determined to protect its officials from political interference. He issued regulations prohibiting Bank of Thailand officials to stand for political office or write articles on politics, which are still in force today.  I totally agree with what Dr. Puey had thus said and practiced without fail. However, since Governor Puey left the office at his own will to concentrate on another job which he loved dearly, that is, rector of Thammasart University, we have had nine governors over a period of almost 30 years. Out of this nine, only two retired from the office, the other seven were either fired or pressured to leave the post by the Government for some reason or another and in most cases the causes of removal had nothing to do with their performance in conducting monetary policy.  
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 How could this have happened? The answer lies in the current Bank of Thailand Act which does not spell out or lay down mechanism for the central bank to achieve its independence. Governor and Deputy Governor are political appointees. They are appointed by His Majesty the King upon the recommendation of the Minister of Finance and approved by the Cabinet. There is no definite term of office. There are no protective clauses in the Act which clearly spell out causes for removal. The most popular reason given by the government when firing governors was one of “suitability”. None of the nine governors had the chance to resign from the office in protest of the Government policies as advocated by Dr. Puey. In the past 7 years, we have 5 Governors including the present one who has been in office for just over 1 year. However, it is important to note as well that sometimes the relationship between Minister of Finance and Governor of a Central Bank turned sour not because of policy conflict but because of personality mismatch that led to eventual conflict. For instance, the current Minister of Finance and the present Governor work well together and have great respect for each other.  What then is the solution? I think the best solution is to legalize Central Bank independence by spelling out clearly in the Central Bank legislation the power, duties, responsibility and accountability of a Central Bank. According to the draft amendment of the Bank of Thailand Act which is to be considered by the Parliament in the near future, some such important features are:  1. a Selection Committee, comprising some outstanding Thai senior statesmen, to nominate appropriate candidates for governorship.  2. a definite term of office for governorship (4-5 years is the norm and this can be extended for another term).  3. clauses which spell out clearly causes for removal of governor.  4. a Court of Directors which comprises of the Governor and Deputy Governors and at least five other members to oversee/manage/entrust the overall affairs of the Bank of Thailand. Question remains whether Governor should be chairman and CEO as well. There are pros and cons on this issue. 5. a Monetary Policy Board chaired by the Governor and consists of internal and external directors. External directors will be appointed by the Government. Responsibility and accountability of the board will be spelled out clearly. It is important to have qualified external directors to provide wider perspective and perhaps a counter balance views.  Since the draft Amendment of the Bank of Thailand Act will take time to be enacted because of a long legal and parliamentary processes (we expect it to be enacted in the middle of next year), we have decided to go ahead with the establishment of a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). The MPC consists of seven members with the Governor chairing the committee. There are two external advisors who serve on the committee, providing independent thoughts and perspectives. The committee meets every six weeks on a pre-announced schedule. The main responsibilities of MPC comprises of:  • setting the direction of the monetary policy with the objective of maintaining price stability,  • examining and approving the monetary conditions and policy stance report, and,  • overseeing the quarterly Inflation Report.  Why did we adopt and implement inflation targeting as our new policy anchor?  As the fixed exchange rate was abandoned after the crisis, it was then necessary to have a new nominal anchor. At first the Bank of Thailand used monetary aggregates as its policy target under the IMF program. The Bank targeted domestic money supply in order to ensure macroeconomic consistency in order to obtain price stability. However, as in many countries in recent years, using money supply as a target did not work well with the Thai economy as the relationship between monetary aggregates and output became increasingly unstable. This was due to changes in people's spending behavior and the popularity of new money-related innovations, such as credit cards and electronic cash cards.  After studies and experimental implementation, the Bank of Thailand formally adopted the inflation-targeting regime starting from May 2000. The new nominal anchor allows the Bank of Thailand to set an explicit target of core inflation in order to stabilize price condition. Since its adoption, a target of core inflation had been set at a range of 0-3.5 percent and remains so. In addition, we have 
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 adopted 14-day repurchase rate as the policy instrument as well as employed macro econometric model to conduct the forecast.  Permit me to elaborate on some of the above mentioned issues with regard to the implementation of inflation targeting framework. The appropriate price index used was consumer price index (CPI) which should be excluding some items that cannot be influenced by monetary policy while still able to retain sufficient price information. Hence we used the core inflation which excludes volatile items of raw food and oil prices. This core inflation has less variation but from historical data, on average, it had been close to the headline inflation in the long run. We can say that targeting the core inflation is effectively the control of long-run inflation such that monetary policy does not have to accommodate supply shocks. In light of this, the target range of 0-3.5 percent was set based on Thailand and our major trading partners' history of inflation.  As for the choice of policy rate, the 14-day repurchase rate was selected as the key instrument. With this instrument, the Bank of Thailand is able to manage the appropriate level of liquidity in the market. The advantage of 14-day repurchase rate over other rates of longer maturities is that the trading volume is much higher and thus provides effective policy signaling to the market. It also has advantage over the rate of shorter maturities, such as 1-day or 7-day, in that it will not impose too much burden on the Bank of Thailand in taking care of the liquidity and maintaining the policy rate. Therefore, other repurchase rates such as 1-day or 7-day will be freely determined by market forces. In sum, the 14-day RP rate will leave room for the short-term rate with flexibility to adjust and move in line with money market liquidity conditions.  The policy rate was initially set at 1.5 percent per annum and it was raised to 2.5 percent in June 2001 to realign the money market interest rates. Following the global economic slowdown, the policy rate had been cut twice in December 2001 and January 2002 to help stimulate the economy. The rate now stands at 2 percent per annum.  Having the policy rate clearly announced, the Bank of Thailand is able to provide a transparent monetary policy signal to the market. This helps provide a framework for a more effective transmission mechanism. After the adjustment in the policy rate, other rates in the repurchase market will adjust in line with the policy rate. Banks will thereafter adjust their portfolio and change their rates for loans and deposits. The transmission mechanism will work itself out such that this will eventually lead to the desirable result in the real sector. The policy impact usually takes up to 8 quarters in the transmission process. Nevertheless, in the case of Thailand after the crisis, the banking system has not yet been fully functioned and this, to a certain extent, undermined the effectiveness of the monetary policy.  The macro-model gives a range of core inflations with probability distribution being described into a fanchart. This fanchart takes into account the related uncertainties and gives some flexibility in a range of forecasts. Based on the most likely outcome, the MPC will announce the expected rate of inflation for this year and next year. According to the most recent assessment, the core inflation will be 0.5-1 percent in 2002 and 0.5-1.5 percent in 2003, providing growth of between 3-4 percent in 2002 and 2003.  Finally to enhance transparency of the process, Inflation Report is published on the quarterly basis providing forecasts of inflation and economic growth for the next eight quarters along with the quarterly press release.  For the final part of my talk, I would like to dwell on the issues of Central Bank Independence. The first issue is whether a Central Bank can have too much independence in the sense that it can be harmful. To this, I incline to say yes, but only in a rare circumstance. Bad decisions relating to monetary or financial institutions operations can be damaging with wide impact. To prevent this from happening, a mechanism should be installed such as a Monetary Policy Committee or a Financial Institutions Policy Committee comprising of qualified external directors so that important policy measures are made through group decisions.  The second issue is how independence should a Central Bank be? I believe that a Central Bank should be independent within the government because it is the Minister of Finance who has to be accountable to the parliament on issues relating to macro economic, fiscal, monetary and financial system matters. I agree absolutely with Governor Paul Acquah that monetary and fiscal policies must be harmonized in order to achieve macro stability, meaning that a Minister of Finance and a Governor of a Central Bank must work hand in hand to achieve a proper policy mix of fiscal and monetary policies so that sustainable growth can be achieved.  
 4 BIS Review 53/2002 Ladies and gentlemen, I feel that I have taken enough of your time already. Therefore, I would like to conclude that a Central Bank can be considered as having its independence when it can perform its duty of achieving and maintaining price stability without any political or governmental interference, and with honesty and integrity while working hand in hand with the Ministry of Finance to achieve a balanced fiscal and monetary policies mix that lead to macro stability and sustainable growth. Inflation targeting approach is an effective mean to achieve Central Bank independence because it encompasses 4 very important ingredients: operational independence, responsibility, transparency and accountability. Other means can be just as effective if they have these 4 required ingredients.  I hope that what I have just shared with you on the topic of Central Bank Independence and our experiences in adopting inflation targeting as a nominal anchor will be of some uses as food for thoughts. Finally, I truly wish to congratulate the Bank of Ghana for the successful launching of Monetary Policy Committee.  Thank you.  
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 T T Mboweni: Recent financial and economic developments in South Africa Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the eighty-second ordinary general meeting of shareholders, 27 August 2002. *      *      * Introduction The South African Reserve Bank was again confronted by many challenges during the past year. I am, however, glad to say that, as on previous occasions, the Bank coped well. Although some ground was lost in containing inflation owing to the exogenous shocks that affected the economy, remedial action has been taken to bring the inflation rate down towards the targeted levels. A period of consolidation in the banking sector was handled in an effective manner so as to ensure continued domestic financial stability. Attention was given to the regulatory structure of the banking sector to continue protecting the funds of depositors and to ensure that the intermediation of savings runs smoothly. The efficiency and effectiveness of internal administrative procedures were improved further and considerable progress was made with transforming the composition of the Bank’s staff to better reflect the demographics of the country. Recent economic developments The South African economy also did well in a rapidly changing political and economic world. A comprehensive review of recent economic developments in South Africa is contained in the Reserve Bank’s Annual Economic Report, which was released this morning. In my address I therefore wish to highlight only the following developments: South Africa, like most other emerging-market economies, was affected considerably by the attacks on the United States of America in September 2001, the uncertainties that this created politically as well as in the business world, the continued relatively high levels of oil prices and the strong downturn in world economic activity. The resulting decline in the volume of our exports in the second half of 2001 affected domestic economic growth. In addition, greater risk aversion to investment in developing countries had a marked impact on capital flows to South Africa. In response to the weakness in world economic activity, monetary policy in most countries became more accommodative and interest rates were brought down significantly. In some countries, fiscal measures were also taken to stimulate activity. These measures now seem to be bearing fruit and a world economic recovery should be of significant benefit to South Africa. The most important effect of world political and economic developments on South Africa was that they contributed materially to the volatility in the external value of the rand during the past year. After the value of the rand had been relatively stable in the first six months of 2001, it depreciated steeply in the second half of the year. As a result, the nominal effective exchange rate of the rand decreased by about 34 per cent in the second half of the year. Towards the end of 2001 the external value of the rand began to recover and the weighted exchange rate recouped about 20 per cent of its losses up to the end of May 2002.  In the following two months the rand fluctuated around this new level but, on balance, declined by just more than 7 per cent. This brought the nominal effective exchange rate of the rand back to about 27 per cent below its level at the beginning of 2001. A number of factors contributed to the depreciation in the value of the rand during 2001. These included a weak export performance and a strong increase in imports and dividend payments to non-residents. The resultant deficit on the current account of the balance of payments was accompanied by a net outflow of portfolio capital. This outflow stemmed from the perceived higher risk of investing in emerging-market economies, the problems experienced in Argentina and later Brazil, instability in Zimbabwe, and unfounded expectations of imminent exchange-control relaxations in South Africa. Eventually, international investors began to regard the external value of the rand as a one-way bet, exporters delayed repatriating their foreign-earned currency and importers switched financing from foreign to domestic sources. In other words, there was a typical speculative bandwagon effect. After the authorities had reminded the market about the sound economic fundamentals in South Africa in a statement on 20 December 2001, and it became clear that the exchange rate of the rand had 
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 over-reacted, this whole process was reversed. Exporters stopped delaying the transfer of their proceeds, importers shifted back to foreign financing for purchases and international investors were again willing to invest large sums in domestic shares and bonds. International conditions calmed down somewhat and the world economy began to recover. At the same time the current account of South Africa’s balance of payments moved into surplus, mainly owing to a decline in dividend payments to the rest of the world and a rise in exports. The depreciated external value of the rand has undoubtedly strengthened the price competitiveness of domestic producers and could lead to a strong export performance. Substituting domestically produced goods for imported goods should further promote economic growth. The South African economy also proved to be quite resilient to the world economic slowdown in the period under review. Despite a synchronised decline in the growth of most of our major trading partners, the growth rate in real gross domestic product only declined moderately from 3,4 per cent in 2000 to 2,2 per cent in 2001 and 2,3 per cent in the first half of 2002. The positive production growth in generally depressed world economic conditions could be attributed to continued strong domestic demand for goods and services. Final consumption expenditure by households and general government contributed to the pick-up in spending, but the largest contribution came from investment, especially fixed investment by the private sector. After declining in the second half of 2001, the volume of exports also began to rise in the first half of 2002. As could be expected with the strong domestic final demand for goods and services, the saving performance of the South African economy remained at a low level. In the past five years, gross saving as a ratio of gross domestic product has continued to fluctuate between about 15 and 16 per cent, which is too low to finance the growth performance the country needs for creating enough employment opportunities. The consistently low saving ratio has persisted despite a substantial improvement in government saving. After being a large dissaver a few years ago, government has made a positive contribution to saving since 2001. Corporate saving, which still represents the mainstay of the domestic saving effort, has weakened considerably over the past five years, while household saving remained at low levels. The steady growth performance in South Africa was accompanied by substantially higher labour productivity. The real output per worker in the non-agricultural sectors had increased by only about 1 per cent per year in the period from 1985 to 1995, but rose at an average annual rate of nearly 41/2 per cent from 1995 to the first half of 2002. Higher labour productivity was the combined result of an increase in output and a reduction in formal-sector employment. Producers preferred to employ capital rather than labour. Economising on the utilisation of labour resources was in part the result of a decline in the user cost of capital. But it was also brought about by factors such as a declining gold price and the opening up of the economy to international competition, which made the use of cost-saving production methods more urgent. Concerted efforts by government to reduce the public-sector deficit contributed further to a decline in formal non-agricultural employment. More than one million employment opportunities have therefore been lost since the peak of the employment cycle in 1989. Employment growth has occurred largely in the informal sectors of the economy and in other forms of self-employment. Unemployment in South Africa nevertheless remains a major problem, with nearly 30 per cent of the economically active population out of work. On the monetary front, the broadly defined money supply grew vigorously during 2001 and the first half of 2002, and reached a year-on-year level of 18,1 per cent in June 2002. Most of this growth was in the form of increased short and medium-term deposits by corporates. This could imply that companies are uncertain about the outlook for the economy and that investors are restructuring their portfolios. It may, however, also be an indication that depositors are positioning themselves for future spending. The risk for monetary policy is that in the long run, there is a close correlation between the rates of increase in the money supply and the general level of prices. The growth in total bank credit extension measured over twelve months moved into the double-digit range towards the end of 2001, but slowed down again to 9,6 per cent in June 2002, compared with 6,9 per cent in June 2001. This increase occurred mainly in the demand of the private sector for funds and arose largely from increases in trade finance, mortgage borrowing by households, instalment sale credit and leasing financing. In the financial markets the private corporate bond market expanded significantly in the past year as the government financed most of its borrowing requirements on international capital markets. From the 
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 beginning of 2002, part of the companies’ needs for capital was financed in the primary share market when the prices of shares improved considerably. New record turnover levels in the secondary bond and share markets were attained in the year ended June 2002. The decline that has been discernible in bond yields from the second half of 1998 was related to a dwindling supply of public-sector fixed-interest securities and lower inflation expectations that came to an abrupt end in the last quarter of 2001. The depreciation of the rand and resulting inflation fears drove bond yields sharply higher, but the mood in the bond market seems to have turned more positive from the beginning of April 2002. Monetary policy continued to be supported by fiscal policy in securing financial stability. In the fiscal year 2001/02 the public-sector borrowing requirement amounted to only 0,6 per cent of gross domestic product. In fiscal 1996/97 it had still been as high as 5,6 per cent. This substantial improvement in the finances of the fiscus was achieved by more efficient tax collection methods and disciplined expenditure programmes. As a result, the rise in public debt relative to gross domestic product was stopped and the interest burden of government eased considerably. This afforded government the opportunity to grant significant tax relief and to expand infrastructural development. Monetary policy After pursuing a relatively neutral monetary policy stance during 2000 and the first half of 2001, the Reserve Bank relaxed monetary policy from the middle of 2001. The neutral monetary policy stance was maintained in a period of low expected future rates of inflation and a slowdown in economic activity. However, the twelve-month growth rate in the consumer price index excluding mortgage interest cost (CPIX) continued to rise steadily from 6,5 per cent in October 1999 to 8,1 per cent in September 2000. This rise in consumer prices was largely related to international developments, such as rising oil prices, general upward pressure on international commodity prices and a depreciation in the external value of the rand. Although these exogenous factors became a threat to monetary stability, most domestic factors remained positive for the containment of inflation. Greater stability in domestic interest rates also seemed warranted to counter the heightened volatility in many financial markets. This policy stance was highly effective as there were few signs of the secondary effects of the weaker currency. In fact, inflationary expectations declined, nominal unit labour cost increased only moderately and growth in the money supply slowed down. Internationally the oil price declined, world economic activity began to slow down and interest rates were reduced aggressively. The twelve-month growth rate of the CPIX was turned around and declined to 6,5 per cent in May 2001 and to 5,8 per cent in September. Taking all these developments into consideration, the Monetary Policy Committee decided to relax monetary policy. The repurchase rate was first reduced by 100 basis points on 15 June 2001 and by a further 50 basis points on 20 September 2001. This brought the repurchase rate down to a level of 9,5 per cent, compared with its peak of 21,85 per cent in early October 1998. However, towards the end of 2001 it became clear that the favourable environment for inflation had changed. Subsequently, two important develop-ments led the Reserve Bank to reconsider its monetary policy stance. Firstly, the inflation targets for the three years after 2002 were announced by the Minister of Finance. The target for 2003 was kept unchanged at an annual average rate of increase in the CPIX of between 3 and 6 per cent, but this range was lowered to an average of 3 to 5 per cent for the next two years. This clearly reflected government’s commitment to the adjustment of policies to bring the inflation rate down to lower levels. Secondly, the external value of the rand began to depreciate sharply in September. The pass-through from the depreciated exchange rate to inflation had been surprisingly muted in 2000, but the sharp downward movement of the rand in the last quarter of 2001 inevitably had a significant impact on inflation. Before this change the challenge to monetary policy had been how to deal with external shocks that had not been putting undue pressure on domestic inflation. The new challenges were how to deal with external shocks that were now beginning to have a significant impact on current and expected inflation, and to avoid an inflation spiral. Inflationary pressures began to pick up during the last quarter of 2001. Food prices were initially the main factor contributing to the acceleration in inflation. These food price increases were partly related to the depreciated value of the rand as domestic prices approximated those determined internationally since the deregulation of agriculture. In particular, maize prices were significantly affected by the 
 4 BIS Review 53/2002 depreciation in the value of the rand. The maize price has wide economic significance in South Africa. White maize is a staple food for many South Africans and 90 per cent of yellow maize is used as feed in the meat, dairy, poultry and egg industries. Apart from the depreciation of the value of the rand, supply and demand factors also contributed to the more than doubling of the spot prices of both white and yellow maize between June 2001 and January 2002. Later the increase in consumer prices became more broadly based, in line with the sharp depreciation of the currency. Rising expectations of price increases became an important factor in the inflationary process, as was clearly reflected by the pre-emptive buying of durable goods by households in the fourth quarter of 2001. As the depreciated rand pushed prices higher, the twelve-month rate of increase in the CPIX started moving upwards from the psychologically important level of below 6 per cent in September 2001 to 9,9 per cent in July 2002. The quarter-to-quarter rate of increase in CPIX inflation was even more pronounced, rising from a seasonally adjusted and annualised level of 6,8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2001 to 11,6 per cent in the first quarter of 2002 and 12,1 per cent in the second quarter. The twelve-month rate of increase in the all-goods production price index accelerated from 7,8 per cent in September 2001 to the even more alarming level of 14,4 per cent in June 2002. These developments soon indicated that the inflation target for 2002 could be in jeopardy. Moreover, given the lags between the implementation of monetary policy and its impact on inflation, estimated at between 12 to 24 months, there was very little that monetary policy could do to rectify this. However, the Bank remains committed to the objective of price stability and policy became focused on the targets for 2003 and 2004. The first response of the Bank to the rising inflationary pressures was to convene an unscheduled meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee early in January 2002. Although the exact feed-through of the depreciated value of the rand to inflation was still unclear at that stage, a number of developments indicated that it might be prudent to adopt a more restrictive monetary policy stance. These developments included a reversal of the downward trend in oil prices, indications that higher inflation expectations were becoming entrenched, higher wage demands, a more rapid rate of increase in unit labour cost and large increases in money supply and bank credit extension. In view of these developments the Monetary Policy Committee decided to raise the repurchase rate by 100 basis points in order to prevent an inflation spiral. Monetary policy was tightened further at the March and June meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee. In both cases the repurchase rate was increased by 100 basis points, bringing the rate to 12,5 per cent on 14 June 2002. By March it was clear that inflation expectations had been adversely affected by the depreciation of the rand. In addition there was concern about the continued high rate of growth of money-supply aggregates and bank credit extension, the state of the balance of payments and the rising trend in unit labour cost. It was argued that a tighter monetary policy at that stage could avoid more drastic interest rate increases in future if the stricter stance was successful in dampening inflationary pressures. By June, it was apparent that the upward trends of inflation and inflation expectations had maintained their momentum, and that growth in unit labour cost and money supply developments remained unfavourable. The Monetary Policy Committee, however, also identified some positive developments that could reduce the pressure on inflation. These developments included the partial recovery of the rand, the appearance of a surplus on both the current and financial accounts of the balance of payments, the continued low level of capacity utilisation and the maintenance of fiscal discipline. The latest forecasts of the Bank show that, given this tightened stance of monetary policy and barring any unforeseen negative shocks, the inflation target for 2003 could be met. However, the average annual rate of increase in the CPIX will probably be close to the upper end of the target range and the risks to the forecast are on the upside. As such, it seems unlikely that monetary policy will be relaxed in the foreseeable future. Although the current stance of monetary policy may be perceived as negative for short-term growth and employment creation, such a view must be compared with the alternative of even higher future interest rate levels, if inflation is not brought under control. Furthermore, the tax concessions granted in the last budget should benefit consumption, and the significant depreciation in the external value of the rand should promote production, particularly of exported goods. 
 BIS Review 53/2002 5 Exchange rate policy As outlined earlier, the external value of the rand came under severe pressure during the second half of 2001. The currency then stabilised in early 2002 and strengthened slowly but consistently until the end of May. Since the beginning of June the exchange rate of the rand has fluctuated widely around its newly established levels. The rand has continued to be negatively affected by developments in emerging markets, and events in 2002 in Argentina and Brazil, for example, could hamper the short-term outlook for the rand. For this reason the Reserve Bank strongly supports the government’s policy that the remaining exchange control regulations should be very gradually relaxed. Despite the relatively volatile movements in the exchange rate of the rand and even when it became apparent that the depreciation of the rand towards the end of 2001 was based largely on speculative transactions unrelated to underlying conditions, the thrust of exchange rate policy remained unchanged. The exchange rate of the rand is therefore essentially determined by the supply and demand conditions in the market for foreign exchange. At the same time, it remains a stated objective of the Bank to gradually close down the net oversold open foreign reserve position. The existence of this net oversold open position has been perceived as a source of weakness for the rand, and has contributed to negative sentiment towards the currency. However, it is also recognised that if the net open foreign reserve position is reduced too quickly, it could contribute to rand weakness. The Bank therefore announced in a statement on 14 October 2001 that we would in future not intervene by purchasing foreign exchange directly from the market to reduce this position. The net open foreign reserve position would instead be expunged from the cash flows derived from the proceeds of privatisation and the government’s off-shore borrowing. This does not imply that all the proceeds from these sources will always be used to achieve this objective. For example, part of the proceeds from the sale of Transnet’s interest in M-Cell was not used to reduce the Bank’s open position. In accordance with this objective, the Bank reduced the net open foreign reserve position from US$23,2 billion at the end of September 1998 to US$11,5 billion at the end of January 2000, i.e. during a period of overall strength in the balance of payments. When the overall balance of payments then began to deteriorate, the open position was brought down far more slowly to US$9,0 billion at the end of April 2001. The net open position was reduced to US$4,8 billion at the end of July 2001 with the proceeds obtained from the restructuring of the Anglo American Corporation and the De Beers mining company, and from foreign borrowing by government. The net open foreign reserve position was reduced further to US$1,8 billion at the end of July 2002 following the stated approach that the Bank adopted in October 2001. This reduction was basically the result of three major sources, namely the transfer of a syndicated loan liability of US$1,5 billion from the Reserve Bank to the National Treasury; the reopening of an existing dollar bond by the South African government which raised US$274 million for delivery against the oversold forward book; and the issuing of a new US$1 billion bond by the National Treasury for delivery against the forward book. While the Bank remains committed to eliminating the net open foreign reserve position, at its current level of US$1,8 billion this position should no longer be perceived as a source of vulnerability. Financial stability International developments also affected domestic financial stability during the past year. The attacks on the United States of America on 11 September 2001 illustrated an enormous systemic risk to financial systems worldwide as well as the key role that central banks must play in such circumstances. The increase in the international linkages among financial institutions adds to the risk in such events. The weakening position of Japanese banks also continues to be a source of vulnerability for inter-national financial markets. Furthermore, corporate governance standards and structures, as well as the credibility of the accounting profession, are being questioned after revelations about the corruption in and resultant failure of a number of large and well-known corporations in the United States of America. The corporate failures in the United States have impacted significantly on markets worldwide, with many stock exchanges shedding considerable value. This again demonstrates the importance of restructuring the financial architecture. Closer to home, trade and financial links expose South Africa to the contagion effects of recent adverse developments in Zimbabwe, which are closely monitored. 
 6 BIS Review 53/2002 Domestically the South African banking sector was characterised by a process of consolidation triggered by the difficulties of some small banks. This trend intensified after the announcement that Saambou Bank Limited, the seventh-largest bank in South Africa, would be placed under curatorship from 9 February 2002. As a result, there were significant withdrawals of deposits from some smaller banks in general and BoE Bank Limited in particular. This spurred the Reserve Bank to take a proactive and leading role in co-ordinating the actions of all key players in the banking sector, which led to an agreement between the private and public sectors on the management of liquidity by recycling cash flows and handling the orderly exit of Saambou Bank from the banking sector. The withdrawal of deposits from some banks prompted the joint action by the Bank and the National Treasury to restore the confidence of depositors, by guaranteeing all the deposits of BoE Bank Limited. BoE also accelerated the planned sale of its mortgage book to FirstRand Bank to manage its liquidity position. The activities of Saambou Bank and BoE were merged with those of some of the big four banks in South Africa. The liquidity problems of some of the smaller banks induced them to cancel their banking registrations and to carry on with niche operations. Other smaller banks are redesigning their ownership structures and in some cases downsizing their balance sheets. Despite these developments over the past year, South Africa’s banking system remains sound. Domestic banks are well-managed and have sophisticated risk management as well as corporate governance structures in place. Banks are well-capitalised, with an average risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio of 12,1 per cent at the end of June 2002. This can be compared with the new and higher required capital adequacy ratio of 10 per cent introduced in October 2001. Total bank funding grew by 22,4 per cent during the year up to the end of June 2002. The growth in total assets of 18,8 per cent over the same period to a level of R1 065 billion was mainly the result of an increase of 21,4 per cent in total loans and advances. The assets of the four big banks as a ratio of the total assets of the banking sector rose from 68,8 per cent on 30 June 2001 to 70,5 per cent on 30 June 2002. At the latter date the foreign banks operating in South Africa held 8,4 per cent of the total banking assets, compared with 6 per cent the previous year. Despite the difficulties encountered over the past year, the liquidity of the banking sector is generally adequate. The average daily amount of liquid assets held in June 2002 exceeded the prescribed prudential minimum by about 9 per cent. However, the reported profitability of the banking sector has continued to decline as margins on earnings decreased and operating expenses increased. Non-performing loans amounted to R26 billion in June 2002. This represents only about 3 per cent of total loans and advances, which compares well with international standards. The provisions made by banks for non-performing loans were adequate, even in terms of international best practice standards. The debt-servicing capacities of households also showed no signs of fragility. The ratios of household debt to disposable income and of household debt to financial assets both decreased over the past year. The single regulator The problems encountered in the banking sector earlier this year illustrated in the most definite manner that it is important that banking supervision in South Africa should remain part of the functions of the Reserve Bank. The blurring of boundaries between the financial services provided by banks, insurers and securities traders has prompted certain developed countries around the world to consolidate the different supervisory agencies under one roof. It is commonly recognised that the potential benefits of assessing the risk management functions of financial conglomerates on a holistic basis are very attractive for developed countries with integrated financial markets and ample regulatory resources. In South Africa the banking supervision function was transferred to the central bank in 1987 because it was regarded as the institution most suited to carrying out this function. Since then, even in the face of many abnormal circumstances, banking supervision has been carried out to the highest international best practice. Over this period, experience has shown that banking supervision is closely aligned with the other functions of the Reserve Bank. With the recent liquidity problems of some small banks, it was again evident that a least-cost resolution of a banking crisis would always depend on a special collegial interaction between the Registrar of Banks and at least four other departments in the Bank. The policy formulation, decision making, co-ordination and rapid execution of the many interventions 
 BIS Review 53/2002 7 that were necessary would have been almost inconceivable in a situation where the supervision of banks was not part of the Bank. Stability in the banking sector is so integral to the monetary policy transmission mechanism, that a central bank must always be involved in banking supervision. Unlike other financial institutions, banks potentially pose a systemic risk because of the nature of their contracts. Their assets are typically long term and uncertain in value, whereas their liabilities are generally short term and certain in value.  The banking sector is therefore prone to contagion as soon as confidence in any bank is undermined. These characteristics give rise to the commonly accepted approach of regulating banks in a discretionary manner. A rules-based approach to banking regulation would be inappropriate because every case of distress in the system is unique. Supervision consequently has to be risk-based and proactive. The banking supervision function in the Reserve Bank has caused many problems and frustrations, and the temptation to pass the responsibility on to another agency is great. However, the capacity to perform effective banking supervision is crucial to price and financial stability. After careful consideration of the issue, I am therefore convinced that it is in the best interests of the South African economy that banking supervision should remain in the Bank. At the same time, I also realise that close co-operation should exist between the different regulatory authorities to address the need for consolidated supervision. Co-operative working arrangements between regulators are essential to address the ever-increasing demands of sound regulation, the hallmark of which consists of decisiveness, timely action and proactive intervention when required. Regulating the banking sector The different approaches adopted to handling the liquidity problem of banks in the past year have created considerable uncertainty about the principles applied in regulating the banking sector. This again emphasises that the execution of this function should be made as transparent and business-like as possible. The objective of bank supervision is to ensure stability, efficiency and depositor protection in banking. A stable financial environment is essential for the working of the economy and the attainment of price stability. A sound banking system contributes to the effectiveness of intermediation, maturity transformation, payment facilitation, credit allocation and financial discipline. Moreover, banks play an important role in collecting savings, allocating resources and providing liquidity. The registration of banks is the first step to achieve stability in the banking system. Stability is promoted by preventing applicants with potentially destabilising weaknesses, such as unqualified or unscrupulous manage-ment or insufficient capital, from entering the system. Unfortunately, there is no reliable formula to determine whether a bank will fail or succeed. The regulator can only apply international regulatory and supervisory norms to the supervision of banks. The South African authorities have adopted the 25 principles contained in the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision, to construct an effective supervisory structure in the country. In deciding on whether a banking licence will be granted to an applicant, an assessment is made of the institution’s business plan, shareholding structure, capital base, directors and senior management, internal controls and projected financial conditions. This evaluation of an application is not a mechanical process, but is in a sense abstract and subjective. Every application is regarded as unique. Once a bank has been established it must be monitored continuously to ensure that it remains fundamentally healthy. This monitoring process involves a quantitative and qualitative assessment of a bank’s soundness. The quantitative assessment entails an analysis and evaluation of defined risk-based data received from banks on a monthly basis, to determine whether they are within prescribed prudential limits and whether their financial positions fall within acceptable norms. The qualitative assessment consists of the examination and evaluation of whether risks are being managed properly. This assessment is done within a framework of corporate governance structures. Despite every effort by the supervisors to ensure a healthy banking system, they cannot guarantee the safety and soundness of individual banks at all times. Where a bank encounters difficulties, special contingency measures are applied. The general approach followed in providing financial assistance is 
 8 BIS Review 53/2002 that the bank in distress is experiencing only temporary liquidity problems. By contrast, an insolvent bank or one with ongoing liquidity problems is required to exit from the banking system in an orderly, efficient manner with minimum losses to depositors and the least harm to the public’s confidence in the banking system as a whole. Special action is taken in a case where a temporary liquidity problem is identified. As every case is different, these actions may vary from one case to another. A broad framework for the contingency procedures has nevertheless been developed. A plan for remedial action is normally drawn up, in close co-operation with the bank concerned. Possible solutions may range from new capital injections by shareholders to measures designed to attract and retain large deposits. In addition, the relevant bank may be allowed to obtain liquidity by discounting liquid assets and by utilising its minimum cash reserves to cover cash outflows. If none of these measures can solve the liquidity problem of the bank in distress, the Reserve Bank may, as lender of last resort, be approached for special assistance in certain circumstances. This special assistance is granted only against collateral of acceptable assets pledged by the bank or a government guarantee because the Reserve Bank is prohibited by statute from making unsecured loans. The Bank’s policy and practice of solving liquidity problems have recently received considerable attention. Two reports were published in the past year. One was on the failure of Regal Treasury Private Bank Limited. The other report was on the financial assistance package to Bankorp (and later to Absa) in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The panel of experts, known as the Davis Panel, found in the latter report that the assistance had averted a systemic crisis. The panel members also concluded that the procedure for dealing with banks in distress had been refined and now conformed to current international best practice. In reviewing the support provided recently to Saambou Bank and the repayment of all the depositors’ money, three of the members of the Davis Panel found that all the actions taken complied with the Reserve Bank’s established procedures. Contrary to possible public perceptions, the authorities did not give any special positive or negative treatment to Saambou Bank’s depositors or shareholders. To create a safety net for depositors, the Policy Board for Financial Services and Regulation has formulated a proposal on designing a deposit-insurance scheme for South Africa. The main purpose of the scheme is to protect small depositors from losses if a bank fails. Membership will be compulsory for all registered banks and separate funds could be established for non-bank financial institutions. The level of coverage still has to be determined, but it would be low enough to avoid creating a moral hazard, yet high enough to inspire confidence. The relationship between auditors and the regulator has always been regarded as extremely important. Recent international events involving the auditing profession have again illustrated the critical role that auditors should play in ensuring that the accounts of institutions are a fair reflection of their financial position. For this reason, a decision was taken to establish an Auditor-Regulator College to create a structure for regular interaction with and compliance training for the auditing profession. The college will play a major role in training and strengthening the banking supervisory process in South Africa. Procedures have also been implemented to introduce banking legislation which will, for the first time, effectively deal with management deficiencies in banks. The proposed legislation will, among other things, provide for the removal by the regulator of directors and managers of banks who are not considered to be fit and proper to perform such appointments. These improvements to the regulation of banking are being undertaken to safeguard the funds of depositors and to ensure that South Africa maintains a recognised, stable banking system. However, the Bank is also aware of the need to broaden the access of individuals and small and medium-sized enterprises to basic banking services and funding. To this end, the approach in the past was to encourage registered banks to provide such services and to exempt certain approved non-bank financial institutions, such as stokvels, credit unions and village financial services co-operatives, from the requirements of the Banks Act provided that these institutions comply with certain specified conditions. Work is now in progress to reform the Mutual Banks Act by making provision for different classes of banks. This would create a more appropriate regulatory framework and give broader access to finance. The Bank also supports all initiatives aimed at finding a balance between facilitating socially responsible behaviour by banks and protecting the stability of the banking sector. 
 BIS Review 53/2002 9 Internal administration In view of the importance of maintaining an overall stable financial environment, a Financial Stability Department was established in the Reserve Bank. The primary aim of this department is to assess and promote the stability of the banking and financial system in South Africa. The main functions of the new department are to identify, analyse and research any potential threats to and weaknesses in the financial system, and to make policy proposals on and encourage changes that will support the stability and effectiveness of the financial system. Another administrative change arose from the majority decision by shareholders to delist the Bank from the JSE Securities Exchange SA, with effect from 2 May 2002. The new listing requirements of the JSE Securities Exchange SA as well as the unique role and structure conferred on the South African Reserve Bank in terms of its Act, made it evident that the Bank would no longer be able to trade its shares on this exchange. The shareholders’ decision led to the establishment of an Over-the-Counter Share Transfer Facility on 3 June 2002, to provide for trading in the Bank’s shares. This facility operates as a closed auction and is administered by the Bank. Satisfactory progress has been made with a process of Bank-wide business continuity planning to ensure that the Bank can continue functioning and meeting its obligations in the event of any interruption or disaster. All the Bank’s departments, branches and subsidiaries are participating in preparing the best possible response to a threat to normal operations. In the field of information and communication technology, several initiatives resulted in lower costs, greater efficiency and new interactive ways of doing the Bank’s business. These included the establishment of a generic facility for receiving data electronically from external associates, enhancing the balance-of-payments system to enable the direct reporting of all cross-border transactions, collecting data online for economic research and creating a new Internet website for the Bank. The Bank’s new cash management strategy (Project Imali) was successfully implemented during the past financial year. The branches of the Bank now provide a full and comprehensive bulk cash-handling service to the private banks. This service has been extended to the Mpumalanga and Limpopo provinces on a contractual basis. Project Bataki, the project aimed at revising the banknote series, has made good progress. Consultations with all stakeholders on developing the preferred technical and security features for the current banknotes will commence in the near future. The problems with dye-stained notes arising from ineffective dye-staining devices have been successfully addressed. With the co-operation of the manufacturers and users of such systems, a new industry standard has been developed and implemented. This will make these notes unusable, which should discourage robbery and theft. Major progress was also made with the reduction of settlement risk in the payment system when agreements were concluded with the payment clearing houses. After intensive consultation with the banking industry, same-day settlement now generally takes place. Real Time Line settlement is effected directly via the SAMOS system and batch settlements forwarded from Bankserv are settled before the following day. Only interbank borrowing and lending, and the final square-off between banks, are done the next day. These changes have aligned South African payment practices to the principles of internationally accepted payment systems. The Committee of Central Bank Governors in the Southern African Development Community made satisfactory advances supporting regional economic integration. In particular, notable progress was made in the fields of payment, clearing and settlement systems, information and communication technology, legal and operational frameworks for central banks and exchange-control policies. The Reserve Bank has also engaged in technical co-operation and advice to a number of central banks in Southern Africa as well as in other African countries, such as Rwanda. In addition, the Bank was actively involved in initiatives to establish closer monetary and economic co-operation in Africa through participation in the Association of African Central Banks. In keeping with the objective of transforming the composition of the Bank’s staff to reflect the demographics of the country, an important milestone was reached in the past financial year when the total black staff complement exceeded the white staff complement for the first time since the inception of the Bank in 1921. This confirms the Bank’s commitment to achieving its objectives for staff transformation by 2005, in accordance with the plan submitted to the Department of Labour in terms of the Employment Equity Act, No. 55 of 1998. Despite this progress, further efforts will be made to achieve gender and race representivity at all seniority levels. We want the Bank’s staff to reflect the diversity and unity of South Africa. 
 10 BIS Review 53/2002 Extensions to the Bank’s head office building, which started in 2001, are progressing satisfactorily and will be completed in 2003. Once completed, the building will meet the Bank’s requirements for additional office space and for parking and conference facilities. The conference facilities will also be made available for use by the public, which should contribute to the improvement of activity in the Pretoria central business district. Acknowledgements All these changes to ensure the efficient functioning of the Reserve Bank could not have been accomplished without the help of a number of people and institutions. In conclusion, I therefore wish to express my appreciation to everyone who contributed to the success of the Reserve Bank in overcoming the challenges of the past year. I wish to thank the Presidency in particular, the government in general and Parliament for supporting the work of the Reserve Bank. In addition, I wish to express my appreciation to the Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank, including the deputy governors, for their commitment and undivided loyalty. Mr J H Cross, Senior Deputy Governor, left the service of the Bank at the end of his term for health reasons and Mr I J Moolman retired. Both of them made valuable contributions to the work of the Bank and the Board, for which we are deeply grateful. Finally, I wish to thank the staff of the Reserve Bank for their professionalism, excellent performance and continued loyal support. 
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Macro-economic developments in the UK and its effects on the West Midlands Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the West Midlands Conference “20-20 Vision”, Birmingham, 20 September 2002. *      *      * Your conference title is “20-20 Vision” - which I thought initially - and not unreasonably - meant it was to be all about hindsight. And I happily accepted the invitation to speak on that basis, because, as we all know, 20-20 hindsight is very easy - as a lot of commentators have demonstrated just recently in their criticisms of US policy-makers in the light of the economic and financial market bubble which built up in the late 1990's! It was only later that I realised you intended that we should look forward to the year 2020 - that the conference was to be a foresight saga - and at that point I began to get cold feet! Central bankers are jolly lucky if they feel at all confident looking ahead 18 months, let alone 18 years - and sometimes recently - given the volatility in financial markets - its been difficult to predict what was likely to happen over the next 18 minutes! But here I am, and what I thought I would do this morning is to try to provide some sort of UK macro-economic context for your discussion of the challenges facing the West Midlands by first looking backwards at some of the trends that we have seen over recent years and then trying to anticipate how those trends might evolve.  People often tell me that retrospection is a sign of old age. But as I reflect on my 40 years at the Bank of England I am increasingly conscious of the remarkable change that has occurred over that time - in fits and starts certainly, but in the same general direction - from a heavily administered economic and financial system to one which is much more market based. Post-war controls on resource allocation had been largely dismantled before I started at the Bank. But the financial system was still governed by all kinds of direct controls - exchange controls, credit ceilings on bank lending - coupled with directional guidance, the queuing of equity issuance and business restrictions - on the activities of building societies, for example; and there was direct intervention in the wider economy through prices and incomes policies and public ownership of large parts of industry, and so on. But all of that has now gone. It's true that plenty of regulation remains - reflecting public policy concerns relating to competition and consumer and environmental protection, employment conditions, health and safety standards, and so on - indeed it has intensified in these areas. The business opinion survey conducted here in the West Midlands earlier this year by the Institute of Chartered Accountants and the IOD - which had over 85% of respondents agreeing that red tape and bureaucracy are stifling business - suggests that some of you have noticed! But for the most part such regulation doesn't tell us what activities we can and cannot undertake, rather it sets the criteria we must meet and the standards we must observe in doing whatever it is we choose to do. It leaves more room for both consumer and producer choice, and more room, and more incentive, therefore for competition and innovation. Our experience in the UK is, of course, just part of a very much broader and continuing evolution internationally - often associated with increasing political democracy - from varying degree of centralised administration to an increasingly open, market-based, approach in all parts of the world reflected also in increasingly free international trade and investment. At the macro-economic level the economic advantages of freer market competition are familiar. No one could claim that it's perfect - especially in the light of the current volatility! But profitability is the best means that we have so far discovered for directing resources - whether human or material or financial resources - into those activities in which they can be most productively employed. It provides a powerful incentive to increasing economic efficiency - and the higher sustainable growth rate that we need to satisfy our aspirations for improving living standards - by encouraging the concentration of production on those businesses, or regions, or countries, which have, or are able to develop, a comparative advantage in particular products or services. That's not necessarily how it seems at the micro-economic level. Individual businesses and their employees, or regions, or even countries at the international level, tend to think of competition and market-driven resource allocation as a zero-sum game: if one side wins the other necessarily loses. So it's not surprising that existing producers are tempted to resist the opening of their markets to 
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 greater competition and look for protection where they can. But attempting to stem the tide by acquiescing in protection would be to ignore the benefits which increased competition, and more efficient and innovative production would bring to society at large, including consumers, as well as potentially more efficient producers and their prospective employees, wherever they are located. It is those benefits which make market competition a positive-sum game at the macro-economic level. I don't at all underestimate the pressures on businesses, and their employees and surrounding communities, that struggle to retain their comparative advantage in a market economy. But standing still is not an option in today's world - nor will it be going forward. The one thing you can be reasonably sure of as you look ahead to 2020 is that you will be confronted with a continuing challenge to keep ahead of the competition in your existing industries and that you will need to be able to respond to changing demands and embrace new activities to replace those where your present comparative advantage becomes impossible to sustain - as is unfortunately bound to happen in some cases. So my first point is that the market economy is with us to stay, with all that that implies. We've also learned that one of the conditions that are necessary if a market economy is to function effectively is a framework of macro-economic stability. For much of the post-war period macro-economic policy - not just in this country, but including in this country - focussed heavily on the short-term management of aggregate demand in the economy. It paid too little attention to the underlying, supply-side, capacity of the economy to meet that demand. Faced with slow growth and rising unemployment both fiscal and monetary policy were used, in combination, to stimulate demand until accelerating inflation and a worsening balance of payments threatened to run out of hand, when the brakes were slammed on and everything went into reverse. The go-stop policy cycle in other words produced the familiar boom-bust business cycle. Over time this experience induced a pervasive short-termism in economic decision-making on the part of both businesses and consumers. That increasing short-termism in turn led to the increasing amplitude of the business cycle, so that inflation rose progressively higher from economic peak to peak and unemployment rose progressively higher from economic trough to trough. I am convinced that, with others, we really have taken on board the lessons of that experience. The requirements that public debt to GDP is kept at a stable and prudent level, with borrowing over the economic cycle limited to finance investment spending, constrain the use of fiscal policy as a short-term instrument. And monetary policy has been given the distinct role as the primary instrument for short-term aggregate demand management, with a target for retail price inflation, not simply as an end in itself, as some people still seem to imagine, but as a measure of the extent to which the growth of demand is held consistently broadly in line with the underlying - sustainable - growth of supply-side capacity. The past ten years have in fact been a period of unusual stability in that broader sense for the UK economy as a whole. Inflation has been consistently low throughout that time - close to, and recently modestly below, our present 2½% target. But that has not been achieved at the expense of consistently high interest rates, and weak growth and high unemployment, as many people initially feared that it would. In fact nominal interest rates have been as low as most of us can ever remember; the overall economy has grown consistently for 40 successive quarters without interruption at an average annual rate of some 2¾%, which is comfortably above its long-term trend; and the number of people in employment has risen fairly steadily to close to an all-time high, while the rate of unemployment has fallen to a more than 25-year low. The overall picture is much the same for the West Midlands region. I don't have regional data for real economic growth, but using the deflator for the UK economy, your region grew from 1992 to 1999, at an annual average rate of 2.7% - very close to the rate for the UK as a whole. The number of people in employment in the region has also increased, with the employment rate now close to a 10 year high and in line with - in fact marginally above - the average for the UK of 74.6%. And the rate of unemployment - on the claimant count basis - at 3.5% is very close to its 25 year low. That's still a bit above the UK average rate, of 3.1% but it's very much better than the 10% rate of a decade ago. Now I know it hasn't felt like that for everyone - particularly for internationally exposed businesses and their employees and for the regions in which such businesses are more heavily concentrated - including the West Midlands with its relatively high concentration of manufacturing businesses. I am well aware that many of them - perhaps many of you - have been having a rough time over the past few years. 
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 Although the UK economy as a whole managed to avoid recession, UK manufacturing output fell from a peak nearly two years ago by around 7% and employment in UK manufacturing fell by 225,000 people, or some 6%. To put that into perspective, manufacturing output fell from peak to trough over much the same period by over 16% in Japan, by 7½% in the US and by 6½% in Germany; and manufacturing employment fell by 7¼% in Japan, 9½% in the US and nearly 3% in Germany. So the pressures on manufacturing were not confined to, nor did they originate in this country. There are two main reasons for the pressures on the internationally-exposed sectors of our economy. The first is the weakness of much of the global economy as a result of the Asia crisis and its aftermath in the late 1990's, and then, more recently, as a result of the sharp, synchronised, slowdown in the major industrial countries - as reflected in the figures I've just given you. The second reason is the strength of the sterling exchange rate, or more particularly the weakness of the euro for most of the time since its introduction some 3½ years ago. The frustrating thing for us has been that that there was very little that either we at the Bank or the UK Government could do directly to address the problems at source. That's fairly obvious when we are talking about the weakening of domestic demand in other major countries. It's perhaps less obvious that we couldn't have done more to affect the exchange rate. It's not that we didn't care - as has sometimes been suggested. In fact we've repeatedly made it clear that we'd welcome a stronger euro because that could help to restore a better balance to the UK economy. The problem has been that we didn't know how to bring it about, certainly without destabilising the overall economy. Many people think it's simply a question of reducing our interest rate by more than the ECB reduced theirs. But it really isn't as simple as that makes it sound. We did indeed do precisely that last year but sterling continued to strengthen - though it has in fact fallen back somewhat against the euro since as the euro has staged a moderate recovery. What we were able to do - given that inflation was somewhat below target - was to try to compensate for the external weakness by stimulating domestic demand here in the UK. In a situation where business confidence - and therefore investment - was weak, that essentially meant stimulating consumer demand. It was not without risk - in terms of the build-up of household debt and of a possible house price bubble - but without it we, too, would have faced recession. Looking forward, there is a reasonable prospect that global demand will pick up gradually, and we may see a more sustainable pattern of exchange rates beginning to emerge with the albeit hesitant strengthening of the euro. There are in fact already signs that manufacturing output has started to recover. But there are downside risks to that prospect associated with the renewed volatility of international financial markets over the summer, which we are monitoring very closely. But abstracting from these recent global and largely cyclical, effects, the more fundamentally important point, looking further ahead, is the likelihood that we - alongside other countries - will continue to operate within a framework of overall macro-economic stability - as a necessary condition for the effective functioning of the market economy. Those presumptions may well mean that manufacturing continues its gradual, long-term, relative decline - as a share of total output, and in terms of the number of people employed - in all developed industrial countries, including the UK. But it does not mean that manufacturing output as a whole will contract in an absolute sense; on the contrary, past experience suggests that it will continue to increase, though the composition of output and techniques of production will continue to evolve. In that sense I very much share the view, of course, of the 49% of those surveyed by the ICA/IOD who disagree that manufacturing industry is in irreversible decline. It is entirely consistent with that view, of course, that other sectors, particularly the services sectors, will grow more rapidly and continue to increase their share of total output. The precise form of the macro-economic stability framework may well continue to evolve, and it would in particular be affected in some degree by the decision on whether or not we join the euro. Were we to do so, the nominal exchange rate certainty with our European partners, representing roughly half our international trade, would - depending partly on an appropriate entry rate, whatever that might be - be of considerable longer-term benefit to many of the internationally-exposed businesses, in whatever sectors, that have suffered from the volatility, and particularly the weakness, of the euro in the past few years. And the greater transparency of prices and costs vis à vis other Eurozone members would enhance competition and the effective functioning of the single European market. There would also be benefits from the integration of our financial markets with those of the Eurozone. The potential downside risk - and one can debate just how big a risk it is - is that the macro-economic stability 
 4 BIS Review 53/2002 framework - while based upon the same general philosophy as here in the UK - would in this case be directed to stability in the Eurozone as a whole. Monetary policy would be decided collectively by the ECB, and fiscal policy would be constrained by the European Stability and Growth Pact - so that the policy stance may not always necessarily be consistent with the particular macro-economic policy needs of individual member states. The essential purpose of the Chancellor's assessment of the famous five tests is of course to weigh the balance between these potential benefits and possible risks, and it will then be for the Government and ultimately the people of this country to decide. The outcome could have a bearing on the macro-economic context both for the UK as a whole and here in the West Midlands, but it is very difficult to predict what the effects might be.  Whatever the outcome of the euro debate, you will be operating in a market economy within a stability-oriented macro-economic framework.  The crucial point then is that the overall rate of growth that we can hope to sustain - which is the key to our future prosperity - will depend upon the vigour and flexibility of the supply-side of the economy. And improving our supply-side capacity is the major challenge confronting us all - at the national level but also here on the ground in the West Midlands. That's not something which monetary policy - which operates - as I say - on the demand side of the economy can do much about - at least directly. Government in all its forms - at the European, national, regional and local levels - has a vital role to play in this, by helping to improve the transport infrastructure, for example, and I know that you will be discussing that subject later this morning; or by raising the standards of education and training, which are critically important in terms of the available skills of the workforce; and by providing the right business incentives and encouraging investment. But the private sector, too, has a vitally important part to play - including at the regional level. Private sector businesses clearly have a strong commercial interest in the prosperity of the communities in which they operate. And I find increasingly as I travel around the country that local businesses and their representative organisations - including both commercial and industrial sectors and the professional services sectors - are working together, with the local academic community, and with the regional and local authorities, to identify - on the basis of their local knowledge - the particular obstacles, and the particular opportunities, they face, recognising that there is a great deal that they themselves can do through partnership - including public-private partnership - to help create a more positive supply-side environment at the regional and local level. That partnership typically embraces not only issues facing the mainstream economy but extends to direct involvement in activities designed to draw into the mainstream economy communities which for one reason or another are liable to be left on the sidelines, but which, if they are given the right opportunities, clearly can contribute to both the economic prosperity and the social cohesion of the region.  And I find that positive approach here too in the West Midlands. It's very much the purpose of this conference - organised by AWM - Advantage West Midlands - alongside the IOD and the ICA. It's the purpose, too, for example, of the West Midlands Regional Finance Forum organised by AWM and bringing together the banks and accountants, representatives of the ethnic minorities and community finance organisations - including Aston Reinvestment Trust, as well as academics and the Small Business Service, with the aim of improving access to finance for business at all levels. You've already come a long way in the West Midlands. You have weathered the international storm in your more traditional industries far better than might have been expected, and you have been relatively successful in diversifying into higher value-added and more knowledge-based industries. I wish I could claim that life will get easier looking forward to 2020 - but I can't promise that and you wouldn't believe me anyway! But what I do say is that working together, with your “can-do” attitude, you are as well placed as anywhere to overcome the challenges ahead - and I wish you all possible success. 
 BIS Review 52/2002 1 Yeo Lian Sim: Hedge funds - a mainstream alternative Keynote address by Ms Yeo Lian Sim, Deputy Managing Director (Market Conduct) of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Hedge Funds World Singapore 2002, Singapore, 19 September 2002. *      *      * Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen A decade of controversy and rapid growth Ten years ago this month, speculation that Europe’s Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) would be realigned gained momentum and the British pound came under intense pressure in the foreign exchange markets. The rest, as they say, is history.  Hedge funds have come a long way since the Sterling attack. They have been linked to other instances of market turmoil, like the Mexican Peso meltdown in 1994-95 and the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98. Studies have revealed little evidence that hedge funds were mainly responsible for those episodes. But their participation is not in dispute. Also in 1998, we saw the near collapse of Long Term Capital Management and its subsequent recapitalisation by a consortium of banks brought together with the help of the New York Fed. The incident raised questions about the risks that large and highly leveraged hedge funds pose to systemic stability.  It was to address these concerns that the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), of which Singapore is a member, set up a working group on Highly Leveraged Institutions (HLIs). In March 2000, the group issued a sobering reminder: institutions that provide leverage to HLIs must improve their counterparty risk management and hedge funds need to enhance their disclosures.  Along with these developments, or some say in spite of them, the hedge fund industry has continued to grow from strength to strength. There are now about 6,000 hedge funds worldwide, managing more than US$550 billion. In 2001, some US$140 billion of new capital was invested into hedge funds. By comparison, the entire industry was only US$20 billion in 19901. While high net worth individuals remain the main source of capital, hedge funds are becoming more popular among institutional and retail investors. Funds of hedge funds and other hedge fund-linked products are increasingly being marketed to the retail market2. For example, ABN Amro launched the first retail fund of hedge funds in Singapore last month.  There are a number of factors behind the meteoric rise in demand for hedge funds. The unprecedented bull run in the US equity markets during the 1990s swelled investment portfolios. This led both fund managers and investors to become more keenly aware of the need for diversification. Hedge funds are seen as a natural “hedge” for controlling downside risk because they employ exotic investment strategies believed to generate returns that are uncorrelated to traditional asset classes.  More recently, the bursting of the technology and telecommunications bubbles, the wave of scandals that hit corporate America and the uncertainties in the US economy have led to a general decline in stock markets worldwide. This in turn provided fresh impetus for hedge funds as investors searched for absolute returns. As one commentator put it, “Where else are they going to put their money?”3.   And the maths is compelling. From 1987 to 2001, the Hennessee Hedge Fund Index posted annualised returns of 18%, higher than the S&P’s 13.5%.                                                       1  Brooks, C. and H.M. Kat, 2001, “The Statistical Properties of Hedge Fund Index Returns and Their Implications for Investors”. 8th Annual Hennessee Hedge Fund Manager Survey, 2002. 2  Financial Stability Forum, 11 Mar 2002, “The FSF Recommendations and Concerns Raised by Highly Leveraged Institutions: An Assessment”. 3  F-Times News, 10 Sep 2002. 
 2 BIS Review 52/2002 The growing demand for hedge fund products has wrought changes on the supply side of the market. The prospect of untold riches has spurred on many former fund managers and proprietary traders to strike out on their own and set up new hedge funds. This year’s ranking of top 100 hedge funds by Institutional Investor magazine included several funds founded by “Tiger Cubs”, former employees of Tiger Management. Investors now have a wide array of hedge funds to pick from, instead of only a few prominent ones previously.  With hedge funds entering the mainstream and becoming respectable, an increasing number of banks, insurance companies, pension funds and fund managers are investing in them. Some are also offering their own hedge fund products to meet customers’ needs, diversify their fee income and stem the outflow of talented staff.  In short, the hedge fund industry has attracted a wider following in the last decade and is expected to broaden its appeal further in the years to come. Hedge funds in Asia This trend is also evident in Asia, where hedge funds are starting to take off. According to AsiaHedge magazine, some 150 hedge funds operate in Asia, of which 30 were established in year 2000 and 20 last year. Currently estimated at around US$15 billion, hedge fund investments in Asia are expected to burgeon. Europe’s experience in this regard is encouraging, with its hedge fund industry quadrupling in size between 1999 and 20014. Industry participants believe that Asia could be the next region of growth for the hedge fund industry. Several factors support this view. Asian hedge funds currently account for a tiny slice of the global hedge fund pie and a mere trickle of the total financial wealth of high net worth individuals in Asia5. Demand for Asian hedge funds should increase as investors in the region build up a better understanding of this new asset class. The potential of Asian hedge funds is well-supported by fundamentals. From an investment perspective, the volatility in the Asian markets in recent years has allowed long-short and other strategic plays to outperform regional indices. The relative inefficiency of the regional markets also presents arbitrage opportunities.  From a demand standpoint, US and European investors are expected to turn to alternatives in Asia as capacity (and quality) in their home markets diminish. Further, the improving economic climate in South East Asia should help foreign fund managers and investors to refocus their attention on the region. Hedge funds look set to play a larger role in Asia. The role of hedge funds in Singapore In Singapore, hedge funds form part of the expanding menu of products offered by the asset management industry. This industry grew rapidly over the last ten years: assets under management increased eightfold from just over S$35 billion in 1992 to more than S$300 billion last year. For the reasons mentioned earlier, asset managers and investors alike are finding a place in their overall strategies for alternative investments including hedge funds, commodities and real estate. (Of course, judging by concerns about Singaporeans over-investing in property, one wonders whether real estate can indeed count as an alternative investment here.) That aside, hedge funds can contribute to the development of Singapore as an international financial centre in a number of ways. First, as evidenced in other major financial centres, hedge funds can attract a mix of supporting professionals such as fund administrators, prime brokers and product specialists skilled at structuring new instruments. Other positive spinoffs include fund of hedge funds managers and consultants, who can add value to investors in the areas of hedge fund selection and allocation among different fund strategies.                                                       4  Merrill Lynch/Cap Gemini Ernst & Young World Wealth Report, 2002. 5  An estimated 1.7 million high net worth individuals (defined as individuals with more than US$1 million in financial asset wealth) in Asia hold in aggregate US$5.1 trillion of financial assets. (Merrill Lynch/Cap Gemini Ernst & Young World Wealth Report, 2002). 
 BIS Review 52/2002 3 Second, hedge funds can lead to more wide-spread use of innovative financial instruments and the development of cutting-edge technical and investment skills. Unit trusts typically go long-only on listed equities, bonds and cash. In comparison, hedge funds, with their broad investment mandates, can employ a selection of designer instruments and creative investment strategies and face little (if any) restrictions on what they can hold. Third, hedge funds can add to the liquidity and efficiency of our capital markets. The contrarian instincts of hedge fund managers provide liquidity and help curtail unsustainable asset bubbles. By seeking out arbitrage opportunities, hedge funds also improve the information flow and, consequently, the efficiency of the market. Further, specialist hedge funds that invest in unlisted stocks and unrated bonds facilitate fundraising by small, relatively unknown companies. Singapore’s regulatory approach Singapore’s approach to regulating hedge funds is risk-focused and differentiated, balancing the potential benefits with the risks that hedge funds could pose to the financial system.  Hedge fund managers are regulated like any other fund manager that manages third-party funds in Singapore. Small or boutique fund managers, that manage funds for accredited investors6, are subject to less stringent licensing requirements because investor protection concerns are less acute. Smaller firms, with fewer than 30 qualified investors7, are exempted from licensing. Hedge fund managers should find such operating structures conducive, as they are typically small outfits managing funds for a limited number of institutions and high net worth individuals.  MAS applies the same risk-focused and differentiated approach to the marketing of hedge funds. MAS does not regulate offers of collective investment schemes and hedge funds to professional and institutional investors in the financial sector as these investors are adequately skilled to evaluate for themselves the investment characteristics of hedge funds. Similarly, financial institutions can offer hedge funds to sophisticated investors on the strength of an offering memo. MAS’ regulatory oversight of the marketing of hedge funds is focused on retail investors. Retail investors may not be familiar with the differences between a hedge fund and a typical collective investment scheme. In particular, key aspects such as legal structure, investment objectives, trading strategies and fees may not be fully appreciated. Unlike unit trusts where a growth fund usually invests in stocks and an income fund in bonds, there is no simple correlation between investment style and asset exposure for hedge funds. Hedge funds also tend to be leveraged and can trade in derivatives, whereas traditional funds have limited scope for borrowing and dealing in derivatives. Further, retail investors may be lulled into thinking that hedge funds are low risk investments based on studies showing hedge fund returns to be less volatile than mutual fund returns. Such statistics must be carefully considered especially since hedge fund returns are anything but normally distributed. Indeed, they are negatively skewed and exhibit high kurtosis. A fat-tail event, such as the Russian default in 1998, was enough to scuttle any profits Long Term Capital Management might have projected with its elaborate models.  Retail investors may not realise that hedge funds also display other characteristics that make them riskier than traditional funds. For one thing, hedge funds have an average life span of 3.5 years, with one-third of newly-established funds folding before those three years are up primarily due to poor performance8. Further, hedge funds are usually subject to a lock-up period and, after that, fixed redemption windows, unlike unit trusts which are typically redeemable every trading day. This is not a preamble to a blanket prohibition on the marketing of retail hedge funds. Retail hedge funds will continue to be permitted under a comprehensive regulatory framework. MAS’ approach is to balance investor needs and investor protection on three pillars – enhanced disclosure, enabling regulation and enlightened investors.                                                        6  “Accredited investor” refers to an individual with net personal assets exceeding S$2 million or a corporation with total net assets of more than S$10 million. 7  “Qualified investor” means an individual with net personal assets exceeding S$5 million, a corporation with total net assets of more than S$10 million, a collective investment scheme that is marketed only to accredited investors, or a collective investment scheme that is not marketed in Singapore. 8  Brooks, C. and H.M. Kat, 2001, “The Statistical Properties of Hedge Fund Index Returns and Their Implications for Investors”. 
 4 BIS Review 52/2002 To enhance disclosure in prospectuses for offers of investments (including hedge funds), Part XIII of the SFA which came into effect in July this year introduced new prospectus checklists, prospectus registration procedures and advertising regulations. A prospectus must contain all material information that a reasonable investor would require to make an informed investment decision, such as the investment objective and specific investment risks of a fund, the fees and charges, and the track record of the fund manager. For the market to exercise discipline on prospectus disclosure, prospectuses that are lodged with MAS are posted on the MAS web-site for public comment for a minimum two weeks. We view this as an advance in speed and efficiency. As a safeguard, MAS may refuse to register a prospectus if it does not satisfy the disclosure requirements or if its registration is not in the public interest. If a prospectus is found to be misleading or deficient after it has been registered, MAS can serve a stop order on the prospectus to prevent further issuance or sale of securities to the public. Following a public consultation in August, MAS will issue comprehensive retail hedge fund guidelines by year-end that will include, among other things, a requirement for some specific information to be disclosed in both prospectuses as well as marketing materials. In particular, the material differences between the hedge fund offered and traditional funds. Also the fees and charges. For funds of hedge funds, the method of achieving diversification must be disclosed. Turning to the second pillar – enabling and flexible regulation, the new guidelines aim to align our hedge fund regulations with international best practice, so that well-managed hedge funds from established markets can be offered in Singapore. A key development is to distinguish between single hedge funds, funds of hedge funds and capital protected hedge funds. Recognising that features such as diversification and capital protection would reduce the risk of investing in a hedge fund, MAS will introduce a lower minimum initial subscription of S$20,000 for funds of hedge funds. No minimum subscription will be required for capital protected and capital guaranteed hedge funds. Single hedge funds may continue to be offered to retail investors with a minimum initial subscription of S$100,000.  To maintain professional standards, retail hedge funds must have at least two executives who each have a minimum of five years’ experience in managing hedge funds. In addition, managers should have at least three of those five years of experience managing funds of hedge funds if they offer this product. Redemptions of retail hedge funds need only be made once every quarter. This is an accepted international practice. Managers who want to provide for more frequent redemptions are free to do so. Redemption procedures should be prominently disclosed. To facilitate the entry of foreign funds of hedge funds, there will be a flexible diversification rule. The rule will require any fund of hedge funds to be diversified either across 15 hedge fund managers or by having not more than 8% of its assets allocated to a single hedge fund manager. This would enable foreign funds of hedge funds to benefit from an earlier liberalisation introduced by the SFA in July this year, which allowed all recognised foreign funds (including hedge funds) to be offered directly to Singapore investors instead of only through feeder funds previously. For a foreign fund to be recognised by MAS, the foreign offeror needs only to register a foreign company in Singapore and appoint a representative to act as a liaison for investors. The fund and its manager should be from a jurisdiction with acceptable regulatory standards. While providing for direct offers of foreign funds into Singapore, the alternative feeder fund structure is still available. A Singapore fund of hedge funds can therefore feed into a foreign fund of hedge funds. Such alliances could benefit from the Singapore manager’s access to local investors as well as the foreign manager’s working relationships with other hedge fund managers. Structures that involve a foreign fund of hedge funds feeding into other funds of hedge funds will also be allowed with good reason and disclosure of all relevant fees and charges.  Work has also begun on the third pillar – enlightened investors – which is an essential element of a disclosure-based regulatory regime. The Financial Advisers Act (FAA), which will become operational on 1 October, will create a class of financial advisers who can advise and inform investors on a whole range of investment products. These financial advisers would be able to promote public awareness of more sophisticated products such as hedge funds.  As part of the regulatory regime under the FAA, a new code of conduct will be issued shortly to provide guidance on the standards of conduct expected of all persons who provide financial advice 
 BIS Review 52/2002 5 (including exempt financial advisers like banks and insurance companies). The standards will cover specific responsibilities with regard to hedge fund products such as explaining product features and risks, as well as making investment recommendations to clients. The new regulatory framework under the FAA is expected to raise the quality of advice on investment products and, along with that, investor sophistication.  Within MAS, a new division has been set up to provide an overview of investor education efforts across the financial sector. In other financial centres, having a strong community of well-informed retail investors has helped in developing the sophistication of the financial markets. This is what we would like to see happening in Singapore. MAS will work closely with the industry to identify gaps and study ways of enhancing investor education in Singapore.  The industry itself also has a major role to play. Given the untapped potential in the market, there is much to be gained, whether at the individual firm or industry level, by being more active in educating investors about the nature of hedge funds, their contribution to an overall wealth management strategy, and the merits of different products. Only by winning and maintaining the trust of investors can the hedge fund industry seize the unique opportunities that are opening up in Singapore and the region.  For its part, MAS will maintain its calibrated approach towards the regulation of hedge funds and hedge fund managers. MAS will also continue to build on the three pillars of enhanced disclosure, enabling and flexible regulation and enlightened investors to establish sound regulatory standards for the industry and foster market development. In each of these areas, we will need to work closely with industry players like yourselves. I consider this conference to be a useful step in promoting such co-operation. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 52/2002 1 William J McDonough: Completing the journey to the New Basel Accord Remarks by Mr William J McDonough, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Twelfth International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Cape Town, South Africa, 18 September 2002. *      *      * Introduction and Overview  As the chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, I am honored to welcome you today to the Twelfth International Conference of Banking Supervisors. I would like to thank our hosts, Governor Mboweni and the staff of the South African Reserve Bank, as well as my colleague, Andrew Crockett, and the Bank for International Settlements, for organizing our gathering here in Cape Town. I’m sure you’ll agree that they’ve done an excellent job.  It appears to me, and probably to many of you, that South Africans have discovered a wonderful niche for themselves as hosts of auspicious international gatherings, having just concluded the World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg a few weeks ago. So if you’re visiting this beautiful country for the first time, I have a feeling that you may be back in South Africa someday in the future. Participants at the United Nations summit in Johannesburg sought ways to improve the lives of people everywhere by focusing on, among other goals, alleviating poverty and promoting economic growth. Bank supervisors and central bankers certainly share those goals. Through our duty to ensure the safety and soundness of the financial system, we aim to preserve depositors’ savings, to promote the circulation of credit, and ultimately to protect the health and growth of our economies. Indeed, we cannot alleviate poverty, we cannot promote economic growth unless our banks are well managed, our financial systems stable, and our markets transparent and open. That the health of an economy depends to a great degree on whether its banks are financially sound and well managed is certainly not coincidental. Banks are charged with critical public trust to safeguard the public’s wealth and to serve as a source of credit to consumers and businesses alike. When banks fail to discharge these tasks responsibly, the costs to society can be high and the impact on the economy devastating.  At the same time, the duty for supervisors to promote the safety and soundness of the banking system entails achieving a delicate balance. Ensuring the prudent management of banks does not mean that we should hinder their growth or profit. Rather, the supervisor’s job is to promote the responsible pursuit of opportunity and innovation. Likewise, it cannot be our job to prevent every bank failure, for some failures remove poorly managed banks from the market and encourage other banks to improve their management as well. Motivating all banks to improve their management of risk, and thereby strengthen the stability of the banking system, is one of the principal objectives that the Basel Committee set out for itself in undertaking a major revision of the international standards for regulatory capital. The three years since have been a tremendous journey for all of us as we seek fundamental reform of the capital adequacy framework.  Meeting here in Cape Town, it seems fitting to portray our work to date as an unfinished journey. This historic port has traditionally served as a way station and respite for weary seafarers who had weathered many storms, but had not yet reached their destination. So today we’ll have a chance to rest near the Cape of Good Hope, to reflect on how far we’ve come, and to chart the rest of our way to the successful implementation of the New Accord. I’d like to share with you the latest news on where the New Accord stands and offer some insight into what you can expect to see in the future. I’ll begin with my views on the milestones that we’ve achieved. Then, I’d like to bring you up to date on how we are resolving outstanding issues. It’s wise to conclude any speech with thoughts about the future, so I’ll close with some remarks on what we’ll need to do to finish our journey – from the perspectives of the Committee and of other supervisors, including of those who may have adopted the 1988 Accord more recently. 
 2 BIS Review 52/2002 Milestones Achieved Let me begin with the important milestones that we’ve achieved in this undertaking. As you know, we embarked on this voyage in the late 1990s because we realized that the original 1988 Basel Accord was becoming outdated. It was designed to be uncomplicated so that it could be applied to banks of various sizes and risk profiles in many markets and jurisdictions. Its subsequent adoption by more than 100 countries represented an important first step in the development of an international standard.  But it has since become clear that the 1988 Accord has been overtaken by advances in the financial sector – and in the broader economy. New technology, the globalization of financial markets, and innovative financial products and services have changed the way that banks monitor and manage credit, market, and operational risks in a manner that the 1988 Accord could not anticipate and does not address. Consequently, the internationally active banks for which the original Accord was intended are quickly "outgrowing" its limitations. Today it’s quite clear that the 1988 Accord provides this class of banks with less meaningful measures of the risks they face and of the capital they should hold against those risks. To ensure that the New Accord remains flexible, forward-looking, and fit for the service of internationally active banks of the twenty-first century, the Basel Committee established several goals for its work, goals that the industry has embraced. • First, we intended to develop a framework that encompasses the "three pillars" necessary to support an effective system of regulatory capital: the appropriate measurement and minimum requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline.  • Second, we wanted to align the minimum requirements more closely with the actual underlying economic risks to which banks are exposed, which should help allocate capital resources effectively.  • A third goal was to encourage banks to refine their measurement and management of risk over time. By creating incentives in the New Accord for banks to re-evaluate and enhance their tools constantly, we expect that banks themselves will adopt a forward-looking perspective on risk.  I’m pleased to say that, through the Committee’s efforts and the cooperation and support of other supervisors and the industry, it appears that the proposed framework will attain each goal. We can now count them among the milestones we've achieved. 1. Encompass the "three pillars" of capital adequacy  With regard to the first goal, the new framework will recognize the important roles that supervisors and markets can play in motivating the prudent management of risk and capital. Indeed, it is the Committee’s view that it would be insufficient for any country to simply adopt the new minimum capital requirements and ignore the remaining two pillars. Both the involvement of supervisors in assessing a bank’s risk management capabilities and the discipline that greater transparency and active markets bring to bear on management can reinforce a bank’s desire to remain adequately capitalized and in control of its exposure to risks.  2. Improve the risk-sensitivity of the capital framework The New Accord will likewise achieve the second and parallel goal to align regulatory capital requirements more closely with the underlying economic risks that banks face. It will do so by departing from the 1988 Accord’s "one-size-fits-all" methodology that assesses credit risk based more on the type of borrower, offering instead a selection of methods to evaluate credit risk based more on the potential for loss. Under the new standardized approach, for example, banks with smaller loan portfolios or less advanced risk management systems will be better able to incorporate a borrower’s creditworthiness into their capital management by relying on external assessments of credit quality. Larger or more sophisticated institutions, in turn, will be able to rely increasingly on their own assessments under the internal ratings-based approach. Similarly, now that the industry is developing a more refined sense of operational risk – the risk of losses caused by failures in processes – the New Accord will "unbundle" this risk and allow banks to differentiate between, and manage separately, their exposures to credit, market, and operational risks.  
 BIS Review 52/2002 3 3. Encourage banks to improve their management of risk  We’ve also attained the third goal: to go beyond a rules-based structure and instead encourage banks themselves to improve their abilities to identify, measure, and manage their risks appropriately. As you know, the most sophisticated approaches to credit or operational risk in the New Accord will permit banks to rely increasingly on their internal assessments of risk when determining how much capital to hold. At the same time, the New Accord will be flexible enough for banks to build their risk management functions on the best practices available in the industry, even as those practices evolve in the future. By promoting the improvement of the management of risk across the industry, I believe that we are laying a foundation for more stable markets.  The milestones achieved square with banks’ and supervisors’ long-standing efforts All of us can take great pride in meeting the goals that the Committee set out to embrace: the three pillars of capital adequacy, enhancing the risk-sensitivity of the capital framework, and creating incentives for banks to improve their management of risk. And we should recognize that these proposed revisions square well with the efforts that banks and supervisors themselves have undertaken, independent of the Committee’s work. The banking industry has done much over the years to adopt a forward-looking approach to risk management – one that emphasizes flexibility in, and improvements to, the measurement and management of risk over time.  For our part, supervisors have come to focus much less on point-in-time assessments of financial condition and much more on evaluating the quality of internal processes and control structures that protect against future losses. By embracing a philosophy of supervision that centers on evaluations of risk management capabilities, we gain deeper insight into banks’ likely resilience during downturns, and we are better positioned to focus management’s attention on finding ways to do better. Certainly the New Accord’s inclusion of extensive economic incentives to adopt sophisticated risk management processes adds encouragement for their enhancement. Moreover, the New Accord’s requirement of strong process controls as a predicate for using the more advanced approaches strongly supports our efforts to make evaluations of internal processes the heart of a more forward looking supervisory approach.  The status of the New Accord So it would seem that we’ve covered quite a bit of territory over the past three years. Yet a Chinese proverb reminds us that, "On a journey of one hundred miles, ninety is but halfway." I suppose the last miles of any marathon are the toughest to finish. The wisdom of that proverb is borne out by the tasks ahead of us to complete, and then to implement, the new capital framework. So I’d like to turn now to the status of the New Accord and of the issues we are resolving.  As you know, since the Second Consultative Document’s release 21 months ago, the members of the Basel Committee have worked collaboratively and publicly with supervisors, banks, and others to revise the proposals so that they best serve the needs of modern banking. We’ve published and discussed thousands of pages of proposals and studies with the industry and the public. The size of – and depth of detail in – those volumes demonstrates how hard we’ve been working and how great the challenge is.  Challenges the Committee is resolving Indeed, while our consultations over the years have reflected on some of the finest – and occasionally highly esoteric – points of contemporary banking, the Committee encountered a few central concerns expressed by the industry – and sometimes by supervisors as well. Some of the overarching issues include the complexity of the proposals and their potential to be "procyclical." Other respondents have weighed in on proposed charges against operational risk and other particular exposures. I’d like to share with you now the latest news on how we are resolving those challenges. 
 4 BIS Review 52/2002 Complexity of the New Accord First, to the issue of complexity. Anyone who’s dared to download the proposals in their entirety from the BIS website may have been surprised to find out how much paper it requires to print them out. The New Accord is truly weighty, in all meanings of that adjective. Naturally, as prudent supervisors, the members of the Committee know that it is easier to enforce a simple rule than a more complicated one. Wherever possible, the Committee has sought to provide simple alternatives that can be applied in many markets and settings. Consultations helped us to simplify or remove a good number of rules thought to be unnecessarily complicated. However, it’s important to recognize that we intend to apply the New Accord especially to large, internationally active banks, all of which are highly developed and complex institutions. One blanket won’t cover a mountain range. In fact, the New Accord’s complexity stems partly from the options it provides to address the wide range of risk profiles, strategies, and systems that banks maintain. Many options were created precisely because some banks felt disadvantaged under a proposed blanket rule. Yet each new option alters the balance between simplicity and complexity. I think the best example of finding that balance lies in the treatment we’ve proposed for exposures to small and medium-sized enterprises. Equating loans to small and medium-sized businesses with loans to large corporations ignores critical aspects of the risks associated with each type of lending; it also could lead to results that seem unfair to banks that lend primarily to smaller businesses. So the Committee developed a special capital treatment for exposures to small and medium-sized enterprises that recognizes the unique characteristics of that form of lending, but admittedly makes the rules more complicated, and perhaps a page or two longer. Nonetheless, we believe that this treatment helps to align regulatory capital more closely with the underlying risks. Procyclicality Another general concern expressed is that the New Accord’s increased sensitivity to risk will reinforce behavioral patterns in banking organizations that may increase the cost of credit precisely at times when its supply is falling, namely during downturns in the business cycle. While we are working to address this concern about procyclicality, it is not a reason to shy away from creating better risk management tools. Here, supervisors must articulate the need for banks to assess risks on the horizon. If banks fail to develop and manage to reasonable expectations about how their risk profiles may change over time, they may take on excess exposures today that they cannot administer responsibly tomorrow. At the same time, we should remember that the New Accord sets out the minimum amount of capital necessary to comply with banking regulations. All supervisors expect their banks to operate at levels above the regulatory minima, and nearly all banks manage to their economic capital needs, not to their regulatory capital requirements. So although deteriorating credit quality might drive up the minimum capital requirement, a bank should already be operating above that level, which should dampen the effects of a sudden downturn in business conditions and asset quality. Along those lines, the Committee recently agreed that banks adopting the "internal ratings based" approach to credit risk will be required under Pillar 2 to conduct meaningfully conservative credit risk stress testing. Stress testing should help banks to maintain adequate capital buffers in advance of potential downturns in the economy. The treatment of operational risk Beyond those two broad concerns expressed about the potential for complexity and procyclicality, some respondents have called for changes to more specific capital charges in the proposals. One of the most interesting discussions centers on whether – or how – the New Accord should treat a bank’s exposure to potential losses that result from inadequate or failed internal processes and systems, or from external events. The endeavor to manage operational risk, as this group of risks has become known, has sparked significant research in the industry and beyond. Supervisors, like more and more banks, have adopted a view of operational risk management as a comprehensive practice comparable to the management of market or credit risk. While operational risk cannot be quantified with the same degree of precision as market or credit risk, the Committee believes that introducing a separate charge for exposures to 
 BIS Review 52/2002 5 operational risk will bolster efforts to find better ways to address it. Failing to include an operational risk charge in the new minimum requirements could inadvertently derail the ongoing work to identify and manage this exposure. Although we’ve seen encouraging progress in measuring operational risk – within both individual firms and industry working groups – the Committee recognizes that the industry has not settled on particular methodologies or principles. Accordingly, the New Accord will permit an unprecedented amount of flexibility to accommodate a spectrum of approaches to operational risk. For the most sophisticated institutions, the "advanced measurement approach" – or "AMA" – is really the ultimate expression of the goal of drawing on internal measures. In response to concerns that the proposed "floor" on the AMA stifled innovation, the Committee decided recently to eliminate it. Consequently, banks will be free to experiment with a great variety of methodologies, without undue constraint on their value to the firm. The AMA is meant to be a catalyst for innovation.  Calibration of other particular charges and the overall level of capital Of course, a good portion of the consultations have addressed rules and formulae used to determine capital charges for other categories of exposures and transactions. The Committee and its working groups have listened carefully to the views of market participants, academics, and other regulators to ensure that the resulting capital requirements make good economic sense and avoid burdening or disadvantaging banks unfairly. Based on the changes we are making, we expect that the Committee will achieve its goal of not raising in aggregate the capitalization required of the banking industry, though clearly and appropriately those banks that engage in higher risk businesses may see their requirements rise, and vice-versa. QIS 3 To ensure that we’ve gotten it right, the Basel Committee will launch a third Quantitative Impact Study – or "QIS 3" – on October 1, 2002, in conjunction with supervisors around the world. The industry has demonstrated tremendous support for this survey and will devote substantial resources to its completion. To date, 265 banks from nearly 50 countries have agreed to perform concrete and comprehensive assessments of how the Committee's proposals will affect them and then submit their findings by December 20, 2002. The inclusion of banks from so many countries will help to ensure that the New Accord’s principles can be applied well to institutions in many countries.  With the public release of the QIS 3 instructions on October 1, the Committee will provide a full picture of its proposed framework and quantitative requirements. Assessment of the QIS 3 results will allow us to ascertain the need for adjustments prior to the release of an updated proposal for public comment in the second quarter of 2003. The Committee intends to finalize the New Capital Accord in the fourth quarter of 2003 such that it can be implemented in each country at year-end 2006. During this three-year period, banks and supervisors are expected to adapt and develop the systems and processes necessary to conform to the standards of the New Accord.  What supervisors are doing to prepare Just what will supervisors do during those three years? Let me conclude my remarks today with some thoughts on how the Committee and other supervisors will complete the journey to the New Accord. There are three areas of focus for us.  1. Evaluating banks’ readiness  First, the member countries of the Basel Committee have begun to survey their banks’ preparation for the New Accord. Some are gathering information on how banks plan to benefit from the new framework, while others have already evaluated selected banks’ internal rating systems and databases to understand how close those banks may be to meeting the stringent requirements associated with the more advanced approaches. In all cases, we are working to understand the challenges that banks will face and are seeking ways to smooth the transition to the new framework. 
 6 BIS Review 52/2002 2. Training and preparing supervisory staff Likewise, supervisors in all of the Basel Committee’s member countries are laboring to make sure that they, too, will be ready for the new rules, which is a second area of focus. From the supervisor’s perspective, the New Basel Accord will require a heightened sense of the internal processes used to identify and quantify risk. This, in my mind, focuses our energy on exactly the right place – that is, how we can encourage improvements in risk management by critically evaluating current practices.  Our supervisory assessments will encompass several relatively new elements – importantly, validating the integrity, accuracy and consistency of the bank’s process for assigning internal credit ratings. Since those ratings will feed directly into models used to manage credit risk, we will scrutinize more than ever their accuracy and integrity. If the initial inputs are wrong, the whole capital allocation system becomes faulty.  Additionally, we will cultivate further our staff’s ability to evaluate advanced risk measurement and management methodologies for operational risk, especially because so much of that work centers on advanced statistical analysis.  Externally, the Committee anticipates providing more assistance, both formally and informally, to other supervisory agencies that are preparing for the added responsibilities we will all assume as the New Accord comes into force. Moreover, I am pleased to note that the Financial Stability Institute will continue its collaboration with the Basel Committee, especially in assisting supervisors globally in understanding and implementing all aspects of the revised Accord. The "FSI" anticipates that more than half of its 40 seminars and programs in 2003 will concentrate on components of the New Accord. In fact, shortly after the release of the Third Consultative Document next year, the FSI intends to offer three special seminars around the world to introduce other supervisors to the most important features of the new framework. 3. Working toward consistent implementation: Accord Implementation Group The third area of activity will be to deepen the level of communication and cooperation among supervisors so that we implement the new rules more consistently across jurisdictions. A "level playing field" demands that international competition be driven by each bank’s strengths, rather than by each country’s rules. Within the Basel Committee itself, we’ve established the "Accord Implementation Group" as a forum for sharing information on ways to assess risk management processes under the New Accord. The group is made up of senior line supervisors – that is, the people who actually assess banks’ risk profiles – and is led by Nick LePan, the Canadian Superintendent of Financial Institutions.  Applying the Basel Accord in the non-G-10 countries Many other countries are similarly preparing for the final leg of our journey, and I applaud your persistence and dedication to this endeavor. At the same time, the Committee recognizes that some countries have only recently adopted the original 1988 Accord and may still be working to ensure a basic level of capital adequacy.  I would like to take a moment to address the supervisors of those countries and emphasize that the Basel Committee’s efforts to revise the Accord are focused on the international banks that compete in the global capital markets and that have the greatest potential to create systemic risk. The need for a common approach to capital adequacy regulations for such banks is what drove the Committee to create the 1988 Basel Accord. As I have noted, however, the original Basel Accord has in some sense become the victim of its success, having been adopted in a number of countries and applied to entire banking systems, including banks both large and small. Now, as the Basel Committee is clearly moving away from a single approach to capital, it is important for the Committee and supervisors worldwide to reflect on the choices available to regulate the capital of banks that are neither highly complex nor internationally active. I believe that the differences between domestic banking systems make it impossible to conceive of a single capital Accord that would be appropriate for all banks in all countries. Rather, supervisors may need to consider different approaches. For some, retention of the current Accord, supplemented by 
 BIS Review 52/2002 7 the second and third pillars, may be the best way forward. Other countries may elect the revised standardized approach of the New Accord. Still others may seek a hybrid of these two possibilities. We should recognize that these might be perfectly valid choices for the treatment of non-complex domestic banks, depending on national circumstances. Attempts to force a uniform approach on such banks that typically do not compete across national borders are unnecessary and possibly counter-productive. Instead, our energy would be better spent on sharing ideas and developing a common understanding of the challenges that supervisors face in dealing with noncomplex domestic banking organizations. Accordingly, at its meeting yesterday, the Basel Committee agreed to launch an initiative jointly with supervisors from many other countries to consider these issues and to develop practical guidance for supervisors on the issues associated with the capital regulation of smaller, non-complex banks. Let me be very clear. The purpose of this initiative is not to develop one or even several specific "Basel-approved" approaches to such regulation. Rather, we wish to provide practical assistance to supervisors confronting the challenges ahead to develop an appropriate regulatory framework suitable for their national circumstances and domestic banking systems. We wish to support your efforts to enhance the adequacy of capital in a manner that conforms with your institutions’ risk profiles, strengthens the management of risk, and fortifies the stability of your financial systems. Concluding thoughts on the New Accord Clearly, all of us have come a long way since 1988, regardless of whether we were the first or simply the most recent supervisors to adopt the original Accord. As we develop new approaches to capital adequacy, none of the milestones we’ve achieved, and none of our success in resolving open issues, would have been possible without the dedication that you, the members of the global supervisory community, have demonstrated. You have been enormously supportive of our work and have undertaken considerable pains to share your views and ideas. The members of the Committee and I are particularly grateful to our friends and colleagues in the rest of the supervisory community for your advice and counsel. We know that none of us will be able to claim individually the success of the New Accord as our own. Instead, it is dependent on all of us to work hard and promote the virtues and benefits of the New Accord in our own countries. Press releases and some encouraging words from supervisors will not suffice. Success will demand our mutual and dogged determination to encourage our banks, to prepare our staff, and to cooperate with each other. As we complete the final miles of our marathon journey, I am confident that the New Accord will be worthy of our efforts. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 1 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 12 September 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB, which was also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Mr. Christodoulakis, and Commissioner Solbes. At today’s meeting, the Governing Council continued its comprehensive examination of monetary, financial and economic developments and assessed new evidence that has become available over the past few weeks. Our conclusion is that risks to price stability appear rather balanced. Against this background, the current level of key ECB interest rates is appropriate. As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average of the annual growth rates of M3 was 7.3% in the period from May to July 2002, compared with 7.4% in the period from April to June 2002. Hence, there is no indication of a significant reduction in monetary growth over the last few months. The recent strength in M3 growth partly reflects both the low opportunity cost of holding money and renewed portfolio shifts into M3 in an environment of financial market uncertainty. In this context, monetary trends need to be assessed with caution. From a longer-term perspective, there is concern that more liquidity is available in the euro area than would be needed to finance sustainable, non-inflationary economic growth. However, at this juncture, there is less risk that excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressure, given the environment of subdued demand. The trend in the growth of loans to the private sector also seems to point in this direction. Concerning the second pillar, the latest data confirm a modest recovery in real GDP growth in the euro area in the first half of this year. In the second quarter of this year real GDP growth is estimated to have grown by 0.3% quarter on quarter, following upwardly revised growth of 0.4% in the first quarter. In contrast to the first quarter, developments in demand appear to have been more broadly based, as activity was supported by private consumption, export growth and inventories. However, overall domestic demand growth remained subdued as a result of the protracted weakness of investment. Looking ahead, the most likely scenario is that of ongoing, albeit modest, growth in real GDP in the second half of this year, with growth rates in line with potential growth in 2003. This delay in the acceleration of economic activity in the euro area broadly corresponds with the world economic outlook, given that the expected pace of the recovery has been scaled down over recent months. Sharp declines in stock prices are having negative effects on consumer and investor confidence. Consequently, the strength of the upturn in economic activity has become more uncertain, both inside and outside the euro area. At the same time, however, the conditions for a stronger economic recovery in the euro area remain in place. On the domestic side, private consumption should particularly benefit from lower inflation and improved real disposable income, while investment should be supported by low nominal and real market interest rates. Finally, the gradual recovery of the global economy is also expected to continue. Nevertheless, risks to the economic outlook, both inside and outside the euro area, need to be monitored closely. Turning to price developments, in July annual HICP inflation was 1.9%, while the inflation rate excluding unprocessed food and energy fell slightly to 2.5%, its first decline in 2002. Eurostat’s flash estimate for August, which indicates that annual HICP inflation increased to 2.1%, is fully in line with previous expectations that inflation rates were likely to fluctuate at around 2% for the remainder of the year. However, the short-term trend is also dependent on oil price developments, which have increased significantly over recent months. Looking further ahead, the recent appreciation of the euro exchange rate, as well as the overall economic environment, should contribute to a reduction in consumer price inflation. Moreover, services price inflation is expected to moderate somewhat, following particularly strong increases in 2002. However, for inflation rates to come down to levels below 2% in 2003, as currently projected by most forecasts, it is crucial that oil prices do not escalate and that wage moderation prevails. With respect to nominal wage growth, we have already noted an upward trend over recent years, which continued even when the economy started to slow down. While the information from the latest wage 
 2 BIS Review 51/2002 indicators does not signal a further acceleration, wage developments remain a cause for concern, despite the weak cyclical situation. With regard to the devastating floods which have hit three member countries in particular, we deeply regret the substantial loss of life. The overall macroeconomic impact of these floods should be limited and have no lasting effects. Certain food prices could temporarily rise as a result, also due to bad weather conditions in other euro area countries, and while real GDP growth could initially be dampened slightly it may subsequently be stimulated by reconstruction. Overall, subdued aggregate demand and the strengthening of the euro should contribute to lower inflationary pressure. At the same time, other factors - in particular monetary developments, but also wage trends and oil price developments - might pose risks to price stability in the medium term and therefore need to be monitored closely. Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, flood-related costs should lead to a review of priorities and a reallocation of expenditure. In addition, against the background of recent developments, it seems to be more warranted than ever to call on member countries to remain committed to the Stability and Growth Pact. Countries with sound fiscal positions should safeguard their achievements, while countries with remaining imbalances must avoid deficits in excess of 3% of GDP and implement determined policies in order to progress towards budgets close to balance or in surplus. This is essential for maintaining and further strengthening confidence in the policy framework in the euro area and for establishing fiscal positions in all countries that allow automatic stabilisers to work efficiently without endangering sound fiscal positions in the longer term. In the field of structural reforms we continue to urge governments to implement, in a determined way, the agenda set in the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. Structural reforms will contribute to expanding the euro area’s potential for non-inflationary growth and to reducing its high level of unemployment. At the same time, they will help to foster confidence among consumers and investors in long-term growth and employment opportunities in the euro area, thereby having a positive effect on spending and investment decisions in the short and medium term. Such confidence is fostered by a determined and broadly based implementation of the reform agenda, focusing, in particular, on labour and product markets. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 1 Vahur Kraft: Challenges facing Estonian economy in the European Union Speech by Mr Vahur Kraft, Governor of the Bank of Estonia, at the Roundtable “Has social market economy a future?”, organised by the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, Tallinn, 19 August 2002. *      *      * A. Introduction, review of the early 1990s and comparison with the present day First of all, allow me to thank Konrad Adenauer Foundation for the organisation of this interesting roundtable and for the honourable invitation to speak about “Challenges of Estonian economy in the European Union”. Today’s event shows yet again how serious is the respected organisers’ interest towards the EU applicant countries. I personally appreciate highly your support to our reforms and convergence in the society and economy. From the outside it may seem that the transformation and convergence process in Estonia has been easy and smooth, but against this background there still exist numerous hidden problems. One should not forget that for two generations half of Europe was deprived of civil society, private ownership, market economy. This is truth and it has to be reckoned with. It is also clear that the reflections of the “shadows of the past” can still be observed. They are of different kind. If people want the state to ensure their well-being but are reluctant to take themselves any responsibility for their own future, it is the effect of the shadows of the past. If people are reluctant to pay taxes but demand social security and good roads, it is the shadow of the past. In brief, if people do not understand why elections are held and what is the state’s role, it is the shadow of the past. But, of course, in ten years a lot has been achieved. We have built up democratic institutions. Market economy functions. Private ownership has a solid foundation. Banks provide credit to people for new housing developments. But our current success should not be taken for granted. And we should also bear in mind that much needs to be done yet. The public has to understand the role and possibilities of the state and the government in the market economy. Everybody should feel responsible for their own welfare as well as their family’s and the state’s well-being. Our new generation should be able to cope with the complicated processes of the modern society much better than we did. In our efforts to achieve this goal it is impossible to underestimate the support provided by our partners. The Estonian society and politicians need partners with whom to exchange experience and from whom still to learn the fundamentals of the functioning civil society. At that, I would like to thank Konrad Adenauer Foundation for the work it has done and is doing in Estonia and elsewhere for the promotion of political co-operation, preservation and support of free democracies throughout the world, development and consolidation of the social market economy and respective values. Allow me to express in my address also full recognition to Prime Minister Mart Laar who has been the leader of the Estonian government during several critical periods. Mart Laar was the head of the Estonian government during one of the most difficult periods - from the autumn of 1992 to November 1994. This was the turbulent period of initial reforms not only in the economy but the entire society, immediately after the monetary reform and adoption of the constitution. But, with your kind consent, I shall hereby focus on economic issues. These were the times when Estonia’s foreign reserves, in the current denomination, could have been expressed in hundreds millions of euros, the average monthly wage was slightly above one thousand kroons and, by the end of 1992, three big banks had collapsed. These were the years just after the monetary reform when the question “for how long this kroon is going to last” was often asked in Estonia, but even more frequently abroad. The central bank has always stressed the essential backing provided to the stability of the kroon’s exchange rate and the financial system by the economic reforms at large and a stable, predictable budget in particular. We have repeatedly stressed that the foundation for our relative economic success was laid in 1992 and 1993. Our banks would not be so strong to date without solid customers - private enterprises, individuals. The quick and resolute privatisation of former state-owned companies in the beginning of 1990s was a decisive factor in the establishment of a sound and strong customer base. Due to that Estonian banks have been able to extend credit to the strong private 
 2 BIS Review 51/2002 sector, in particular. Thus we managed to avoid the situation that many former socialist economies were forced to experience - floating of problem loans directly or indirectly to state-controlled, often corrupt industry. In the course of the reorganisation of the financial sector in the early 1990s we did not hesitate to liquidate badly-managed, insolvent banks in the first half of 1990s. Neither did the government hesitate when it was necessary to liquidate badly-managed, insolvent enterprises that were manufacturing for stock. Privatisation of state-owned companies for real money to core investors, and, if necessary, liquidation of state enterprises that were operating in the red, created a good basis for the emergence of a strong and free competition-driven business sector. Without it the real wages in Estonia would not have increased by almost one-third in the second half of 1990s, without it we would not be approaching the finish line in our EU accession process. Steps taken ten years ago for the demolition of the old, impotent and perspective-lacking system and for the building up of a new, viable and future-oriented economy are now bearing fruit. The basis of the economic reforms undertaken by the government in the early 1990s was a strong fiscal policy. Let’s be honest, at that time none of us knew exactly what a national budget really means and how the amount of state-collected taxes and public expenditure in practice affect the economy. One thing was clear - public expenditure should not exceed public income or the value of the Estonian kroon would immediately be put at stake. The 1992-1993 strictly balance-oriented strategy helped to create the social foundation that would even to date be suitable for developing a fiscal policy capable of even better supporting the balanced economy. I touched upon the economic policy key issues of the past decade because the same issues that were topical then are on today’s and tomorrow’s agendas. How to achieve better economic efficiency and improve competitiveness? How to avoid the deterrent impact of local lobby-groups on the economic policy and ensure a truly effective and free market? How to develop a truly balanced and forward-looking fiscal policy? These issues are in the focus not only in Estonia but also in the European Union. Naturally, today’s problems - like the society itself - have a completely different look than 10 years ago. It is not only Estonia that has changed, it is the entire world. However, the key questions - likewise the optimum solutions to them - are, in essence, the same. I would like to offer just a few examples for the illustration of the above-said. In the beginning of 1990s we created in Estonia conditions for truly free competition in the financial sector and the entire economy. Estonia abandoned all possible barriers to import and export of goods and services, created equal opportunities to all investors and privatised state-owned banks. These steps laid the foundation for our current success. To date, 10 years later, Estonia like the European Union discusses widely how to create a truly free market of infrastructure services which until now have been either directly or indirectly protected by the state. And principal solutions to this problem shall not differ from the decisions made in the first half of 1990s. It is true that, for example, opening up of the electricity market to free competition is definitely more time-consuming than privatisation of many industrial enterprises. But, surely, restructuring of the electricity sector does not differ in principle from the reform in the banking sector. In both cases the state must ensure the availability of the critical infrastructure in Estonia and communication with the external markets - in one case, it means payment systems, in the other case interconnections with the European and Scandinavian grids. In both cases the government has to ensure supervision over the market actors’ behaviour and establish clear rules. In both cases the government must have action plans or guidelines for crisis management. And when these guidelines and relevant national policies are in place, there will be no impediments to the complete opening of the market. The task of the government is not to delay the opening of the market but rather to speed it up. I am positive that, like in the banking sector, the society will benefit from this. It will result in more efficient production, lower prices, better service quality and curb the power of the monopolistic producers. To date, as in the early 1990s, we again face the question of what is the right fiscal policy. Of course, today this problem is raised in a slightly different way. But, in essence, it is the same question - what fiscal policy shall ensure the stable development of the Estonian economy within the fixed exchange rate regime and as part of the euro area. I shall return to this question towards the end of my presentation. Thus the economic policy key issues we are facing in the beginning of the 21st century resemble in many aspects the problems we tried to resolve in the beginning of 1990s. We have achieved progress in finding solutions to some of the problems, others have remained unresolved. One thing is clear - undue postponement of tough issues is no good to anybody. If we want to be treated as equal partners in the European Union, if we want to sustain the rapid growth rate and 
 BIS Review 51/2002 3 growing income level, we must tackle these problems with similar resolution and energy we did 10 years ago. B. Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - internal policy So - what are today’s and tomorrow’s challenges facing Estonian economy? Filled with pride for the economic development of our country over the past decade, we must now concentrate more on the future. Estonia’s goal is not only the sustainable economic growth target of 5.5-6 per cent per annum but also the preparedness to join the European Union and to make maximum use of the opening opportunities. What should we then focus on especially? B.1 Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - overall economic policy stance Estonian economy is already strongly integrated into the European economic area. From the perspective of the central bank I would like to refer to the clear convergence of the interest rate fluctuations and inflation cycles in Estonia and the European Union. The share of current and future EU member states in Estonia’s export is about 81%. In 1994-2001 Estonia’s export to the European Union increased on the average 25% per annum. Our exports to the European Union have steadily grown quicker than imports from the European Union. It means that we have been steadily increasing our market share in the European Union - although it is small. The export structure also characterises our competitiveness - exported goods reflect changes that have taken place in the economy. Our traditional export items are timber, textile and foodstuffs, but also, for example, parts and components of electric motors, cables, mobile phones, antennae and the like. We export not only goods but also services - primarily transport and travel services - also computer and IT services and the volume of these services has been increasing rapidly during the last three years. The FDI inflow that has reached the 9 billion kroon level in recent years proves our competitive position in the Baltic Sea region as well as a broader region. Equal distribution of investments between the main sectors of economy is an indication of the balanced economic development (in 2001, for example, manufacturing industry - 20%, transport and communications - 23%, wholesale and retail trade - 14%). It is also important to note that the FDI inflow was not contingent on the privatisation of former SOEs. And finally, our competitiveness is demonstrated by the yield of investments made in Estonia and reinvesting of substantial part of annual profits which in 2001 amounted to 3,8 billion kroons. This is also shows our competitiveness. The readiness of Estonian economy for the integration with the European economic system is demonstrated especially well by such key sectors of our economy as the financial and telecommunication sectors. Here we talk about the complete opening of the market to domestic and foreign competition, strong state supervision and integration of Estonian enterprises in the big multinational corporations. What should we focus on in the future? Estonia is no longer a catching-up candidate country as it was three-four years ago. However, we still cannot say that the restructuring of our economy has been completed. On the contrary, the forthcoming member status in the EU will mean many more responsibilities. Our goal is not simply to be ready for the EU accession but to ensure maximum use of the opportunities concurrent with the membership. What should we focus most on? First, a clear vision of the state’s role in the organisation of the economic system. The task of the state is not to produce goods or services - be it in such specific areas as energy or rail transport. The task of the state is to ensure the functioning of the market wherever it for some or other reason requires its support. Secondly, unemployment has become a problem in Estonia. Without dwelling on concrete statistics, I would like to emphasise that labour market is subject to the same set of rules as all other markets. If labour is too expensive, entrepreneurs will not recruit new workers. I stress this fact because in recent 
 4 BIS Review 51/2002 years our political measures for the mitigation of unemployment have, as a rule, been driven by the so-called active labour market strategy - focusing mainly on retraining and further education. Although an active labour market policy is necessary to increase the mobility of the labour force, it can reduce unemployment only if the legislative regulatory framework and the overall structure of the labour market foster the creation of new jobs. I think that we should in Estonia seriously and comprehensively analyse factors that influence employment, including absolute or relative taxation of the workforce and costs related to hiring and layoffs. Thirdly, the balanced growth. Reforms are not an objective per se, we undertake them with the assumption that they will lead to a higher economic growth rate, higher income and improved living standard. Leaving aside the turbulent years of economic reforms immediately after the 1992 monetary reform which lasted until 1995, the average annual economic growth rate in Estonia has been above 5%. Between 1995 and 2001 the average salary increased from 2086 kroons to 5721 kroons. During the same time period real wages increased by one-third. We believe that our mean economic growth rate will continue to be about 6% per annum. The quality of the economic growth in Estonia is consolidated by growing productivity - in 1995-2001 the GDP per capita (in fixed prices) increased by almost 40%. It is also demonstrated by the remarkable interest of the private sector and its readiness to invest. Structural changes in the economy can also be regarded as quality indicators - changes in the distribution between the industrial, agricultural and service sectors. Still, in the forthcoming years we must keep a watchful eye on the external equilibrium of our economy, the current account deficit and its financing, changes in the productivity and competitiveness. It is obvious that no country, not even Estonia, when planning its economic policies should assume, for example, a 8-8% current account deficit spanning several years. Even if the latter is in the initial years financed through foreign direct investments, the adaptation of the economy is inevitable. The slower the economic growth is during the adaptation period, the more painful it is for the society. The goal of the economic policy should be the prevention of the internal demand-driven boom immediately prior and after the EU accession which will be followed by a significantly slower growth phase. Pre-accession economic programme and macroeconomic risks All these important issues are, to a certain extent, reflected in Estonia’s pre-accession economic programme which was recently approved by the government of the republic. I stress that the projections which form the basis of the national pre-accession programme and the premise that in Estonian economy the real total output is going to increase at the rate of about 6% per year are attainable only if the current economic policy continues. Keeping of the macrobalance is of critical importance for sustaining the economic growth and credibility of the monetary policy. The kroon’s fixed exchange rate and the forthcoming entry into the euro zone are by no means “free lunches”. B.2 Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - internal policy - joining the EMU Estonia’s entry into the euro zone is contingent on the fulfilment of economic criteria applicable to the single currency countries - on the other hand, one can say that only these economies that meet the requirements can benefit from the transition to the single currency. And Estonia’s monetary and exchange rate policy during the pre-accession period and immediately after the EU accession should be considered against this background. First, the fixed exchange rate of the Estonian kroon against the euro and the currency board system will remain unchanged before and after the accession to the European Union. The adoption of the euro will take place in three stages in accordance with the acquis - joining the European Union, joining the ERM2 exchange rate mechanism and, once the Maastricht criteria are met, joining the euro area. The condition of the Estonian economy and financial system as well as integration with the EU markets that I commented upon earlier in our view fully support this principle. Also the European Commission and the European Central Bank have affirmed us that the euro-based fixed exchange rate and currency board regime, in principle, are in harmony with the acquis and conform to the requirements set for the monetary policy of the non-euro zone economies. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 5 Secondly, ERM2 provides to the new member states a necessary and useful interim stage between the EU accession and the adoption of the euro. The choice of monetary and exchange rate policies in new member states has been diverse. ERM2 is a suitable and flexible means for the harmonisation of varied monetary policies and applied tools. The post-accession period will most likely be a serious test phase to most member states - definitely Estonia - in elaboration of their economic and fiscal policies and relevant co-operation with the EU institutions. Participation in the development of economic policy guidelines sets relatively high demands both on actual policy formulation and institutional co-operation. Naturally this process will have two parties - the present applicant countries will have joining in the EU processes whereas the “old” member states will have to study the key problems the new members states face in their economic development. The post-accession ERM2 phase is an appropriate time for the establishment of the comprehensive co-operation in the economic policy area on the national as well as the European Union level. The “testing” of the economies’ competitive abilities will also be crucial - not by means of the exchange rates but interest rates. Maastricht criteria For Estonia like for all new member states the only possible way to join the euro system is to do it in full compliance with the letter and spirit of the EU Treaty. As we well know, the key issue here is the fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria. Most new member states, Estonia included, will obviously have no great difficulties in meeting the sovereign debt and budget deficit criteria. The remaining two criteria - low inflation and exchange rate stability - are connected with some specific problems. The fulfilment of the inflation criteria might not in reality be as difficult as is feared - and achievable in not so distant future. However, in the context of rapid accession, the meeting of the inflation criteria becomes a main issue. This is due to the interaction of the so-called real and nominal convergence. Together with the rapid growth of productivity and earnings, prices are going to rise quicker in the new member states. Considering great price gaps in applicant countries v?s a v?s present member states, one can assume that price equalisation will take time. Thus we can conclude that inflation rates in the new member states will for several years stay higher than the mean rate of the three lowest inflation economies in the European Union plus 1.5 per cent. We have estimated that for Estonia the “optimum” pace for streamlining of prices would be ca 2 to 3 per cent points per year. In our opinion this difference reflects the quicker productivity increase trend in Estonia. In conclusion, a few comments on the main economic policy issues that the European Union faces. After the introduction of the euro the issue of potentially new co-operation modes has been raised repeatedly, This is also discussed at the Convention on the Future of Europe. Figuratively speaking, the question means which policy measures foster the best utilisation of the possibilities offered by the single currency. C. Challenges facing Estonian economy on its way to the European Union - the EU perspective The first priority issue is naturally the further improvement of the EU internal market. The on-going convergence and improved operational efficiency of the internal market will make prices more flexible and allow better use of resources. It is extremely important to develop the common market for all goods and services, including telecommunication services and other utilities - also financial services in order to ensure free competition and price formation based on the demand and supply on the Pan-European market. A well-functioning common market should help to reduce transaction costs, by offering more and more services via the internet, for example. A common innovation policy, system of business support measures and dissemination of experience of different businesses, availability of start-up capital - all this is deemed to promote productivity and further convergence. 
 6 BIS Review 51/2002 Flexibility and mobility of production factors Another set of critical issues is related to flexibility and mobility of production factors. Here I must stress the importance of capital and labour market flexibility. Both need all possible support in order to increase the efficient use of resources in the common market economies. In addition to the unified money market in the euro zone, we should aspire towards the full integration of capital markets. Simplified procedures for the adoption of secondary legislation that regulates the financial services area are an important step forward. The convergence of financial markets calls for a more extensive harmonisation of the legal environment in various countries. But it also requires closer co-operation between various national supervisory authorities and/or better co-ordination of supervision functions on the EU level. In addition, it should be taken into account that capital transfers between the member states would be easier if business laws and regulations of different countries are harmonised. Here I could mention rules governing companies’ mergers and takeovers, bankruptcy procedures, state aid distribution terms and conditions. A flexible labour market is extremely important for the effective common monetary policy purposes. However, it is unlikely that in the near future Europe will see any notable crossborder migration of the labour force - it is not expected to happen before or after the EU enlargement. Therefore, limited flexibility of the labour market should be offset by an efficient internal market, high capital mobility and greater flexibility of the domestic labour market. Fiscal policy - fiscal federalism In addition to the above-mentioned supply-related issues, the EU and its member states’ fiscal policy principles in the context of the common monetary policy have been under special scrutiny. It has been stated that enhanced co-operation within the fiscal policy area will allow to mitigate potential economic difficulties in various countries. In principle, the question is whether and to what extent automatic balancing mechanisms should be invoked on the EU general fiscal stance level and be targeted at the smoothing of regional disparities with automatic income transfers from the wealthy to the less-wealthy regions - thus, in fact, compensating for the lack of the exchange rate mechanism within the single currency regime. Also in recent months the question has been raised whether or not the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact are too rigid. By way of general comment, I should say that there are sufficiently many examples of great disparities between different regions of a federal state. Regional policy is crucial also for states with high labour mobility. Ultimately, the success of regional economies depends primarily on the efficient resource management and extensive income transfers can even slow down the adjustment process. In my view it is obvious that as long as the European Union remains to be the alliance of independent member states, there will be neither need nor possibility for any additional communitisation. Exceptions could include precisely defined circumstances when an intervention on the EU level would be justified in order to ensure the uninterrupted functioning of the internal market. Harmonisation of the fiscal policy on the macro level would be automatically accompanied with the tax rate equalisation. At that, taxation policies of any given member state reflect principal choices of their internal policy and preferences of the entire society. Stability and growth pact With the regard to the Stability and Growth Pact, it is assumed that automatic stabilisation mechanisms shall function smoothly within the 3% GDP scale. This threshold could be exceeded only in case of an abrupt or unexpected shock situation. Additionally, the Stability and Growth Pact aims at a balanced budget during the economic cycle. Thus it presumes that one should not look for structural reasons if some member state experiences a long-term budget deficit or surplus. In my opinion, the Stability and Growth Pact has performed its function very well in recent years. This is proved by the fact that most of the EU member states now have a much stronger fiscal position than in previous years. Any major changes in the Stability and Growth Pact are likely to cause additional insecurity and significantly affect the credibility of the entire framework. Therefore I believe that the Stability and Growth Pact should remain a cornerstone of the EU economic policy also in the years to come. Further convergence of markets and various national economies should by itself prop the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. In addition to the potential approximation of the business cycles, the 
 BIS Review 51/2002 7 common market should create preconditions enabling each country to invest its savings effectively within the Union. And even more importantly, harmonised and flexible commodity markets will help to reduce adjustment costs - and thus minimise the need to use budget stabilisation mechanisms during the short-term adjustment period. D. Concluding remarks To date the European Union faces several complicated but well-known economic policy problems from the recent past. Estonia as the future EU member state must take this into account. It is not enough to be able to overcome challenges on the WAY to the European Union. We must become equal partners to other European states, be able and willing to participate in the discussions on the monetary and fiscal policy issues, perceive Estonia in Europe and Europe in Estonia. Today the European Economic and Monetary Union within which 12 states have adopted the single currency, offers a historic chance to create a truly strong, flexible and efficient economic area. I believe that potentials of the single currency will be exploited in the best possible way. It would serve the interests of the current as well as future member states and the whole of Europe. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: Economic policy challenges Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Executive Board of the Confederation of Norwegian Business and Industry, 19 September 2002. Charts for the speech can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * A year and a half ago, the Government and the Storting adopted new guidelines for economic policy, which call for an annual use of petroleum revenues equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. At the same time, the Government issued a new operational mandate for monetary policy. Norges Bank shall set the key rate with a view to maintaining low and stable inflation. The first sentence in the monetary policy mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the national value of the krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. This is the best contribution monetary policy can make to economic growth and prosperity and is a necessary precondition for stability in the financial and property markets. The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the international value of the krone. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from day to day, from week to week, and from month to month. We do not have the instruments for fine-tuning the exchange rate. The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth an objective. The last paragraph specifies what Norges Bank shall do. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Monetary policy that is oriented towards low and stable inflation will contribute to a stable krone exchange rate over time. If we take steps to counteract an appreciation of the krone when there are pressures in the economy, we reduce the possibility of curbing inflation and increase the risk of fluctuations in the economy. Maintaining stability in the internal value of the krone must thus take precedence. The implementation of monetary policy has been delegated to Norges Bank. Norges Bank sets the interest rate on the basis of our understanding of the regulation. Our interpretation places emphasis on the Government’s rationale behind the regulation, on the objective as formulated in the first paragraph and on our knowledge about the relationships between the interest rate, the krone exchange rate, output, employment and inflation. The interest rate influences price inflation indirectly via domestic demand and via its effect on the exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it is more profitable to save and more costly to borrow. This has a dampening impact on consumption and investment. Lower demand in turn curbs the rise in prices and wages. Higher interest rates make it more attractive to take krone positions and borrow in foreign currency. As a result, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This reduces prices for imported goods. In addition, a strong krone curbs activity, profitability and the capacity to cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. It is important to be aware of the relationships between employment, output and inflation. If there is a shortage of labour and other economic resources, a tight monetary policy stance will reduce inflation through its effect on prices for imported goods and on aggregate demand for goods and services and for labour. When monetary policy is aimed at stabilising inflation, it will also contribute to stabilising aggregate output and employment. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be reduced. Monetary policy functions with considerable and variable lags. Therefore, the current level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target. It is nevertheless conceivable that in a situation with a high rate of inflation and sluggish economic growth, Norges Bank may decide to apply a somewhat longer time horizon than two years to reach the inflation target of 2½ per cent. By influencing inflation over time, monetary policy will not in itself cause unnecessary disturbances in the economy. 
 2 BIS Review 51/2002 Norges Bank has one instrument: the interest rate. Changes in the interest rate have a broad impact. Monetary policy can therefore not be oriented towards stabilising developments only in the internationally exposed sector, as has been advocated. This could easily create considerable imbalances in the Norwegian economy. The low interest rate policy and devaluations in the 1970s and 1980s are examples of how such a policy can fail. Monetary policy was geared towards preventing a deterioration of competitiveness in manufacturing. The krone was devalued on several occasions. But wage growth accelerated to compensate for higher inflation. The result was a wage and price spiral that hit the entire economy. At the same time, there was a sharp rise in the demand for loans, which created tensions in our financial system in the 1970s and in the 1980s. Monetary policy can be an effective means of influencing aggregate demand in the economy. However, there is little monetary policy can do to counter disturbances on the output side of the economy. Changes in wage formation, a decline in productivity growth or a sharp rise in prices for important factor inputs must instead be countered by measures to improve the way the economy functions. Fiscal policy places emphasis on smoothing fluctuations in the economy with a view to ensuring appropriate capacity utilisation and low unemployment. There is an overlap between the tasks that monetary policy and fiscal policy are intended to perform. This makes it natural to raise the issue of whether there is a need to coordinate fiscal and monetary policy decisions. Several reasons may lead to the interplay between monetary and fiscal policy failing to function. Interplay functions well when the decision-making bodies are conscious of how one body’s decisions influence the decisions of the others. Unless this fact is recognised, a decision will not produce the result that was planned. The economy may move in a very undesirable direction, with high interest rates, sluggish economic growth and a deterioration in the state’s financial position. Without coordination, a good result may still be achieved if fiscal policy acts as “leader” and monetary policy as “follower”, to use expressions taken from game theory. The fiscal policy authorities can internalise the monetary policy response pattern. The central bank’s response pattern must of course be known so that the fiscal authorities can take this into account. The social partners can similarly take any monetary policy response into account when wages are being determined. The “leader” in this interplay - the social partners - can take the “follower’s” - Norges Bank’s - response into account. This view is most relevant in centralised wage formation. In decentralised wage formation, monetary policy will instead affect wage growth via market mechanisms by stabilising aggregate demand. A precondition for interplay that functions well is that monetary policy is known and remains firm. The outcome of this year’s wage settlement indicates that the social partners have not internalised the monetary policy response pattern. Perhaps one of the stumbling blocks has been the choice of wage settlements at industry level and the large wage increases for employees outside the two largest employer/employee organisations (NHO and LO). The high wage growth awarded to groups whose wages are determined through individual agreements indicates that the labour market has been tight. The rise in salaries for white-collar workers and managers may also reflect weak cost control in enterprises and organisations following a long period of expansion. For a long time, a stable exchange rate and labour costs among our trading partners formed an anchor for wage determination. Since 1998, however, the rise in labour costs in Norway has been around 2 percentage points higher than that of our trading partners. High wage growth, combined with the global downturn and a strong krone, is having a severe impact on manufacturing. It is the combined wage growth for all groups that influences the inflation outlook. However, substantial wage increases for some groups can trigger wage spirals. Wages for salaried staff in the business sector have exhibited sharp growth. This year, it appears that wage increases will particularly be high in the public sector and in parts of the private service sector. Over time, growth in real wages must be consistent with growth in labour productivity. With an inflation target of 2½ per cent and trend growth in the economy of 2 per cent, there will be scope for annual nominal wage growth of about 4½ per cent. These figures are consistent with developments in the 1990s. Wage growth averaged 4½ per cent and productivity growth 2 per cent in this decade. This resulted in an inflation rate of 2½ per cent combined with a stable krone exchange rate. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 3 An unexpected upward shift in labour costs will require an increase in interest rates in order to avoid higher inflation. When wage growth reaches a level that is inconsistent with the inflation target, the result over time will be higher interest rates, lower employment and higher unemployment. There is a relationship between wage growth and interest rates. The lower wage growth is, the lower interest rates will be, and vice versa. The differences between interest rates in various countries reflect to a large extent differences in wage growth. Japan represents the one extreme, with an interest rate of zero and no wage growth. At the other extreme are Iceland and Norway, with high interest rates and high wage growth. The relatively high wage growth in Norway is the result of a tight labour market. In other countries, the situation is different, with sluggish economic growth and abating inflation. As a result, the interest rate is higher in Norway than in other countries. Households are enjoying strong growth in income and are borrowing heavily. Wage growth is high. Financial savings are low. There is strong growth in retail sales measured in current prices. House prices are high. Petroleum investment is also high. On the other hand, we expect to see weak developments in exports and for example in investment in commercial buildings. The Norwegian krone has appreciated markedly this year. Developments in wage settlements have probably been an important driving force. High wage growth leads to high interest rates, making it attractive to take krone positions. As a result, the Norwegian krone appreciates. We must be prepared for fluctuations in the krone exchange rate in line with that observed in other countries. There is free trade in goods and services and free capital movements. The krone is floating. This means that economic agents cannot assume that the krone will be stable against the euro, against the dollar or against a weighted average of foreign currencies. The krone does not fluctuate any more or less than other currencies. A large share of petroleum revenues is invested in foreign equities and bonds through the Petroleum Fund. Changes in oil prices influence the size of the Fund, but have little effect on the domestic use of petroleum revenues. The Petroleum Fund thus serves as a buffer against fluctuations in oil prices and shields the krone exchange rate. Nevertheless, we have been prepared for fluctuations in the krone exchange rate on a par with changes in other countries. Over the last two years, the appreciation of the krone has been driven by the wide and increased interest rate differential between Norway and other countries, which reflects the relatively high level of wage growth in Norway. The interest rate differential reflects high demand growth and high wage growth. There is a clear relationship between wage growth, interest rate expectations and the krone exchange rate. The appreciation of the krone dampens inflation, and at the same time weakens profitability, employment and the capacity to cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. The krone can move in both directions. It will not appreciate indefinitely. Sustained lower wage growth will be accompanied by a narrower interest rate differential and it may reverse movements in the exchange rate. A declining level of wage growth would provide a strong impetus to the internationally exposed sector. The interest rate could be reduced. This would lead to a depreciation of the krone, with a further improvement in earnings and employment. Over the last thirty years, manufacturing has been scaled back in waves. There was substantial downscaling in the years from 1977 to 1984 and 1987 to 1992 in particular. In the years leading up to the periods of contraction, profitability deteriorated in the manufacturing sector. It can take time before such a deterioration translates into lower output and employment. But when the turnaround does occur, it tends to be swift and hard-hitting. It now appears that a new period of downscaling is under way. Several factors point to this: First, productivity growth is higher in manufacturing than in other industries. This has resulted in a trend decline in the numbers employed in manufacturing in Norway, as it has in other OECD countries. Second, manufacturing costs have increased sharply since 1998. Up to the summer of 2000, this cost increase was to some extent offset by a weaker krone. The appreciation of the krone has highlighted and exacerbated the deterioration in cost competitiveness. On balance, it appears that cumulative wage growth in Norway will be a good 15 per cent higher than in other countries from 1998 to 2003. The krone is now about 7 per cent stronger than the average for the 1990s. 
 4 BIS Review 51/2002 Third, as a result of the fiscal guideline, the internationally exposed sector is subject to additional pressure. Over time, the phasing in of petroleum revenues will lead to restructuring and the transfer of resources from the exposed to the sheltered sector. Fourth, the response patterns in stabilisation policy function in a different way from previously. Under the “Solidarity Alternative”, the response pattern consisted of countering labour market pressures and strong wage growth by reducing growth in public spending (or, if appropriate, by strengthening government revenues). This had a beneficial impact on manufacturing industry. Today, monetary policy shoulders more of the burden. This may sometimes result in a strong krone exchange rate. Fifth, growth in the global economy is sluggish while, at the same time, oil prices are high. The fall in share prices curbs economic growth among our trading partners. Markets for Norway’s export industries are stagnating, but at the same time high oil prices are providing a stimulus for some sectors of the Norwegian economy. Interest rates were assessed by the Executive Board of Norges Bank yesterday. Interest rates were left unchanged. Norges Bank’s key interest rate, the sight deposit rate, therefore remains at 7 per cent. According to Norges Bank’s assessment, with an unchanged interest rate, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be higher than 2½ per cent is the same as the probability that it will be lower. A sharp rise in labour costs is contributing to a relatively high rise in prices for goods and services produced in Norway. A persistently strong krone will contribute to keeping down prices for imported goods. The strong krone will have consequences for activity in the internationally exposed sector. Together with prospects for low inflation internationally, the strong krone is the most important force acting as a counterweight to the sharp rise in domestic costs. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 1 M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: A brief comment on credit risk analysis Opening address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC Financial Regulators Training Initiative Regional Program - Credit Risk Analysis, Bangkok, 26 August 2002. *      *      * Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a pleasure for me to be here at the opening of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Financial Regulators Training Initiative Regional Program on Credit Risk Analysis. The Bank of Thailand is indeed privileged to have the opportunity to host this distinctive event initiated by APEC. I also wish to personally extend a warm welcome to all the participants and to express our deepest appreciation to the distinguished speakers who have kindly agreed to come to share with us their knowledge and wisdom on various aspects of credit risk analysis. Needless to say, amongst other risks, credit risk or the possibility that a borrower will default, represents a key risk in the banking business. The example of the Thai financial system where roughly 400 billion baht of non-performing loans, commonly known as NPLs still remains since the 1997 financial crisis shows the painstaking effect of credit risks at the national level. Global trends along with advance technology and financial innovations have further added complications to the matter by enabling financial institutions to change their activities and risk profiles at a speed and scale which could not be imagined a few years ago. These developments have spurred the necessity of our having to better understand and perform more analysis on banking risks. After all, banks do live and prosper by accepting risks, but these risks have to be managed with proper care. As we have all seen, well-managed banks have tended to stay resilient to the banking crisis and provided a backbone for restoration of financial stability. We must therefore, continuously adopt new techniques and technologies in risk analysis to ensure appropriate risk management of all financial institutions in the future. Of course, prevention is always better than the cure. As financial regulators, one of our main tasks is to provide a prudential framework ensuring the overall improvement of risk management of financial institutions. In the case of Thailand consolidated supervision as well as prompt corrective action will be introduced under the new Financial Institutions Act. Study is also on the way to prepare ourselves for the implementation of the BIS New Capital Regime, and we look forward to their conclusion for an explicit framework that will complement our current practices where we ask the Board to understand the nature of their organization’s business activities and risk appetite in order to provide an adequate internal control system to monitor and mitigate risks. Risk-based supervision represents yet another endeavor to tackle the effectiveness of risk management of financial institutions as transaction testing may no longer be an effective approach to examine the ever-more complex financial institutions of today. I must therefore, commend APEC for this initiative in bringing together bank supervisors across countries within the Asia and the Pacific region to learn and to share views and wisdom on this very important topic. It is my hope that all of you would take this opportunity to learn as much as possible from our highly experienced and knowledgeable speakers as well as from one another on the key issues relating to credit risks, but most importantly to reinforce supervision standards in order to enhance financial stability under your jurisdiction. Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to declare open the APEC Financial Regulators Training Initiative Regional Program on Credit Risk Analysis. I wish you every success and a pleasant stay in Bangkok. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: The role of the Central Bank Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Fafo Institute for Labour and Social Research and the Norwegian Power and Democracy Project, Oslo, 6 September 2002. *      *      * The way in which economic policy is oriented today reflects the experience gained and the lessons learned in the 1970s and 1980s. In Norway, efforts to develop an economy under strong centralised coordination and control culminated in the 1973 proposal1 to establish an incomes policy council. According to the proposal, the social partners would undertake a commitment through the council to keep negotiated wage increases within specific limits. It was also stipulated that demand management policy should be included as part of incomes policy. The proposal to establish an incomes policy council was logical. It was the last wall in the building that was constructed after the war. Coordination and control were important key words. Other components were: • fiscal policy oriented towards full employment • regulation of credit within limits specified in a separate credit budget • channelling of loans through the state banks • regulation of capital movements • low nominal interest rates stipulated by the government authorities • a fixed, though adjustable, krone exchange rate • use of price regulation • an active business policy through state ownership and state grants and subsidies The proposal to establish an incomes policy council did not receive support. There was just too much control and coordination. Now, only 30 years later, very little of this system remains. The building was not solid enough. We know from experience that fiscal policy alone cannot ensure a high level of employment. The structure of the labour market and of wage formation is probably of greater importance. The direct regulation of credit, interest rates and capital movements broke down and was phased out in the 1980s. The krone is floating. Price regulation no longer plays a role as a macroeconomic instrument. The scope of business policy has become more general. State ownership in the Norwegian business sector remains extensive, but the management of ownership has been totally revised following the negative experience of companies in Kongsberg, Mo i Rana and Syd-Varanger. I would like to highlight two factors that have taken on considerable importance for economic policy. One of these factors is that economic agents look to the future when they make decisions about consumption and investments, wages and prices, and want to take account of economic policy not only as it is today, but also as they expect it to be tomorrow and in the future. This is particularly evident in foreign exchange and financial markets, where exchange and interest rates are influenced when participants shift large amounts partly on the basis of their expectations concerning economic policy and economic developments. Financial market expectations concerning economic policy are entirely different today from what they were 20-30 years ago. Behaviour can change from being very rational to herd behaviour. The issues that receive attention, and that govern movements in exchange and interest rates, change. It is thus important that the authorities do not sow doubt, but on the contrary act in a long-term and predictable manner. The authorities must be credible and inspire confidence. There must be a good match between the stated objectives of economic policy and what is actually done to achieve them. This is the most important reason why the implementation of monetary policy has been delegated to the central bank in Norway,                                                       1 Cf. Official Norwegian Report (NOU) 1973:36 (price problems). 
 2 BIS Review 50/2002 as has been the case in other comparable countries. In Norway, the responsibility for interest rate decisions was delegated to Norges Bank in 1986. The other factor is the special challenges to stabilisation policy posed by petroleum revenues. Norway’s export revenues and government revenues can be expected to be very high as long as production remains high, and as long as the global market allows producing countries to extract substantial economic rent. At the same time, we know from experience that revenues may vary sharply from year to year. As a result of the high level of earnings and fluctuations in these revenues, the most important contribution fiscal policy can make to stabilising the Norwegian economy is to provide a sound, long-term plan for the use of petroleum revenues. Attempts to use the central government budget to fine-tune economic activity may, at worst, have a destabilising effect if these attempts are perceived as being a departure from the long-term plan for the phasing in of petroleum revenues. It is necessary to show that fiscal policy can be applied symmetrically in periods of economic expansion and contraction. A year and a half ago, the Government and the Storting adopted new guidelines for economic policy, which call for an annual use of petroleum revenues equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. At the same time, the Government issued a new operational mandate for monetary policy. Norges Bank shall set the key rate with a view to maintaining low and stable inflation. Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002MonetaryPolicy Regulation(1)•Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone'snational and international value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments.Monetary policy shall also underpin fiscal policy by contributing to stable developments in output and employment.•Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy. Norges Bank’s mandate reads as follows: Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments. At the same time, monetary policy shall underpin fiscal policy by contributing to stable developments in output and employment. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 3 Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002MonetaryPolicy Regulation(2)•Norges Bank's implementation of monetary policy shall, in accordance with the first paragraph, be oriented towards low and stable inflation.The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. Norges Bank’s implementation of monetary policy shall, in accordance with the first paragraph, be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth an objective. The last paragraph specifies what Norges Bank shall do. The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the national value of the krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation fosters economic growth and stability in financial and property markets. The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the international value of the krone. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from day to day, from week to week, and from month to month. We have free international trade and free capital movements. We do not have the instruments for fine-tuning the exchange rate. But when monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation, this will contribute to a stable krone exchange rate over time. Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Relationshipsin monetarypolicyNorges Bank'sinterestratesExchange rateConsumerpriceinflationConsumptionInvestmentLabour marketWagesand marginsImportedpriceinflation The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its effect on the exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it is more profitable to save and more costly to borrow. This has a dampening impact on consumption and investment. Lower demand in turn curbs the rise in prices and wages. 
 4 BIS Review 50/2002 Higher interest rates also make it more attractive to take krone positions and borrow in foreign currency. As a result, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This reduces prices for imported goods. In addition, a strong krone curbs activity, profitability and the capacity to cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Implementationofmonetarypolicy•If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent, with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be increased.•If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent, with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced.•It is just as important to avoid a rate of inflation that is too low as it is to avoid a rate that is too high. The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be reduced. This orientation of monetary policy will normally also contribute to stabilising production and employment. Monetary policy functions with considerable and variable lags. The current inflation rate does not provide sufficient information to determine the level at which interest rates should be set now. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target. It is nevertheless conceivable that in a situation with a high rate of inflation and weak economic developments, Norges Bank may decide to apply a somewhat longer time horizon than two years to reach the target of 2½ per cent. Nor do we need to be in any hurry to raise the level of inflation in a situation where inflation is very low, while economic activity is high. By influencing inflation over time, monetary policy will not in itself cause unnecessary disturbances in the economy. A precondition for applying a longer time horizon is that financial market participants have strong confidence in low and stable inflation over time, and that wage formation has a nominal anchor. Flexible inflation targeting provides a framework for the use of monetary policy instruments that both ensures that the economy has a nominal anchor and allows monetary policy to smooth fluctuations in the economy that are due to changes in demand for goods and services. At the same time, the budgetary guidelines state that “...[in fiscal policy] considerable emphasis must be placed on stabilising fluctuations in the economy with a view to ensuring appropriate capacity utilisation and low unemployment.”2 We can see here that there is an overlap between the tasks monetary policy and fiscal policy are intended to perform. This naturally raises the issue of whether there is after all a need to coordinate fiscal and monetary policy decisions. Is there, for example, a risk of a situation arising where Norges Bank tightens monetary policy to achieve the inflation target, while at the same time the central government authorities increase the use of petroleum revenues (more than implied in the fiscal policy guideline) in order to increase employment and reduce unemployment?                                                       2 Report 29 (2000-2001) to the Storting: Guidelines for economic policy. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 5 There are various factors that can prevent the interplay between monetary and fiscal policy from functioning.3 Interplay functions well when the decision-making bodies are conscious of how one body’s decisions influence the decisions of the other.  Unless this fact is recognised, a decision will not produce the result that was planned. The economy may move in a very undesirable direction, with high interest rates, sluggish economic growth and deterioration in the state’s financial position. 4 However, even without continuous coordination, a fairly good result may be achieved if fiscal policy acts as “leader” and monetary policy as “follower”, to use expressions taken from game theory.5 The authorities determine fiscal policy knowing how monetary policy will react. Today’s flexible inflation targeting establishes a firm framework for monetary policy and provides clear guidelines on how monetary policy is to respond in different situations. The fiscal policy authorities can internalise the monetary policy response pattern. This is only natural, since the mandate for monetary policy was laid down by the Government and the Storting. In other words, the conditions exist for delegating the interest rate decision, but the central bank’s response pattern must be known, so that the fiscal authorities can take this into account. When the response pattern in monetary policy is known and remains unchanged over time, the social partners can also take any monetary policy response into account when wages are being determined. The “leader” in this interplay - the social partners - can take the “follower’s” - Norges Bank’s - response into account. This view is most relevant in centralised wage formation.  In decentralised wage formation, monetary policy will instead affect wage growth via market mechanisms by stabilising aggregate demand. The current monetary policy guidelines will function well whether wages are determined centrally, locally or individually. The outcome of this year’s wage settlement, and the debate that followed, may indicate that the social partners have not yet internalised the response pattern in monetary policy ensuing from the mandate laid down by the Government and the Storting. Perhaps a stumbling block has been the choice of wage settlements at industry level and the large wage increases for employees outside the two largest employer/employee organisations (NHO and LO). On the other hand, the choice of settlement type is probably influenced by the participants’ assessment of the economic outlook. The high wage growth awarded to groups whose wages are determined through individual agreements indicates that the labour market has been tight. However, the rise in salaries for white-collar workers may also reflect weak cost control in enterprises and organisations following a long period of expansion. A precondition for interplay that functions well is that monetary policy is known and remains firm. The best thing Norges Bank can do to contribute to good interplay between the various components of economic policy and wage formation is therefore to be transparent about its analyses and assessments of economic developments.                                                       3 Various game situations between fiscal and monetary policy are described in the literature. Some of these games are discussed in Kai Leitemo (2000): “Samspillet mellom penge- og finanspolitikken under et underliggende inflasjonsmål for en liten åpen økonomi” (The interplay between fiscal and monetary policy under an underlying inflation target for a small, open economy) in Norsk Økonomisk Tidsskrift No. 2/2000, and in Erling Steigum (2000): “Samspillet mellom penge- og finanspolitikken ved et inflasjonsmål” (The interplay between fiscal and monetary policy with an inflation target) in the book Perspektiver på pengepolitikken (Perspectives on monetary policy), edited by Jan F. Qvigstad and Øistein Røisland. 4 This is the game theory known as the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. 5 Cf. descriptions in the Stackelberg equilibrium game theory. 
 6 BIS Review 50/2002 Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Labour costsin Norwayand amongtradingpartners1)Percentagegrowth01234567199319951997199920012003012345671)Hourlylabourcosts in manufacturingSource:Statistics Norway, TRCIS/IMF and Norges BankNorwayTradingpartners For a long time, a stable exchange rate and labour costs among our trading partners formed an anchor for wage determination. Since 1998, however, the rise in labour costs in Norway has been around 2 percentage points higher than that of our trading partners. High wage growth, combined with the global downturn and a strong krone, is having a severe impact on manufacturing. Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Sustainablewagegrowth•The 'Solidarity Alternative' (Aukrustmodel)Wagegrowthamongtradingpartners3-4 per cent(+Productivity growth in Norway -productivity growth abroad   0= Scope for wage growth in Norway3-4 per cent•InflationtargetTheGovernment'sinflationtarget2½  per cent+ "Normal" productivitygrowth2  per cent= Scope for wage growth in Norway4½ per cent Over time, growth in real wages must be consistent with growth in labour productivity. An inflation target of 2½ per cent and trend productivity growth of around 2 per cent, according to updated national accounts figures, imply annual nominal wage growth of about 4½ per cent. These figures are consistent with developments in the 1990s, when wage growth averaged 4½ per cent. This resulted in inflation of 2½ per cent. The krone exchange rate was stable. In general, an unexpected upward shift in labour costs will prompt an increase in interest rates in order to avoid higher inflation. With a floating exchange rate and unchanged interest rates, an increase in wage growth of one percentage point will eventually translate into a comparable increase in price inflation, unless this increase is based on higher productivity. The magnitude of the interest rate increase must be adapted to this. First, the nominal interest rate must be increased to maintain the real interest rate. Second, the real interest rate must also be increased in order to prevent inflation from accelerating. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 7 Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 20020246802468Rise in labourcosts, 1998-2002Key rates and rise in labourcosts1) 2)Per centEuro areaUSNorway²)JapanDenmarkKeyratesSeptember 2002Sources: OECD, TRCIS and Norges Bank1)Hourly wage growth in manufacturing2)Figures for Norway from the Technical Reporting Committee on Income SettlementsIcelandSwedenFinlandUK When wage growth reaches a level that is inconsistent with the inflation target, the result over time will be higher interest rates, lower employment and higher unemployment. Similarly, lower wage growth will normally result in lower interest rates, higher employment and lower unemployment. There is a relationship between wage growth and interest rates. The lower wage growth is, the lower interest rates will be, and vice versa. Japan represents the one extreme, with an interest rate of zero and no wage growth. At the other extreme are Iceland and Norway, with high wage growth and a high key rate. Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Annualwagegrowth1)and unemployment2)Per cent0246819931995199719992001024681)  Averagefor all groups, includingthecostofadditionalvacationdays2)  Registeredunemployedand onlabourmarket programmesas a percentageofthelabourforceUnemploymentrateAnnualwagegrowthSources: TRCIS, DirectorateofLabour and Norges Bank High wage growth affects the exposed business sector in two ways. First, it erodes earnings and reduces employment. Second, monetary policy has to be tightened. This leads to an appreciation of the krone, with a further reduction in earnings and employment. 
 8 BIS Review 50/2002 Fafoog Makt-og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002Annual wage growth in enterprises in the Confederation of Norwegian Business and Industry0246819931995199719992001024681) IncludescostsofadditionalvacationdaysTotal employees1)Sources: TRCIS and Norges BankSalariedemployees1) It is combined wage growth for all groups that influences the outlook for inflation. However, substantial wage increases for some groups can trigger wage spirals. Wages for salaried staff in the business sector have exhibited sharp growth over several years. This year, it appears that wage increases will be especially high in the public sector and in parts of the private service sector. Although it is too early to draw final conclusions, there are some indications that wage formation in Norway is changing: • The social partners do not appear to be placing as much emphasis as previously on developments in wage growth among our trading partners. • There are also signs that the social partners may be placing less emphasis on the impact on total unemployment when negotiating wages. • Some features of this year’s wage settlement point to a somewhat greater degree of decentralisation in wage formation. An example of this is the municipal sector, where the Federation of Professional Associations will, as from this year, hold local negotiations on pay increases. On the other hand, centrally negotiated pay increases were very high this year. • In public sector wage settlements, little emphasis appears to have been placed on the assumptions concerning wage growth on which government allocations are based. This has a negative impact on service production in many areas of the public sector. The experience of this year’s wage settlement also indicates that profitability in the internationally exposed sector has been given less emphasis in wage negotiations than earlier. A shortage of labour in more sheltered industries may thus have a greater influence than previously on overall wage growth. Inflation would then be determined by domestic factors to a greater extent than in the past. The Norwegian economic system has undergone substantial changes over the past ten to twenty years. The model based on detailed control of capital, credit and interest rates and centralised coordination has been abandoned. Less emphasis is placed on having discretionary scope for manoeuvre and on using surprise decisions to influence economic developments. It is recognised that the structure of the labour market and of wage formation has a decisive impact on developments in employment. Monetary policy is delegated in Norway and in comparable countries. The monetary policy guidelines provide a foundation for building credibility and creating confidence in economic policy, thereby making it more effective. 
BIS Review 49/2002 1 Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy, cyclical fluctuations and competitiveness Address by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Norwegian Association of Economists, 5 September 2002. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank(cid:146)s press conference following the Executive Board(cid:146)s monetary policy meeting on 7 August and on previous speeches. *      *      * 1.  Introduction Thank you for giving me this opportunity to discuss the relationships between monetary policy, cyclical developments and competitiveness. There has been some debate about monetary policy this summer. Part of this debate has focused on the role monetary policy can and should have in smoothing fluctuations in the real economy and safeguarding competitiveness in the Norwegian business sector. Some have maintained that we place too much weight on reaching the inflation target. Statements like this should be discussed in the light of what monetary policy can be used for and of the broad effects on the economy of various monetary policy objectives. Only when we have clarified our options, can we discuss whether the emphasis on the inflation target is (cid:147)too great(cid:148), (cid:147)too little(cid:148) or (cid:147)just right(cid:148). I hope to be able to offer some clarification today. I think it will also become clear that Norges Bank in its implementation of monetary policy consciously seeks to avoid unnecessary disturbances in the real economy. First of all, I would like to present a theoretical outline of how monetary policy works and then indicate some relevant and realistic monetary policy objectives.1 I will then discuss and assess Norwegian monetary policy on this basis, including the trade-offs we face in economic policy. It is important to note that it is a question of trade-offs. We simply cannot have everything we want. 2a. How does monetary policy influence the economy? Monetary policy affects the economy through several channels, together referred to as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In a closed economy, monetary policy mainly works by influencing demand through changes in the real interest rate. In an open economy, monetary policy also works through changes in the exchange rate. Let us make a stylised review of what happens if the central bank raises the key interest rate. In the short and medium term, prices are relatively rigid. As a result, the short and longer real rates of interest also tend to increase when the nominal interest rate is raised. In addition, there is both a nominal and a real appreciation of the exchange rate.                                                       1 The presentation is largely based on Svensson, Lars E.O. (2002): (cid:145)Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization(cid:146), mimeo. Princeton University 
2 BIS Review 49/2002  • The direct exchange rate channel to inflation  An appreciation will reduce prices for imported goods measured in krone terms. How quickly this reduction will feed through to consumer prices depends among other things on competitive conditions and margin setting.  A change in the real interest rate will also influence demand in the economy. • The real interest rate channel to aggregate demand • An increase in the real interest rate reduces demand, both for consumer and investment goods. It becomes relatively more attractive to save, and leads to a reduction in current consumption. Investors in their turn will face higher investment costs and will as a result reduce investment demand. • The exchange rate channel to aggregate demand  Strengthening the exchange rate means that domestically produced goods and services become relatively more expensive than competing foreign products. Demand for domestically produced goods is thus reduced.  It is common to assume that the effects through the channels mentioned so far will come about within one year of a change in the interest rate. The direct exchange rate channel to inflation is probably the one that acts quickest. • The demand channel to inflation  The reduction in aggregate demand as a result of the rise in the interest rate will in turn slow the rise in prices. This is mainly due to two factors. First, output is reduced. The decline in output results in lower demand for labour. This reduces wage growth. Second, firms set lower prices as a result of lower demand. The impact on inflation is often assumed to come one to two years after the effect on aggregate demand.  In addition to these relatively direct effects, the price level will also be influenced by changes in prices for imported and domestically produced intermediate goods. • The expectations channel to inflation  Both price and wage inflation is affected by changes in expected inflation. One reason is that firms often set prices for several periods. The same applies to wage formation. Expected price changes will figure prominently in the calculation of expected future real wages. We have seen that an increase in the nominal rate of interest reduces inflation through various channels with varying lags. As a result, inflation expectations can also be expected to be redused. The expectation channel will therefore amplify the effect of monetary policy.  The time it takes for a change in the interest rate to have an impact on inflation and demand will vary. It must also be stressed that in the course of the period in which a change in the interest rate affects output and inflation - and often before monetary policy takes effect - the economy will be influenced by a number of direct and indirect disturbances. Thus, the central bank(cid:146)s control over inflation and production is far from perfect. 2b.  What is a reasonable objective for monetary policy? The goal of economic policy tends to be a desire for maximum welfare for the country(cid:146)s inhabitants. This goal is often expressed as a number of separate goals, such as (sustainable) economic growth, efficient utilisation of resources, equitable income distribution, price stability, viable regions, etc. Monetary policy has little or no ability to influence most of these separate goals in the long term. It is therefore sensible to specify monetary policy(cid:146)s long-term goals in terms of factors monetary policy can affect. Introducing money into an economy and establishing a credible monetary policy that ensures low and stable inflation will have a positive effect on the real economy. Similarly, monetary policy that ceases to function could result in a dramatic deterioration in welfare, as we have seen on numerous occasions. However, apart from this, monetary policy will not have lasting effects on the growth potential or the level of welfare in the economy. It is the supply of economic resources - labour and 
BIS Review 49/2002 3 capital and our ability to utilize them efficiently in production - that is decisive. We cannot use monetary policy to pull ourselves up by our bootstraps. It also seems intuitively unreasonable that it should be possible to influence output potential or average growth in the economy through monetary policy. I think this is fairly obvious if we imagine the effects of monetary policy in a (cid:147)Robinson and Friday(cid:148) economy. i) The long-term objectives of monetary policy  In the long term, monetary policy determines the average level of inflation. Output is determined by the supply of labour, capital and technology and by productivity changes. It is important to stress the essential difference between the target of a high level of economic growth (output target) and the inflation target. As long as output is independent of monetary policy in the long term, the authorities cannot choose an output target for monetary policy. Attempts to boost production above the natural level in the long term will only result in a rise in inflation. However, the inflation target can be chosen by the authorities. ii) The short-term objectives of monetary policy Under certain conditions, monetary policy may nevertheless contribute to smoothing cyclical fluctuations, i.e. swings in output and demand. Some of the channels through which monetary policy influences inflation go by way of  the demand side of the economy. Monetary policy can be used aggressively to bring inflation under control quickly, but with considerable fluctuations in the real economy as a consequence; or it may be used more gradually with less of an impact on the real economy, but with inflation being allowed to deviate from the target over a slightly longer period. In the short term, there will thus be a trade-off between output and employment developments and the variation in inflation around the inflation target. In the theoretical literature this trade-off is often described as a loss function in which both output and inflation variability are included. The idea is that the central bank shall minimise a weighted average of the two. The loss function can be depicted in stylised form in a chart with output variability (deviation from (cid:147)natural(cid:148) or potential output) and inflation variability along the axes. It is assumed that the central bank wants - if it had been possible - output and price stability. The welfare loss will thus be smaller the further into the chart we are. The lines in the chart (indifference curves) thus show different combinations of inflation variability and output variability that result in the same welfare loss. 
4 BIS Review 49/2002  Lars Svensson, who is a prominent contributor to theoretical research in the area of monetary policy, has recommended that the central bank should explicitly define a loss function. He proposes an expression where the squared deviation between inflation and the inflation target and the squared deviation between actual and potential output be weighted together to provide a measure of the loss in each period. The total loss is then found by discounting future losses. Up to now, no central bank has gone as far as Svensson recommends. However, the horizon that is chosen for monetary policy will implicitly provide some indication of the central bank(cid:146)s loss function. If the horizon is very short, inflation will be quickly brought back to the target, with greater fluctuations in output as a result. This indicates that the central bank puts considerable weight on avoiding variations in inflation and little weight on stabilising the real economy. Similarly, if the horizon is long, it will indicate that the central bank also puts greater weight on avoiding variations in output and employment.  
BIS Review 49/2002 5 The chart illustrates the optimal combinations of inflation and output variability. The three points in the chart reflect different types of inflation targeting.2 Strict inflation targeting means that only the variation in inflation is included in the loss function. No weight is given to output changes, thereby resulting in relatively high output variability. Monetary policy has the swiftest effect through the exchange rate channel. If inflation is higher than the inflation target, the central bank will raise its key rate sharply to reduce inflation quickly. This may lead initially to a relatively strong appreciation of the currency, which reduces imported inflation. As CPI inflation quickly approaches the target due to the change in imported inflation, demand is also reduced as a result of a higher real interest rate and stronger exchange rate. The change in demand will then influence inflation. In order to avoid a further reduction in the inflation rate, the central bank will lower the interest rate. The result of this policy will be considerable variations in nominal and real interest rates, accompanied by substantial variations in the nominal and real exchange rate and in output.  Flexible inflation targeting implies that the central bank also puts some weight on output and employment variability. Output is therefore also included in the loss function. This means that the central bank will attempt to avoid the sizeable variations in output resulting from strict inflation targeting. The way to take account of output and employment under a flexible inflation target is to choose a relatively long time horizon. In this way the central bank will gradually bring inflation back to the target. In practice, inflation is allowed to vary in the short term in order to prevent unnecessary variations in the real economy. One final possibility would be to put sole weight on minimising output variability. One variant of this would be to minimise unemployment variability. Note that this policy does not improve the growth potential of the economy, only the fluctuations. Moreover, this would result in substantial inflation variability since the economy does not have a nominal anchor. This policy would not be sustainable in practice because it does not provide an answer as to how monetary policy should respond to unemployment that is driven by wages and costs. We would then be forgetting the experience of the 1970s and 1980s. Monetary policy credibility will also influence output and inflation variability. Current inflation pressures depend on expected future price changes. If economic agents feel confident that the central bank will stabilise inflation around the target, and their behaviour reflects this, inflation will move back to the target more quickly. Hence, the central bank must react less each time it wants to bring inflation back to the target. This also implies that output and employment must be reduced less in order to achieve a                                                       2 See, for example, Svensson, Lars E. O. (2000): (cid:147)Open-Economy Inflation Targeting(cid:148), Journal of International Economics, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 
6 BIS Review 49/2002 given decline in inflation.3 The line in the chart will therefore move further down and to the left with a more credible monetary policy.  3. Norwegian monetary policy and cyclical fluctuations In the long term, we cannot influence growth potential or prosperity by means of monetary policy - not even in Norway. But we can influence the fluctuations in the economy, the short-term cyclical movements. Norges Bank also takes into account that monetary policy should not cause unreasonably sharp fluctuations in output by setting a relatively long-term horizon for the attainment of the inflation target, and allowing deviations in the intervening period. It would probably be possible by a very aggressive use of instruments to force inflation back to the target within a time frame of 3-4 quarters - perhaps even less if the foreign exchange channel is strong. This would cause very pronounced fluctuations in the real economy, however. In this sense, variations in output enter our (cid:147)loss function(cid:148). The thinking that follows from the theoretical research is to a large degree present in the actual setting of interest rates. For practical purposes, we, and other central banks with inflation targeting, make estimates of future price inflation. Our instruments are oriented in such a way that there are prospects of attaining the inflation target two years ahead. The theoretical literature has given us useful knowledge as to how far forward in time this horizon should be set. The result of using too short a horizon will be considerable instability in output and in nominal and real interest rates. From our point of view, it is very positive that substantial resources are being invested in theoretical and empirical research in this area. Norges Bank will seek to contribute to this work and to the public debate. We must also be willing to consider adjusting the manner in which we carry out our analyses and communicate monetary policy as new knowledge becomes available. Let us now look at the concrete objectives of Norwegian monetary policy. A year and a half ago, the Storting and the Government adopted new guidelines for economic policy. According to its mandate, Norges Bank shall orient monetary policy towards maintaining low and stable inflation. The first paragraph presents an objective. The last paragraph states more specifically what Norges Bank is to do.                                                       3  See, for example, Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (2000): (cid:147)The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective(cid:148), Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 44, no. 2, 195-222. 
BIS Review 49/2002 7   The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the internal value of the krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. It is also a necessary precondition for stability in financial and property markets. The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the international value of the krone. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from day to day, from week to week, and from month to month. We have free international trade and free capital movements. We do not have the instruments for fine-tuning the exchange rate. In Norges Bank(cid:146)s submission of 27 March 2001 to the Ministry of Finance on the new guidelines for economic policy, we indicated that when monetary policy is aimed at low and stable inflation, this is the best contribution monetary policy can make to stability in the krone exchange rate over time. The interest rate affects price inflation through a number of channels, including the krone exchange rate. A stronger krone curbs inflation. If we take steps to counteract an appreciation of the krone when there are pressures in the economy, we reduce the possibility of keeping inflation at bay and there is a greater risk of pronounced fluctuations in the economy. Maintaining stability in the internal value of the krone must thus take precedence. As long as other countries pursue a policy of low and stable 
8 BIS Review 49/2002 inflation, stability in the international value of the krone is dependent on low and stable inflation in Norway The implementation of monetary policy is delegated to Norges Bank. This implies that Norges Bank sets the interest rate on the basis of our understanding of the regulation, as indicated in the Bank(cid:146)s submission to the Ministry of Finance in March last year. Our interpretation places emphasis on the Government(cid:146)s rationale behind the regulation, on the objective as formulated in the first paragraph and on our knowledge about the relationships between the interest rate, the krone exchange rate, output, employment and inflation.  The operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2‰ per cent. A monetary stance resulting in high and varying inflation would have led to wider swings in output and employment. It would also have been a recipe for turbulence in the foreign exchange markets. There is therefore a close link between the third paragraph of the regulation - the inflation target - and the first paragraph concerning stabilising economic developments and exchange rate expectations. Monetary policy affects the economy with considerable and variable lags. The current level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target, and also makes it possible to avoid unnecessary output and employment variability. See also the formulation of the regulation about contributing to stable developments in output and employment. If we should attempt to attain the inflation target in the very short term, by lowering the key rate and thereby contributing to a depreciation of the krone and higher price inflation, we would very probably be compelled to raise the interest rate even more a year from now in order to attain the inflation target than we did the last time we raised interest rates. Such a short-term policy would have contributed to greater demand and output instability. With the relatively long time horizon that has been chosen, monetary policy can contribute to stable developments in output and employment. However, situations may arise where more than two years or less than two years is required to attain the inflation target. This will depend on what disturbances the economy is exposed to. Norges Bank will communicate such a change in the time horizon. 4.  Monetary policy and competitiveness Monetary policy cannot be used to influence the size of the internationally exposed sector over time. This is primarily determined by wage and income formation, fiscal policy, including the use of petroleum revenues over the government budget and the adaptability and efficiency of the economy. 
BIS Review 49/2002 9  The new monetary policy mandate is linked to the new fiscal policy guideline. When the new guidelines were adopted in March 2001, Norges Bank pointed out that, in isolation, a gradual phasing in of petroleum revenues could contribute to deteriorating conditions for the internationally exposed sector. Norway(cid:146)s fiscal policy will stimulate demand in the public and sheltered sectors. Consequently, internationally exposed industries may have difficulties recruiting labour and may face higher labour costs. The contest for labour may result in a deterioration in competitiveness internationally.  The fact that economic mechanisms function in this way was pointed out in Report 29 (2000-2001) to the Storting from the Stoltenberg Government and in Annex 4 to Report 1(2001-2002)to the Storting from the Bondevik Government A deterioration in competitiveness can be caused by two factors: high wage growth, or a nominal appreciation of the krone. In isolation, an expansionary fiscal policy must lead to a tightening of monetary policy if the inflation target is to be attained. Without such a tightening, the labour market would be tighter, and competitiveness would deteriorate as a result of rising wage and price inflation. 
10 BIS Review 49/2002 In the debate, it has been stressed that the scaling back of manufacturing has come faster and with greater intensity than expected. But nor was wage growth expected to take the turn it did. Not this year, not last year, and not the year before that. Wage growth that is 15 per cent higher than other countries (from 1998 to 2003) is bound to have repercussions. The krone exchange rate has also appreciated. But the reaction in the foreign exchange market cannot be called an overreaction when wages have increased so much. The same forces that have driven up the krone, could bring it down if they were reversed.  Competitiveness is the ability to pay high wages on the basis of high productivity. For a number of years, Norway has had high wage growth that has not been matched by equally high productivity growth. Over time, growth in real wages must be consistent with growth in labour productivity. An inflation target of 2‰ per cent and trend productivity growth of around 2 per cent, according to updated national accounts figures, imply annual nominal wage growth of about 4‰ per cent. Under the (cid:147)Solidarity Alternative(cid:148) in the 1990s, a stable exchange rate and the rate of wage growth among our trading partners functioned as an anchor for the social partners. Up to 1997, this anchor remained effective. However, growth in labour costs jumped in 1998 and has since been around 2 percentage points higher than among our trading partners. Wage growth is high in relation to earnings in many enterprises. It is demanding to improve efficiency at the pace required to keep up with the rise in labour costs.  
BIS Review 49/2002 11 The sharp rise in labour costs in recent years carries with it a potential for higher unemployment. The interest rate is an effective instrument for countering lower demand and growing unemployment when measures to stimulate demand do not translate into higher wage growth or unstable financial markets. However, there is little monetary policy can do to prevent an increase in unemployment that is driven by high cost inflation.  Developments in wage settlements have been a driving force behind the appreciation of the krone. The foreign exchange market has responded as expected. When there is confidence that the inflation target will be attained, high wage growth creates expectations of a tight monetary policy and relatively high interest rates. High returns make it attractive to take krone positions. Increased demand for our currency boosts the international value of the Norwegian krone. If wage growth slows , and we can be confident that it will remain low for the next few years, the interest rate differential against other countries can be narrowed. This will normally lead to the krone depreciating.  Over the last thirty years, manufacturing has been scaled back in waves, and particularly sharply in the period 1977 to 1987. In the years leading up to the periods of contraction, profitability weakened in the manufacturing sector. It can take time before such a deterioration translates into lower output and 
12 BIS Review 49/2002 employment. But when the turnaround hits, it tends to hit fast and hard. It now appears that a new period of downscaling is under way. Several factors point to this: first, a trend analysis indicates that manufacturing employment will be reduced in the period ahead, partly because petroleum investment is expected to decline and productivity growth in manufacturing to be somewhat higher than in other industries. Second, manufacturing costs have increased sharply since 1998 as a consequence of high wage growth. Up to the summer of 2000, this cost increase was to some extent offset by a weaker krone. The appreciation of the krone has revealed and exacerbated the deterioration in cost competitiveness. Third, as a result of the fiscal guideline the internationally exposed sector is subject to additional pressure. Over time, the phasing in of petroleum revenues will lead to restructuring and the transfer of resources from the exposed to the sheltered sector. Fourth, the response patterns in stabilisation policy function in a different way from previously. In the past, it was generally understood that high wage growth and overheating of the economy must be by with a tightening of government budgets. Today, with the fiscal guideline and inflation targeting, it is monetary policy that is tightened to a greater extent in such a situation. The burden of stabilisation policy is thus at times transferred to the internationally exposed sector. Against this background, a decline in manufacturing employment from 300 000 to 240 000 over a ten-year period, as Norges Bank has previously indicated, does not seem unreasonable. Norges Bank has one instrument: the interest rate. It has a broad impact. Monetary policy can therefore not be oriented towards stabilising developments only in the internationally exposed sector. This would create considerable imbalances in the Norwegian economy. The low interest rate policy and devaluations in the 1970s and 1980s are examples of how such a policy can fail. Monetary policy was geared towards preventing a weakening of competitiveness in manufacturing. The krone was devalued on several occasions. But wage growth accelerated to compensate for higher inflation. The result was the yuppy period, unsound investments and a wage and price spiral that hit the entire economy. The Norwegian economy had to go through an extensive turnaround operation in the late 1980s. Confidence in monetary policy and the Norwegian krone had to be restored in order to avoid persistently high inflation. It took a long time, and very high interest rates were required, before confidence in the nominal anchor was restored. 5.  Conclusion Through a sound, credible orientation of monetary policy, it is possible to attain an inflation rate that on average is equal to the targeted figure. By practising flexible inflation targeting, i.e. having a medium-term horizon for the inflation target, we can also achieve a reasonable trade-off between inflation variability and output variability in the short term. But monetary policy has no lasting effect on output and employment. These are determined by the supply of economic resources - capital and labour. Technological developments, and our ability to use that technology, also play a decisive part. In the long run, monetary policy cannot influence output, employment or competitiveness beyond the benefits that follow from low and stable inflation. The economy requires a nominal anchor. The Government has laid out a guideline for monetary policy which implies flexible inflation targeting. This is a regime that has also won broad international support. This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
 BIS Review 49/2002 1 Ernst Welteke: The international financial architecture Opening address by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a European-American discussion on Germany and the Deutsche Bundesbank sponsored by the American Council, Frankfurt, 6 September 2002. *      *      * I Ladies and gentlemen It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to today(cid:146)s conference on the international financial architecture. This conference is a joint venture between the Deutsche Bundesbank and the American Council on Germany. It offers an opportunity for a European-American dialogue on current financial market issues. Since the mid-1990s, the international community has witnessed a new wave of international financial crises. Given the ongoing world-wide integration of financial systems, the consequences of crises are no longer confined to a single state. Therefore international co-operation is more than ever required. A clear concept of the international financial framework is especially warranted when we consider the growth of the markets. For years the growth of international financial flows has far exceeded traded goods and services as well as income figures. Financial markets mirror closely the economic and political situation. Five days ahead of the first anniversary of September 11 they are particularly challenged. The downgraded economic perspectives are reflected in low asset prices at the stock markets. The current uncertainties are reflected in high volatility. Investors worldwide take into account political tensions and impending military conflicts. Therefore, the current concentration of threats can serve as an example for the burden which the financial architecture must be able to bear. II The term (cid:147)financial architecture(cid:148) is intuitively associated with planning and constructing a solid building. There are prerequisites for a stable construction. An architect has to consider the statics of the building and its foundations. A market economy is such a foundation, along with the free movement of capital and functioning exchange rate regimes. A solid building rests on strong pillars to weather possible storms. One of the pillars of the financial system is a resilient and solid banking system. It has to be able to absorb shocks - the banking system needs (cid:147)systemic stability(cid:148). A robust framework supports and enhances the pillars. International standards, like the (cid:147)Cooke ratios(cid:148) of banking capital or the new Basle II accord, are part of the framework which supports and enhances the pillars. Even massive pillars have to be inspected by experts from time to time. It is not always obvious to outsiders that parts of the structure have to be mended or rebuilt - the exterior facade can hide a rotten interior. Surveillance has to play an important part in detecting weak spots in the framework. National and international supervisors can monitor the state of the framework and should intervene if necessary. The IMF, the BIS, and the Financial Stability Forum, together with national authorities and private institutions, are part of the surveillance network for financial systems. The metaphor of the International Finance Architecture could be misleading, if we take it too literally. Unfortunately, we do not have a single architect but many would-be architects who try to stabilise a permanently evolving and growing system. Every single bilateral contract alters the financial system. The system needs stabilising elements from within. Built-in incentives are crucial in setting up a sound and credible financial system. Incentives for good corporate governance and sound practices within the financial community can discipline the market and therefore strengthen the system. The market participants themselves bear the main responsibility for financial stability. Transparency is another precondition for sound and healthy financial markets. To fully reap the beneficial effects of market discipline, relevant and timely data about the financial system have to be 
 2 BIS Review 49/2002 published. The IMF(cid:146)s special data dissemination standards are a good example of transparency in the field of macroeconomics. III Especially in times of sluggish growth, the global financial system is vulnerable. The real economy and the financial system are closely connected. The impact may also work the other way around: financial crises can cause major frictions for the real economy, whether via a depression of sentiment, a credit crunch or negative wealth effects. Therefore, monetary policy has to monitor financial market developments closely. Moreover, stable and well functioning financial markets are in the own interest of central banks. The need for a proper monetary transmission process, for sound payment systems and for a stable banking sector provide ample reason for central bankers to care about the financial architecture. The surveillance structure in Europe is currently under review. Proposals made by the finance ministers of Germany and the UK envisage new institutions or committees which could be seen as a potential nucleus for a European Financial Supervision Authority. However, they favour the so called (cid:147)Lamfalussy model(cid:148), which originally was intended to reform the supervision of securities trading. This model is not easy to apply to the banking sector for at least two reasons. Firstly, the surveillance issue is different in the banking sector. And secondly, the harmonisation of rules and conduct in the banking sector has already reached a high level. This is due to the fact that the current cooperation in the field of banking supervision in Europe already covers different countries and various sectors of the financial system. So far, cooperation has proved both worthwhile and efficient. Any future form of cooperation in the field of financial sector supervision should make use of central banks(cid:146) know-how in banking supervision and financial markets. All institutions involved - the finance ministries, the supervisory authorities and central banks - should contribute to possible new committees or fora. IV Ladies and gentlemen A thorough discussion about instruments and the framework of international financial organisations demands an atmosphere free of short-term political pressure. This a prerequisite for sensible and sustainable crisis solutions. The discussion today is taking place in precisely such an environment: the American Council on Germany and the Deutsche Bundesbank are providing an opportunity to discuss current issues of the international financial architecture in a calm and rational setting. We have invited a number of experts in the field of international financial architecture. And, indeed, it is a pleasure for us to welcome all of you. Thank you for coming. The conference starts with the keynote address by the Vice President of the Bundesbank J(cid:252)rgen Stark. Afterwards, the discussion is structured in three panels. We will start with an outlook for the world economy and its interaction with exchange rate developments. Otmar Issing, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, will chair this panel. On this basis we can exchange views about the roles of the public sector and the private sector in the resolution and prevention of international debt crises. The governor of the Banque de France, Jean-Claude Trichet, is chairperson of panel B. Finally, we shall deal with the lessons of recent financial crises and the way forward. Professor Allen Meltzer will lead the discussion in this panel. Thank you again for coming and taking part in this conference. Many thanks to the panelists. I wish you a discussion which, hopefully, will lead to a better understanding of financial crises and possibly to more efficient measures to handle them. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy, securities markets and municipalities Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the anniversary seminar, Kommunalbanken, 30 August 2002. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation *      *      * In my address today I will touch on three themes. First, I will discuss monetary policy and its influence on municipalities’ financial position, followed by some remarks on the Norwegian bond market and Kommunalbanken AS. I will then conclude with some reflections on the challenges associated with the pension system and the interplay with securities markets.  Municipalities’ financial position and monetary policy  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002Guidelines for economicpolicy•Fiscalpolicy:-guideline for use of petroleum revenues:•use real return on Petroleum Fund•smooth fluctuations in the economy•Monetarypolicy:-inflationtarget Norway’s economic policy is based on the guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. The guideline for fiscal policy states that the use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget shall be equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. Most of the phasing in of petroleum revenues will take place over the next ten years. With a 4 per cent return on the Petroleum Fund, the use of petroleum revenues will rise to almost 5 per cent of mainland GDP in 2010.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002The objective of monetary policy•Monetary policy is to be oriented towards low and stable inflation.•The inflation target is set at 2.5 per cent. 
 2 BIS Review 48/2002 Monetary policy is oriented towards low and stable inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. When monetary policy is geared towards stabilising inflation, it also contributes to stabilising demand and production. Low and stable inflation fosters stability in the economy. The inflation target is the nominal anchor for the Norwegian economy.  Low inflation is the objective, and the interest rate is the instrument. Monetary policy functions with considerable and variable lags. The current level of inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be set today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effect of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target. Economic agents can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be close to 2½ per cent over time. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be lower than 2½ per cent, the interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is just as important to avoid a rate of inflation that is too low as it is to avoid a rate that is too high. Changes in labour costs influence the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services. Labour market tightness is heavily influenced by demand for goods and services. High levels of private and public consumption, investment and exports will sustain the demand for labour. When the supply of labour is limited, competition for labour pushes up wages.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002-3-11351999200020012002-3-1135Goods and services produced in NorwayCPI-ATEImportedconsumergoodsLow imported price inflation pushes down consumer price inflation.Priceinflationby origin.Per centSources:Statistics Norway and Norges Bank In many countries, low and stable inflation is the goal of monetary policy. It can therefore be assumed that imported inflation will remain subdued. But, the rise in prices will still vary as a result of global economic developments. The krone exchange rate also plays an important role in determining import prices. A strong krone will curb prices for imported goods. When there is a rise in interest rates in Norway and a widening differential between domestic and foreign interest rates, investments in NOK increase, and the krone exchange rate appreciates.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  20020246802468Rise in labourcosts, 1998-2000Key rates and rise in labourcosts1)Per centEuro areaSwedenUSNorwayNew ZealandJapanDenmarkUKAustraliaCanadaKeyratesApril 2002Sources:OECD and Norges Bank1) Manufacturing 
 BIS Review 48/2002 3 Interest rates are higher in Norway than in most other OECD countries. This is a direct result of the markedly higher level of nominal wage growth in Norway. Wage growth has ranged between 5 and 7 per cent every year since 1998. This year’s wage settlement appears to be following suit. Strong wage growth is the result of a tight labour market.  Wage increases in this year’s settlements were high. Wage settlements in the internationally exposed sector did not set the trend for wages. Wage growth in several sheltered sectors, including the local government sector, is likely to be considerably higher. This is a break with the pattern observed a few years ago.  The phasing in of petroleum revenues increases demand for labour in the public sector and in enterprises selling goods and services to households. The contest for labour is reflected in high wage growth and a deterioration in competitiveness in exposed industries. Many enterprises in the sheltered sector can, in principle, pass on higher labour costs to customers. Monetary policy must reduce the possibility of passing on these costs in order to keep inflation at bay. This is done partly by keeping growth in demand for goods and services under control. In addition, a strong krone may boost imports of goods and services previously reserved for domestic producers.  In rural areas and towns, where local government employment is an alternative to working in agriculture, fisheries, local services or small-scale industry, the public sector with its nationwide agreements can be a wage trend-setter. Wage growth in the public sector can therefore be an important source of higher inflation.  In the public sector, higher labour costs due to costly income settlements can only be passed on to customers to a limited extent. On the other hand, the rise in costs can intensify pressures to increase government allocations. Most likely, the central government will be expected to pick up the bill when labour costs rise sharply.  In the business sector – with its profitability requirements – higher labour costs must be matched by an increase in productivity. In principle, the central government will apply the same requirements to government agencies. How these requirements will be met in practice will have a decisive impact on developments in central government expenditure and, consequently, on interest rates and the krone exchange rate.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002Real growth in public spendingRevisedNationalBudget20026¾%Real growth, investmentDistributedas follows:1½%Real growth, consumption2¾%Real growth, transfers2.5%= Real spending growth4.4%-Rise in prices for expenditure7.0%Growth in central government expenditure2002  Growth in public spending between 2001 and 2002 is estimated at 7 per cent. This is considerably higher than growth in private sector mainland GDP, which is estimated at around 4 per cent. The fiscal guideline is then closely adhered to. Real growth in public consumption is estimated at 1½ per cent. In other words, growth in production of public services will be moderate, even though public spending is rising sharply in nominal krone terms. This is because the cost of producing public services is rising sharply, reflecting high wage growth in the public sector. There have also been substantial increases in transfers to the household sector through social security schemes. The bulk of the high growth in central government allocations therefore translates into strong growth in household income and 
 4 BIS Review 48/2002 consumption. This tends to be the result when wage and costs pressure are already at such a high level. If the central government were to compensate public sector entities for the high wage increases, the result could easily be a new round up the wage spiral.  The high level of interest rates and the strong krone reflect real economic driving forces, such as a high level of petroleum revenues, a tight labour market and strong growth in household income, consumption and borrowing. In addition, a shift in the wage formation process may have added to the particularly high rate of overall wage growth. If these forces are restrained, there is also hope that the pressures on monetary policy will subside.  The bond market Market interest rate rates determine the compensation afforded to savers for abstaining from consuming today and the price the investor has to pay for borrowing the savings of other agents. The financial sector is the intermediary that channels savings to profitable investment projects and seeks to achieve optimal use of existing capital. The financial system should also enable borrowers and investors to diversify risk. Banks and securities markets ensure the distribution of capital and risk management.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002•The financial system has been subjected to shocks:•Cyclical downturn in the major industrial countries•The IT share bubble burst•Terror attacks in the US•Argentina "bankrupt”•Confidenceeroded•Large-scale fraudulent accounting practices by US companies In the last few years, the financial sector has been under considerable strain. There has been a downturn in the major industrial countries, a collapse in technology stocks, terror attacks in the US and default on government debt in Argentina. Equity prices have plummeted and bond defaults have increased sharply. The scandal at the energy company Enron and the recently disclosed fraudulent accounting practices at several US companies have eroded confidence in securities markets and the financial system. One role of securities markets is to ensure that the risk linked to various investments is reflected in borrowing costs and expected returns, which are adjusted continuously through market price mechanisms. For price mechanisms to function effectively, it is essential that there is confidence in the information and results published. The US authorities have already taken measures to prevent further accounting and audit scandals. Several initiatives are also expected to be taken internationally. Smoothly functioning securities markets make an important contribution to a stable and efficient financial system. Without securities markets’ contribution to risk diversification, it is highly unlikely that the financial system could have coped as well as it did with the shocks of recent years. Norway has a well developed financial system. Financial institutions such as banks, mortgage companies and insurance companies channel assets and debt between economic agents. In the securities market, capital is channelled directly from lender to borrower through the use of standardised debt and equity instruments in the primary market. Securities can also be traded in the secondary market. Substantial volumes of debt and equity instruments are traded daily among operators. The debt market consists of bonds and short-term debt instruments, while the equity market is essentially made up of stocks.  
 BIS Review 48/2002 5 SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002DomesticdebtsecuritiesmarketsOutstanding as a percentage of GDP, 2001Source:OECD020406080100120140160180DenmarkFinlandNorwaySwedenGermanyFranceUKUSPublic sectorPrivate sectorTotal outstanding The Norwegian bond market is very small on an international scale, whether it is the government bond market or the private bond market. Corporate debt issues in Norway are more limited than in most comparable countries. The chart shows that this market is also small in a Nordic context. Foreign investors have recently shown a growing interest in NOK-denominated bonds as a result of strong growth in the Euro-krone market. This is the result of the relatively high level of interest rates in Norway. International operators are issuing NOK-denominated bonds on a large scale. At the same time, this provides life insurance companies and investment funds with an investment alternative in NOK.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002Issuersin theNorwegianbondmarket31.12.2001. In billions ofNOKSources: Statistics Norway and the Norwegian Central Securities Deposit020406080100120140160180200Central governmentFin. inst., banks and insuranceLocal governmentOther private enterprisesAbroad The largest holders of Norwegian bonds are insurance companies, but the government, private companies and foreign investors also account for a large share of bond holdings. The largest issuers are the government and financial institutions. Kommunalbanken is also a fairly large issuer in the Norwegian bond market. At the end of 2001, the Bank’s total bond and commercial paper debt came to about NOK 26 billion. This accounted for a good 6 per cent of total outstanding bond and short-term debt issues in Norway at the end of last year.  There are historical reasons for the thin securities market in Norway. From the post-war period and up to the beginning of the 1980s, the Norwegian bond market was subject to direct regulation. It was only in the late 1980s that the market for bonds and short-term debt was liberalised and it is now part of the international market. 
 6 BIS Review 48/2002 SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002Outstandingholdings ofdomesticdebtsecuritiesissuedby non-financialenterprises. As  percentageofGDP, 2001 Sources: BIS/OECD051015202530GermanyNorwayFinlandDenmarkFranceSwedenUKUS The turnover and issue volume in the market increased sharply up to the mid-1990s. However, Norwegian companies use the bond market on a far more limited scale than companies in comparable countries.  Solid state finances also help to explain the limited size of the private bond market in Norway. A well functioning government bond market can stimulate the private segment of the debt securities market. In most countries, the state has a sizeable borrowing requirement, with a high level of debt. Even though its borrowing requirement is small, the Norwegian government also places emphasis on a well functioning bond market in its government debt policy. Government debt issues are confined to few and large standardised loans. This contributes to higher turnover in the secondary market and hence greater liquidity. With ample liquidity and low risk, government bond rates can serve as a benchmark for private bonds.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002Effective interest rates on government bonds and private bonds5-10 year maturity. Per cent456789Jan. 95Jan. 97Jan. 99Jan. 01456789Source:EcowinGovernmentbondsPrivate bonds The interest rate on private debt securities is heavily influenced by the interest rate on comparable government securities. Private issuers have to pay a somewhat higher interest rate than the government because they have a lower credit rating. Another factor is the liquidity of the debt instruments. The rate differential between government securities and private debt securities therefore consists of both a credit risk premium and a liquidity premium. Normally, the larger and more developed the market is, the lower the liquidity premium is. The financial position of local government in relation to the central government ensures that there is little or no credit risk linked to the bonds issued by Kommunalbanken or municipalities. Because of the liquidity premium, however, Kommunalbanken and the municipalities would benefit from a more developed and more liquid bond market in Norway. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 7 I can find several reasons why the Norwegian economy would benefit from a larger portion of credit being channelled through the debt securities market.  SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002•A well developed debt securities market:-Enhancedrisk management-Continuous pricing of risk reduces the possibility of shocks-Provides the financial system with two legs to stand on a) Enhanced risk management  Bonds and short-term issues are traded in the secondary market. More participants are thereby given the opportunity to invest in assets that have largely been reserved for financial institutions. Banks are also provided with increased possibilities to diversify the risk in their loan portfolios across different sectors and regions. All in all, this contributes to spreading the credit risk linked to the loans. When risk is diversified, the financial system is less vulnerable in the face of financial turbulence. b) Continuous pricing of risk reduces the possibility of shocks Loans from financial institutions and securities debt differ widely in terms of the degree of transparency in credit rating and pricing. The credit rating in financial institutions must be looked upon as internal company information. Loans provided by banks and financial institutions are far less liquid than negotiable securities and the price will generally not change as a result of new information about the borrower. On the other hand, securities markets are subject to transparency and information requirements. Participants’ credit ratings are continuously reflected in the transparent pricing process in the market.  The stability in our financial system is strengthened when market operators’ assessment of the correct value is reflected transparently and continuously in prices. A precondition is of course that the information that companies are obliged to provide is correct. Economic shocks will also be more easily absorbed, even though considerable price changes may have substantial wealth effects. Because banks lend at relatively fixed rates, financial institutions must be able to adjust volumes when new information is available. This, for example, can be done by refraining from rolling over short-term loans. The spillover effects of unexpected events may therefore be more substantial for bank loans than for securities debt. c) A well developed debt securities market provides the financial system with two legs to stand on Financial crises are normally related to the banking system. The crises have partly been the result of a very high concentration of risk in banks. In crisis situations, we have seen that financial institutions and securities markets can be complementary and prevent a credit crunch. One example is the crisis that followed the collapse of the US hedge fund LTCM in 1998. For a period during the crisis, there were substantial problems in the private bond market in the US. Financial institutions increased lending and prevented a more extensive credit crunch. Conversely, we have seen that when there have been problems in the banking sector, securities markets have replaced bank loans. 
 8 BIS Review 48/2002 Changes are now taking place, which I think will contribute to strengthening the Norwegian bond market. Proposed legislation changes will for example provide for the sale of housing loans to a separate entity that finances the purchase by issuing bonds.  The proposed legislative amendments would permit a wider range of issues in the bond market. In general, a larger number of issuers and investors would enhance liquidity in the secondary bond market. This could also directly or indirectly strengthen banks’ position.  Funding of pensions SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002The savings market in various countries31.12.2000. As a share of GDPSource : OECD00.511.522.5BelgiumDenmarkFinlandFranceGermanyIrelandItalyNetherlandsNorwayPortugalSpainSwedenSwitzerlandUKPension fundsSecurities fundsLife insurance The organisation of the pension system in Norway will also be of considerable importance to the local government sector as a big employer. The securities market will also be influenced by the pension system Norway will have in the future. Life insurance companies and pension funds are major operators in the Norwegian securities market. SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002•Design of a new pension system:-"Pay-as-you-go"-Fund-basedschemes:–Definedcontribution–Definedbenefit•Who should bear the risk? In Norway, the bulk of pensions are funded through the pay-as-you-go system. It is the taxation of current income that pays for the National Insurance Scheme’s current pension benefits. For the vast majority of western countries, estimates show that substantial tax increases will be needed to cope with the ageing of the population. The alternative to the pay-as-you-go system is to build up funds prior to the payment of pensions. These funds can consist of different assets such as stocks and bonds. More fund-based schemes will generate a positive stimulus to the Norwegian securities market, even if an appropriate risk diversification would imply that a large portion of the capital in pension funds is 
 BIS Review 48/2002 9 invested abroad. A rising share of fund-based schemes in other countries will also increase investment in Norway. The statutory regulation of pension fund investment will also be of importance. For example, today most countries have relatively stringent restrictions on the equity portion in pension funds’ portfolios. However, a proposed new EU directive would make it possible to increase this portion, which may have an impact on demand for securities.  Recent developments in financial markets have shown that a substantial measure of uncertainty is associated with the return on such investments. This uncertainty is related to future economic developments, which will also apply to the pay-as-you-go system. It is true that Government can influence this through tax changes. Adverse economic developments will, however, put the ability and willingness to increase taxes in order to honour pension obligations to the test. This uncertainty will be even greater in a country like Norway that is highly reliant on one or a small number of industries. Government finances are, for example, still vulnerable in the face of a sustained decline in oil prices. The uncertainty about future developments is continuously reflected in a fund-based system. An essential question associated with a fund-based system is who is to bear the risk related to returns. It is common to distinguish between two forms that provide different solutions for this: A defined-benefit pension scheme is an agreement to pay a specified benefit amount irrespective of the return on the premiums paid in. The benefit can be adjusted for inflation, wages or the like. Premium payments can be changed as a result of demographic changes such as higher life expectancy, but not as a result of lower returns. A fall in returns must be covered by the company or entity if they have their own pension funds. Pensioners are secure under municipal defined-benefit based pension schemes, while municipal service production must absorb the impact of lower returns. SG Kommunalbanken, 30.august  2002-2024681012141619941995199619971998199920002001Net financial incomePremium incomeNational Local Government Pension Fund -premiums and financial income1994-2001. In billions of NOK In recent years, municipalities have noticed this additional burden as owners of the National Local Government Pension Fund. However, high returns restrained the rise in premium income towards the end of the 1990s. The alternative to a defined-benefit pension scheme is a defined-contribution pension scheme. The defined-contribution pension plan is a programme under which members decide how pension savings are invested. Future benefits depend on the return. It can be agreed that the pension payments are to be fixed. The size of payments will then depend on how much has been saved, the pension period and calculated return.  Under a defined-benefit pension programme, life insurance companies and pension funds – or those behind them – in a sense offer insurance against a form of absolute risk to which everyone is exposed. Absolute risk may, for example, be a change in economic developments as a result of major disturbances to the world economy or the domestic economy.  Under a defined-contribution pension scheme, the individual member assumes the absolute risk.  With a larger share of pension savings in defined-contribution schemes, some of the risk that is now being borne by insurance companies will be transferred to members. One problem that may arise in connection with defined-contribution schemes is that members end up with benefit payments that are 
 10 BIS Review 48/2002 markedly lower than expected. Therefore, it would also be appropriate to apply risk limits to defined-contribution pension schemes.  Conclusion The local government sector employs a rising share of workers in our country, accounting for close to 25 per cent of employment today. The behaviour of local government, as a user of labour and employer, is of considerable importance for economic developments and also for the inflation outlook. The local government sector is a major user of financial service, both as borrower and as buyer of insurance products. Norway has a well-developed financial system, but its bond market is small compared  with other countries. In the long run, a larger and more liquid bond market in Norway could provide a basis for improved risk management and enhanced diversification of risk in the financial system. A new pension system is now being considered. One of the main questions relates to the distribution between pay-as-you-go and fund-based schemes. There will always be a measure of uncertainty associated with future economic developments, and thereby with future pensions. The funding of pensions will continuously reflect this uncertainty. Not even public pay-as-you-go schemes can guard us against this. A higher proportion of fund-based schemes will make this uncertainty more visible and provide greater opportunities for each individual to adapt. Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 1 David Dodge: Macroeconomic stabilization policy in Canada Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 31 August 2002.  The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website. *      *      * What I propose to do on this panel today is to talk about stabilization policy and policy co-operation from the viewpoint of an industrial country that has a floating exchange rate and both an explicit inflation target for monetary policy and a clear objective for fiscal policy. While my perspective has been particularly influenced by my time as Deputy Minister of Finance and now as Governor of Canada’s central bank, the broad outlines of my conclusions are widely shared, not only in those two institutions, but in Canadian academic and public policy circles as well. Moreover, I believe that our experience and the lessons that can be drawn from it are applicable to all open economies with flexible exchange rates.  In the 1990s, the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada reached a series of joint agreements on inflation-control targets. As well, the government established a framework that greatly reduces the probability of running a fiscal deficit and thus puts the debt-to-GDP ratio on a clear downward track.  Initially, the credibility of these policies was not high; so it was essential to demonstrate clearly our resolve to achieve greater fiscal prudence and lower inflation until credibility was gained. Thus, it was sometimes necessary to override the automatic stabilizers of fiscal policy in order to establish credibility. And for monetary policy it meant that we could not always implement the easing warranted by our inflation targets. But as the targets were achieved, the public’s trust that the authorities were going to do what they said they would do increased. That trust is tremendously important.  Now that the credibility of both monetary and fiscal policies is firmly established, the stabilizers are able to do their job.  I would like to begin by considering stabilization policy, then say a few words on policy co-operation.1  Stabilization Policy  Monetary policy and stabilization  In aiming to achieve a 2 per cent inflation target over an 18- to 24-month horizon, Canadian monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to demand and supply shocks.  When there are shifts in demand, the direction of changes in our policy interest rate is quite clear. Suppose that the economy is operating at its production potential and that inflation is at the 2 per cent target. A downward shift in demand would create excess supply in the economy, putting downward pressure on inflation. To bring inflation back to 2 per cent over a period of 18 to 24 months, the Bank of Canada would lower its target for the overnight interest rate. Through its effect on market interest rates and the exchange rate, this action would increase the level of output in the economy, moving it back towards production potential. Inflation would, therefore, return to the target shortly after the excess supply disappeared from the economy. An upward shift in demand would, of course, generate symmetric responses.  While the theory is clear about the appropriate response to demand shocks, the magnitude and persistence of shocks—and hence the size and timing of interest rate adjustments—are always difficult to judge. This is where the art of monetary policy-making comes into play.  It is even more difficult, of course, to gauge the appropriate monetary policy response to supply shocks—which take the form of higher (or lower) inflation than expected for a given level of demand.                                                       1  The interaction of fiscal and monetary policies is covered more fully in Dodge (2002) 
 2 BIS Review 48/2002 The Bank’s framework for inflation targeting allows temporary supply shocks to be largely ignored, as long as they do not feed into inflation expectations. The credibility that has been established means that they typically no longer do so. Consider price surprises coming from the most volatile components of the consumer price index—components such as fruits and vegetables or fuel oil and natural gas. As our operating guide, we use a measure of core inflation that excludes these components. This gives us, and economic observers, some confidence that we are looking at something close to the underlying trend of inflation. Thus, our interest rate response to price shocks that are perceived to be temporary can be minimal. As a result, there will be little effect on output. In other words, monetary policy does not turn temporary supply shocks into something that is destabilizing for aggregate output.  A more difficult situation occurs when persistent increases or decreases in prices coming from the most volatile components of the consumer price index threaten to keep the total index away from the target for a significant period of time. Credibility helps here too, but the Bank must be particularly cautious that these movements in inflation do not feed into inflation expectations.  Supply shocks that take the form of a change in the level, or growth rate, of potential output are often hard to recognize. Here, however, the key is for the central bank to return the trend of inflation to the target if it has moved away. Since the trend of inflation relative to the target is the best indicator of where demand is relative to potential output, this will be consistent with moving demand back into line with the new path of potential output over the medium term.  Fiscal policy and automatic stabilization  In Canada, the main automatic fiscal stabilizers are various types of tax revenues, as well as employment insurance payouts. Some of these fiscal stabilizers work almost immediately—for example, personal income tax deducted by the employer. Others, such as employment insurance payments, work with a fairly short lag.  Comparing and contrasting automatic fiscal and monetary stabilizers  Automatic fiscal stabilizers are very effective in dampening an output cycle. But they offset only part of the change in output.  In contrast, monetary policy can fully offset a change in output, but it takes time to work, with the full impact on output normally felt only after 12 to 18 months.  Discretionary stabilization policy  While the automatic or quasi-automatic stabilization provided by monetary and fiscal policies is very desirable, the question remains as to whether there is a role for something further—a discretionary stabilization policy.  In the case of monetary policy, the nature of the response is the more or less automatic one described earlier. As I implied then, judgment is key to the process. That is particularly true in times of great uncertainty, such as last autumn. But a clear inflation target means that, in principle, the discretionary choice for monetary policy-makers is limited relative to that of the fiscal authorities.2 The arguments for and against discretionary fiscal policy as an important element in macroeconomic stabilization in an open economy tend to revolve primarily around lags and around the effectiveness of short-run fiscal policy relative to monetary policy.  If the timing were close to perfect, fiscal policy measures that lasted for two or three quarters could, in principle, and under ideal circumstances, shorten the time it takes to move output back to its desired level. Thus, in principle, discretionary fiscal policy is a useful tool. But, as a practitioner, I can tell you                                                       2  Some commentators have described inflation targeting as "constrained discretion," in the sense that there is a clear objective and a medium-term framework but no precise rule for varying the policy interest rate (Bernanke et al. 1999). That is, there are many possible paths back to equilibrium. At the Bank of Canada, we have decided that the best way to implement inflation targeting is to have an acceptable trade-off between the variance of inflation around its target and the variance of output around its production potential. Thus, we have chosen an 18- to 24-month horizon for achieving the inflation target. We take into account all the relevant information, but we have no simple rule for setting interest rates. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 3 that the great problem here is that temporary measures are both difficult to initiate quickly when the need arises and extraordinarily difficult to stop once the need is past.  Thus, as a practical matter, not a philosophical one, there are some severe limitations to the use of discretionary fiscal policy as a stabilizer.3,4  My views about this have been reinforced by the way the business cycle in Canada has developed over the last 18 months or so. In early 2001, we were expecting that the slowdown in both the U.S. and Canadian economies would be modest. In Canada, an earlier announced tax cut was fortuitously coming into effect. It was not until the middle of last summer that it became evident that the Canadian economy was undergoing a more pronounced slowdown than we had expected. Between January and August 2001, we had lowered our policy interest rate by 175 basis points. Even the most ardent supporters of discretionary fiscal policy would not have thought about doing anything major until August. With the horrific events of 11 September, economic forecasters marked down their forecasts for 2001 and 2002 significantly. We, like other major central banks, accelerated the pace at which we were cutting interest rates—from September through January 2002, we lowered our policy interest rate by a further 200 basis points.  Fortunately, the Canadian government added only a small amount to spending in its budget announcements in late 2001—and that consisted mainly of necessary spending for security and border issues. I say "fortunately" because, based on the national accounts published at the end of May 2002, growth in the Canadian economy actually rebounded in the fourth quarter of 2001 and accelerated to about 6 per cent in the first quarter of this year.  Thus, with the benefit of hindsight, it is evident that there was more underlying strength in the economy than we expected. Combined with the large amount of monetary stimulus that was applied, this meant that the economy could recover rapidly. Therefore, added fiscal stimulus was not necessary to get the economy going. And the monetary stimulus provided is proving much easier to turn around. Since mid-April, we have raised our policy rate by 75 basis points. To be sure, other uncertainties have arisen and will continue to arise in the future. Our best judgment about these uncertain factors will continue to be taken into account. But, overall, this episode is clearly showing that monetary policy actions can be used more flexibly than fiscal policy actions.  I would stress that discretionary fiscal policy can also get governments into trouble if it leads them to neglect their long-run fiscal anchor—particularly since discretionary action is more likely to be associated with an easing in policy than a tightening. This neglect would risk eroding fiscal credibility—the trust that the public has that the fiscal targets will be met.  Policy Co-Operation and Stabilization  Now let me turn to the issue of policy co-operation and policy coordination.  Our inflation targets are joint targets. They are not just the Bank’s targets—they are the targets of the Government of Canada as well.  Our view is that, essentially, "coordination" came through the joint agreement on inflation targets. With clear agreement on the medium-term policy objectives and with a shared understanding of the policy framework, there is no need for coordination on the setting of interest rates and fiscal policy instruments.  The economic literature on policy coordination tends to be about situations where the fiscal and monetary authorities have one or more of the following: very different views of economic welfare,5                                                       3  This is also the view of Cecchetti (2002) and Taylor (2000). For an opposing view, see Seidman (2001). Much earlier, Boulding (1969) summarized an academic session on recent experiences in the use of fiscal policy with a poem including the following lines, ". . . Policy may follow Fillip’s Law—Too little and too late, too much too soon . . . ." 4  For the Canadian federal government, the limitation of discretionary fiscal policy as a stabilizer is compounded by the fact that Canadian provincial governments taken together represent a larger share of the economy than the federal government does, and their spending structure (which includes more spending on capital than the federal government) better lends itself to discretionary spending for stabilization purposes. 5 That is, their "loss functions" are very different. 
 4 BIS Review 48/2002 inconsistent policy objectives, policy that is totally discretionary, or a tendency to get involved in game-like behaviour with one another. None of these applies in Canada—and none should apply anywhere.  Given our policy framework, when the government changes fiscal policy, it needs to think of how these changes will affect inflation and, consequently, interest rates. Similarly, the Bank of Canada needs to consider how changes in fiscal policy will affect demand and inflation, and thus its setting of interest rates. Therefore, it is to the mutual benefit of both parties to co-operate in sharing information and analysis as they adjust their policy settings.  Co-operation between the Bank and the federal Department of Finance occurs on a number of levels. I have frequent discussions with the Minister and Deputy Minister. And there are meetings at the staff level to share, for example, information from economic forecasts, surveys, and contacts with various groups and organizations. One of the key reasons for our regular discussions has been to ensure that each institution understands the details of the framework within which the other one is pursuing its objectives and how this framework is being implemented with respect to current economic surprises.  The Bank also keeps in close touch with provincial fiscal authorities.  Thus far, I have not said anything about the appropriate mix of monetary and fiscal policies when talking about coordination and co-operation. Quite simply, with explicit frameworks in place for monetary and fiscal policies, the whole issue of policy mix becomes moot. The fiscal and monetary authorities are both adjusting their policy instruments to attain their respective objectives. There is no other mix of interest rates and fiscal thrust that the authorities will perceive as consistent with meeting the monetary and fiscal objectives.  Concluding Thoughts  Clear monetary and fiscal objectives, combined with clear accountability for meeting those objectives, provide the background for policy co-operation and stabilization in Canada. The monetary and fiscal policy frameworks have created an environment where co-operation in the form of sharing information and analysis is most effective. Fiscal and monetary credibility is high. In other words, economic agents trust that the monetary authorities and the fiscal authorities will maintain these frameworks.  With trust in place and with expectations well anchored, the automatic fiscal stabilizers can be allowed to operate fully and monetary policy actions can be directed to achieving the inflation targets. In addition, when major shocks occur, with trust in place, there can be a temporary overshoot or undershoot of the fiscal or monetary targets without unhinging confidence in the framework or in expectations that the targets will be met over time.  I believe that Canada’s experience and the lessons we have learned about having clear policy objectives and supportive, transparent policy frameworks have broad applicability in open economies with a flexible exchange rate.  
 BIS Review 47/2002 1 R Basant Roi: A central banker’s piece of advice to bankers Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the official inauguration of the New Co-operative Bank Ltd, 9 August 2002. *      *      * The Rt Hon Prime Minister Hon Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance Hon Ministers Chairman and Members of the Board of Directors of New Co-operative Bank Ltd. Ladies and Gentleman Good Afternoon I am privileged to address this audience of bankers and representatives of co-operative societies on the occasion of the official inauguration of the New Co-operative Bank Ltd. Nearly a hundred and forty years ago, in December 1863, the Comptroller of Currency and later Secretary of the Treasury of the United States addressed a letter to all national banks that had just come into operation. Retrospectively, I strongly believe that this is rightly an occasion for me to quote 7 very short paragraphs from the nearly 140-year old letter, more so as I recognise a good number of bankers and representatives of co-operative societies in this audience. Each of the seven paragraphs that I am about to share with you remains invaluable pieces of advice to bankers - even after nearly 140 years. First advice  “Let no loans be made that are not secured beyond a reasonable contingency. Do nothing to foster and encourage speculation. Give facilities to legitimate and prudent transactions. Make your discounts on as short as the business of your customers will permit and insist upon the payment of all paper at maturity, no matter whether you need the money or not.” Second advice “Distribute your loans rather than concentrate them in a few hands. Large loans to a single individual or firm, although sometimes proper and necessary, are generally injudicious and frequently unsafe. Large borrowers are apt to control the bank; and when this is the relation between a bank and its customers, it is not difficult to decide which in the end will suffer.” Third advice “Treat your customer liberally, bearing in mind the fact that a bank prospers as its customers prosper, but never permit them to dictate your policy.” Fourth advice “If you doubt the propriety of discounting an offering, give the bank the benefit of the doubt and decline it; never make a discount if you doubt the propriety of doing it. If you have reasons to distrust the integrity of a customer, close his account. Never deal with a rascal under the impression that you can prevent him from cheating you. The risk in such cases is greater than the profits.” Fifth advice “Pay your officers such salaries as will enable them to live comfortably and respectably without stealing; and require of them their entire services. If an officer lives beyond his income, dismiss him; even if his excess of expenditures can be explained consistently with his integrity, still dismiss him. 
 2 BIS Review 47/2002 Extravagance, if not a crime, very naturally leads to crime. A man cannot be a safe officer of a bank who spends more than he earns.” Sixth advice “The capital of a bank should be a reality, not a fiction; and it should be owned by those who have money to lend, and not by borrowers. The Comptroller will endeavour to prevent, by all means within his control, the creation of a nominal capital by national banks, by the use of their circulation, or any other artificial means; and in his effort to do this, he confidently expects the co-operation of all well managed banks.” Seventh advice “Pursue a straightforward, upright, legitimate banking business. Never be tempted by the prospect of large returns to do anything but what may be properly done under the National Currency Act. ‘Splendid financiering’ is not legitimate banking, and ‘splendid financiers’ in banking are generally either humbugs or rascals.” These are the seven chief mantras of good banks and good bankers. They are atemporal - indeed timeless. They were valid more than century ago; they are valid today and they will continue to remain valid. The New Co-operative Bank Ltd is starting operation. A note of caution is appropriate on this occasion. Never attempt to grow big too fast. Make sure that all loans are adequately and legally backed by valid securities - whether the loans are made to co-operative societies or to individuals. When a bank lends few thousands of rupees it is the borrowers’ headache to repay the loan; when it lends millions of rupees it is not the borrowers’ headache but the bankers’ headache to recover the money lent out. A small bank with a healthy and sound balance sheet is stronger than any big bank with a weak balance sheet. I seize this opportunity to reflect on one particular aspect of the way policy decisions in some banking enterprises are made in Mauritius. Of all the five revocations of banking licences in Mauritius, three were clearly motivated by problems the roots of which were found at the level of Boards of Directors. Members of the Boards of Directors obscenely took advantage of their positions to influence imprudent credit decisions making. The Bank of Mauritius issued 9 Guidelines to the banking industry so far. Two more Guidelines have been issued to the industry for consultations. The Guidelines on Corporate Governance, effective June 2001, and on Related Party Transactions, effective January 2002, put the roles and responsibilities of Boards of Directors of banks in the right perspective. The Guidelines, as I said in my address to the private sector in November last, are not obituaries but principles that should be adhered to by the Boards of Directors of all banks, including the Board of Directors of the Bank of Mauritius. The quiet and sybaritic lives of Board members are over. The Banking Supervision Department of the Bank of Mauritius is already assisting the staff of the New Co-operative Bank Ltd to come to grips with all the Guidelines. I urge all the Co-operative entities to familiarise themselves with the Guidelines in order to understand and fully appreciate the new regulatory environment in which the New Co-operative Bank Ltd is expected to operate. May I wish the New Co-operative Bank Ltd the very best of success. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 1 Susan S Bies: Bank performance and corporate governance Speech by Ms Susan S Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Pennsylvania Association of Community Bankers, Memphis, Tennessee, 28 September 2002. *      *      * Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to speak to members of the Pennsylvania Association of Community Bankers and to return to my home of twenty-four years, Memphis, Tennessee. Some of you have asked if I have had any surprises in my new role as a Governor of the Federal Reserve Board. I must say that the biggest surprise is the amount of required reading. I haven’t read so much on so many different topics since I was in graduate school! Not only do I get to discuss economics and monetary policy, but also--as chair of the Board’s bank supervision committee--I am deeply involved in bank regulation and operations issues. Even though I brought with me twenty-seven years of banking experience, including an earlier stint with the Federal Reserve, I find that my current responsibilities make me consider issues in new ways. Consequently, I look forward to meeting with groups like yours so that I have a better understanding of emerging issues from diverse perspectives. In my comments today, I will first address the recent financial performance of U.S. banks, and of community banks in particular. I will then turn to improvements that banks large and small are making in measuring and managing risk, the responsibilities of directors and senior managers in corporate governance, and finally, to the importance of sound accounting practices. In my view, these topics are inextricably linked and in light of continuing questions of confidence in America’s corporations, they are quite timely. Financial condition of U.S. banks Last year was exceptional in many respects, with the United States slipping into a recession, the September terrorist attacks, the stock market declines, and all of the related events. In response, the Federal Reserve reduced interest rates at every meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee in 2001 and an additional three times between meetings, for a total of eleven rate cuts accumulating to 475 basis points. Since then, the Federal Reserve has shifted its bias from one in which we were concerned more with weakness, to one in which the risks of inflation and weakness were balanced, then back again--most recently--to a concern about economic growth. The direct effects of the past year’s stressful events were painful enough. In addition, abusive accounting and corporate-governance practices made conditions worse, as large corporate bankruptcies imposed substantial losses on investors, lenders, and employees. These domestic events increased the uncertainty about earnings reported by other firms and dampened financial markets that were already weak. Abroad, Argentina’s economic and political difficulties reminded us, yet again, that exposures to emerging economies can also present substantial risk. Throughout this period, the U.S. banking system remained strong, reporting continuing record earnings and profitability, despite a slip in asset quality. During the first half of this year, U.S. insured commercial banks earned more than $44.5 billion and an annualized return on assets of 1.37 percent. Both figures represent the industry’s best six-month performance ever and reflect impressive growth on top of what were already impressive results. Net interest income was the primary driver of increased revenue, despite a notable decline in commercial loan volume. Loan loss provisions remained relatively high by the standards of most of the past decade but dipped notably from the second half of 2001. Net charge-offs, which were concentrated among commercial loans of large banks and credit card specialty lenders, also dropped. While this improvement since year-end may signal that problem assets have peaked, some large institutions have not yet fully recognized the results of this year’s supervisory assessment of shared national credits. Consequently, we may see further deterioration in asset quality during the periods ahead. Moreover, the general economy needs to strengthen further before we can be much more comfortable that we’re out of the woods. As noted, current weaknesses appear to be largely within the commercial loan portfolios of large regional and money center banks rather than those of smaller institutions. Even the problems of large 
 2 BIS Review 55/2002 banks could be viewed as mild, however, given the shocks felt by many in their customer base. In some respects, bank performance may reflect improvements in risk-management practices and also the greater diversification of revenues and exposures that has occurred in the past decade. Bank performance also reflects, I believe, a greater awareness by institutions throughout the banking system that they should promptly address problems as they emerge. During this recession and recovery, both the banking industry and the regulatory agencies appear to have responded well, by acting in a timely manner and without unnecessarily constraining bank credit. That positive outcome was made easier, of course, because the banking system was strong as challenges began to build. Because the industry had the earnings and capital to absorb increased losses, there was time and opportunity to deal more calmly with emerging weakness. If smaller banks, generally, are not seeing the commercial loan weakness that some larger institutions are facing, which areas may present them with heightened risks? A couple of possibilities come to mind. First, for most of the past decade, community banks--particularly those in the asset range of $100 million to $1 billion--have actively expanded their commercial real estate lending. Since the early 1990s, larger community banks have expanded these portfolios from 13 percent to 22 percent of aggregate assets. Most Reserve Banks are reporting generally weak commercial real estate markets, as failing companies vacate office and retail space and renters move into single family homes. Commercial real estate credits are still performing relatively well for this stage of the cycle, and my comments are not intended to suggest a material concern. Nevertheless, they account for most of the increase in nonperforming assets over the past year for large community banks. Given the checkered history of commercial real estate lending and its increased relevance to many banks, this portfolio must be monitored and managed carefully. We have seen before the cyclical nature of commercial real estate and its links to the general level of economic activity. The loss of anchor firms such as K-Mart, for example, may reduce the market value of certain shopping centers and the consumer traffic and the financial strength of nearby businesses as well. The second area of potential risk relates to interest rates. For the industry overall, the Federal Reserve’s interest rate cuts last year certainly appear to have helped bank earnings, but they present management with new challenges, too. Lower rates undoubtedly eased payment pressures on many borrowers and prevented further deterioration in the quality of bank loan portfolios. Nearly 60 percent of all banks also saw wider net interest margins in the first six months of 2002 than in the comparable period of 2001. At some point, however, lower interest rates may begin to compress net interest margins for some institutions as deposit rates reach their effective floors. Those holding low-yielding, long-term assets could get hurt. Indeed, many banks have responded to the low rates by sharply reducing their investments in Treasuries and shifting funds into mortgage-backed securities in the search for higher yields. Given the historically low interest rates at which recent mortgages have been originated or refinanced, one might expect these loans to be prepaid much more slowly than they have typically been in the past. As a result, the effective maturity, or duration, of bank securities portfolios--and of many loan portfolios as well--has been extended. Clearly, I am not about to forecast interest rates--something I’ve already learned that central bankers never do. My point is that banking organizations, and investors generally, should recognize that domestic interest rates are historically low and that the possibility for a rising rate environment should not be overlooked. Even stable rates could present increased risks, if savings and money market deposit accounts flow out of banks as quickly as they came in when equity markets declined. We should all ask ourselves how long depositors would be content to earn the currently low rates when those markets stabilize or improve or interest rates rise once again. At some point, even loyal customers--those on fixed incomes, in particular--may blink and take steps to improve their own yields. Managing risks The health of financial institutions today is also a result of improvement in the risk-management process that has been ongoing at banks for years. Increasingly, the entire risk management process has become more quantitative, reflecting not only the enhanced ability to collect and process data at lower cost, but also improved techniques for measuring and managing risk. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 3 As you are aware, bank regulators are working to develop a more modern international approach to bank capital--called Basel II. Although those standards, in the first instance, are being designed to address changing practices at large, internationally active banks, we can expect the lessons learned about risk management to have much broader effects. We do not anticipate, for example, that large numbers of banking organizations in the United States would formally adopt the data and analytically intensive and sophisticated processes to determine regulatory capital under development today. The costs and resources to develop such systems and frameworks are beyond the resources of all but a limited number of very large banks. We would expect, though, that the effort would eventually strengthen risk management and provide best practice examples industry wide. In quantifying credit risk, larger banking organizations are taking the lead, measuring a borrower’s probability of default, the bank’s loss given default and its likely exposure to the borrower at the time of default, taking into consideration future draw downs. The greater use of credit scoring in retail transactions provides a stronger framework to assess risk and ensure that loan pricing reflects the credit quality. Such tools should perform even better as the effects of the most recent economic slowdown are incorporated into bank statistics. Most consumer credit models were developed after the 1990-91 recession, and so their reliability in predicting default rates and losses during a severe economic slowdown is yet to be fully tested. We are already observing, for example, significant increases in delinquencies in subprime lending. Since many of these borrowers did not have significant access to credit in previous recessions, their ultimate default rate should help validate the strength of the new statistical models. The measurement and management of interest rate risk has also improved greatly in recent years, perhaps particularly at community banks. Asset/liability committees at banks throughout the country now routinely consider the results of models developed either internally or by vendors to identify the market sensitivity of loans, investments, and deposits. As a result, managers can better anticipate changes in net interest income and develop responses to their specific circumstances. The industry is also developing new revenue streams and diversifying its earnings sources. Such efforts help increase the cross-sell ratio with key customers, which in turn should improve customer loyalty and further stabilize a bank’s revenue base. Providing the personal touch has long served community banks well, but personalized service alone may become less sufficient in the years ahead. Conducting sound market research and pricing to reflect competition, customer value, and underlying risk are becoming more important for success. Recent abuses of corporate accounting practices and other matters provide good lessons in risk management as bankers try to increase earnings by cross-selling more products. We have seen, for example, how conflicts of interest and the lack of a strong quality-assurance function destroyed the reputation and viability of a major accounting firm. Similarly, banks that compensate line officers on the basis of sales and cross-selling must guard against the adverse incentives that those compensation structures can provide. There, too, a strong quality-assurance function is essential. Given the dominant role of credit risk at banks, the chief credit officer should ensure that pressures to increase fee income do not lead to unacceptable levels of credit risk. Corporate governance Sound corporate governance is an essential element of a strong risk-management process. As bankers and bank directors, you have specific responsibilities to manage the risks at your financial institutions and effectively oversee the systems of internal controls. Not only are the activities of banks central to credit intermediation, but, in this country, banks fund their activities in part with federally insured deposits. Those deposits are the lowest-cost source of funds that banks have, specifically because of the government’s guarantee. Bank directors are not expected to understand every nuance of banking or to oversee each transaction. They can look to management for that. They do, however, have the responsibility to set the tone regarding their institution’s risk-taking and to oversee the internal-control processes so that they can reasonably expect that their directives will be followed. They also have the responsibility to hire individuals who they believe have integrity and can exercise a high level of judgment and competence. In the light of recent events, I might add that directors have the further responsibility to periodically consider whether their initial assessment of management’s integrity remains correct. 
 4 BIS Review 55/2002 Interagency policy holds boards of directors responsible for ensuring that their organizations have an effective audit process and internal controls that are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses. The reporting lines of the internal audit function should be such that the information that directors receive is impartial and not unduly influenced by management. Internal audit is a key element of management’s responsibility to validate the strength of a bank’s internal controls. In the limited cases in which that function must be outsourced, best practice is to avoid using the same firm for the external audit as well. Internal controls are the responsibility of line management. Line managers must determine the level of risks they need to accept to run their businesses and must assure themselves that the combination of earnings, capital, and internal controls is sufficient to compensate for the risk exposures. Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal, should independently monitor the control processes to ensure that they are effective and that risks are measured appropriately. The results of these independent reviews should be routinely reported to executive management and boards of directors. Both executive management and directors should be sufficiently engaged in the process to determine whether these reviews are in fact independent of the operating areas under review and whether the officers conducting the reviews can, indeed, speak freely. The level of independence from executive management that a board can demonstrate has, of course, become a far more visible and more important factor in evaluating corporate governance. Recent audit failures have highlighted the value of sound practices, such as having audit committee members regularly meet privately with an institution’s outside auditors to discuss matters without management present. The recent Conference Board and New York Stock Exchange recommendations, or prior reports by the Blue Ribbon Committee and the Treadway Commission in the 1980s describe best practices for audit committees and are worthy of your review. This summer, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took the matter of independence a step further, in the case of publicly traded firms, by incorporating specific requirements of independence into law. For example, all members of a company’s audit committee must now be outside directors. Moreover, at least one of those committee members should be a so-called financial expert. If not, the firm must disclose why not. The legislation also assigns audit committees sole and direct responsibility for appointing, compensating, and overseeing the company’s auditors. Other provisions of the act set forth potentially broad ranging standards affecting the way public companies compensate their executives and directors and disclose their operating results. To strengthen the role of outside auditors, the act also limits the non-audit work such firms may perform for audit customers and creates an oversight board to regulate and oversee audit work. Precisely how some of these legislative provisions will affect firms has yet to be decided by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Other provisions, though, are in effect now or will become effective soon and warrant immediate attention. Although the act applies only to institutions that register their shares with the Securities and Exchange Commission, its elements should be considered by virtually all commercial banks and by most other companies of any material size. They could well highlight weaknesses in your own procedures. Indeed, beyond legal requirements, boards of directors and managers of all firms should periodically test where they stand on ethical business practices. They should ask, for example, “Are we getting by on technicalities, adhering to the letter but not the spirit of the law? Are we compensating ourselves and others on the basis of contribution, or are we taking advantage of our positions?” Ultimately, of course, markets correct their excesses, and in this context “markets” include both the public and private sectors. Obviously, during the past year we’ve seen reactions not only from investors and creditors, but also from lawmakers and regulators, to observed failures within corporate boardrooms. All of the actions affect market practice. My intent today is to remind you that as business and community leaders, you should recognize the value of exercising self-discipline within your own institutions. That includes maintaining sound ethical practices in protecting the reputations of your banks. As we have seen from recent events, the market’s response can be harsh. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 5 Quality of accounting practices Uncertainty regarding the quality of corporate accounting standards strikes at the heart of our capitalist system and threatens the efficiency of our markets. Investors and lenders must be confident that they understand the risks they accept and that their counterparties are playing fair. For six years I was a member of the Emerging Issues Task Force of the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which provides the accounting industry with guidance in areas where financial reporting practices are diverging. During that time, I developed a better appreciation for the challenges that standard-setters face when dealing with topics that are becoming increasingly complex. Informed and objective professionals can legitimately disagree on the best accounting standard to apply to new types of transactions. That is part of the challenge of keeping accounting standards current. The rapid pace of business innovations makes it impractical to have rules in place to anticipate every business transaction. Rather, the more complex and dynamic the business world becomes, the more important it is that accounting be based on strong principles that are sufficiently robust to provide the framework for proper accounting of new types of transactions. At the core of such accounting principles should be professional standards that every corporate accountant and every outside auditor must follow. In part, auditors should be required to ask themselves whether a particular accounting method adequately represents the economics of the transaction and whether it provides readers with sufficient information to evaluate the risks. If not, it is likely that the procedure is not the best accounting method to apply. Rules alone, however, do not ensure good financial reporting. At Enron and other companies, weak corporate governance practices apparently permitted sham transactions and misleading financial reporting. Outside auditors erred in trying too hard to please an important client. They forgot that their professional role is to assure users of financial reports that the statements fairly represent the condition of the corporation and that they communicate, not conceal, the level of risk. Some observers have asserted that new accounting standards are needed. In some minor ways that may be true. But judging from publicly available information, I believe that what we need most is to restore the integrity of corporate accountants and the quality of the audit process, rather than impose extensive new rules. One reason that accounting in the United States has become so rule-based is that we tend to add new accounting standards when abuses occur even when the abuses resulted from accounting and audit failures. Rather than creating new rules, forming the new Public Company Oversight Board established by Sarbanes-Oxley may provide a better approach and help to refocus public accountants on core principles and away from more aggressive and misleading practices. Given human nature and the complexity of many accounting issues, we must expect that rules will sometimes be broken or misapplied. But a new, authoritative oversight board--combined with more-rigorous reviews by corporate boards--should be able to discourage and address severe abuses. For its part, the Federal Reserve is also willing to challenge accounting interpretations that it sees as too aggressive. By no means do we intend to supplant accounting authorities in making rules, but we do intend to provide discipline, when necessary, in their interpretations--particularly in the context of regulatory reporting and in light of the weaknesses in quality-assurance processes in public accounting firms. For example, the Federal Reserve has required loan pools at one large bank to be re-consolidated into their financial statements when it was determined that risk and control were not removed from that organization through the creation of special purpose vehicles. In another example, the banking regulators have jointly issued for comment new guidance related to credit cards. This guidance not only deals with unacceptable practices, but also clarifies that revenue recognition of fees billed to customers should reflect the expected ability to collect those fees. In addition to the recognition and measurement aspects of financial reporting, we need to continually evaluate the effectiveness of disclosures. Public disclosures by banks, as well as other firms, need not follow a standard framework that is exactly the same for all. Rather, we should insist that each entity disclose the information it believes its stakeholders need to evaluate its risk profile. Each business line in a complex organization is unique, and--to be most effective--the specific disclosures of its risks should be different, too. Even in smaller organizations, disclosures should be tailored to reflect the activities of the organization. A summary of the information that is important for executive management and the board of directors in monitoring the health of the bank is an excellent place to start to tailor the information that would be useful to investors and customers. That is the approach being taken in developing the Basel II Capital Accord. Disclosure rules that are too rigid may 
 6 BIS Review 55/2002 be, or become, incompatible with risk-management processes that continually evolve. In this area and many others, the best results are likely to come from bankers and regulators working together. Conclusion In closing, I congratulate you and the industry, generally, for successfully dealing with the challenges of the past year. The industry remains fundamentally sound and has consistently demonstrated that it can deal with stress. Nevertheless, no business can afford to remain static, and banks of all sizes should continually pursue better ways to manage risk. Following sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices consistently is also crucial to maintaining the confidence of capital and financial markets. We should learn from the experiences of this past year and ensure that our own accounting and control systems practices are sound. We should also take the opportunity to strengthen areas of corporate governance that may be weak. As bankers and bank regulators, we are responsible for conducting our affairs with competence and integrity. As we do so, our banking system should grow stronger still. 
 BIS Review 55/2002 1 Niklaus Blattner: Value, vulnerability and resilience of the financial market infrastructure Speech by Professor Niklaus Blattner, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the SIBOS Conference, Opening Plenary, Geneva, 30 September 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen As a central banker sharing the responsibility for overseeing payment and settlement systems, I have of course been closely following the developments of the financial market infrastructure. There is no doubt that these developments have greatly contributed to an enhanced efficiency of the financial sector. They have also highlighted the fact that not only the payment and settlement systems but also other providers of standardized services in the field, not least S.W.I.F.T., have become more important over time. The developments have further shown that safety and resilience have clearly gained more weight for the system operators, for the system participants as well as for the regulatory authorities. In the first part of my address I would like to consider the economic value added by the payment and settlement infrastructure and to briefly discuss the driving forces underlying its development. In the second part I shall focus on the role of central banks as agencies of oversight. In the third part I shall describe the factors that shape the vulnerability of financial markets and their infrastructure and examine how these factors have changed over time. The fourth part is devoted to the implications of identified vulnerabilities for resilience. In the fifth part I shall address the cost-benefit issues that sooner or later inevitably turn up whenever measures to improve resilience are discussed. I shall conclude with a summing-up of my main points. Value: significance and driving forces The main function of banks is intermediation. In its basic form intermediation takes place between borrowers and lenders. Additional intermediation functions are - among many others - making payments and buying and selling securities on behalf of clients. Over the past decades we have seen a huge decrease in the costs of intermediation. This has drastically changed the structure of the banking sector and, at a more general level, the structure of the whole financial sector. Two factors have triggered this change. First, competition in the markets has increased as a consequence of reduced trade barriers and of deregulation. Trade barriers not only in goods but also in services including financial services and in financial assets have been progressively lifted. This has led to rapidly growing interaction among economies, not least in the area of banking and financial services. Countries participating in this process have seen their domestic financial markets become deeply integrated with markets abroad. Distance and location, increasingly becoming less of an obstacle, no longer give protection from competition. This is globalization. Second, technological progress, especially in information technology (IT) and telecommunications, has exerted an all-pervasive pressure to innovate at the level of processes and products and has greatly affected the way the financial sector organizes itself. Innovation has sharply reduced the costs of telecommunications as well as the costs of IT equipment. As a consequence, the costs of trading financial services and financial assets have decreased enormously. Additionally, not only has innovation brought down costs, but it has also increased the scale and scope as well as the quality of services. Innovation made markets expand to a hitherto unknown degree. Indeed, the value of traded financial services and assets has gone up almost explosively. These developments have required the construction of an adequate trading, clearing and settlement infrastructure. A good example is the market for foreign exchange (FX). Today, FX is one of the few truly global markets. It is open 24 hours a day and participants from all over the globe are connected through electronic networks. Here, the birth of Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) is of utmost importance. Since September 9 of this year the settlement of FX transactions in the largest seven currencies can take place on a Payment versus Payment basis. CLS has only been possible thanks to technological progress, the decrease in communication costs, and large trading volumes. The benefit is not only higher efficiency but also reduced risk. 
 2 BIS Review 55/2002 Let me sum up this first section on value as follows: There is no doubt that market integration and technological progress have been the driving forces. They have led to sizeable reductions in transaction costs. This has permitted the creation of today’s globalized financial industry and has made possible an impressive growth in value. The role of central bank oversight Now, let me turn to the role of central bank oversight: Every transaction - be it a commodity or a service - eventually leads to a transfer of money. From trade to settlement at least one system of the financial market infrastructure is usually involved. Given this, it is not surprising that the regulators are keeping a keen eye on market developments. Central banks, with their core mandate of monetary policy, have an especially close relationship with the payment systems. To the overseers of payment systems the main objective is safety. The definition and standards of safety have evolved with the years. For a long time the main interest of central banks in payment systems came from computer experts. Payment systems used to be viewed merely as ‘computers’ that cleared and settled payment obligations. In the late 1980s the focus started to shift towards the financial risks, i.e. credit and liquidity risk inherent in payment systems. Slowly it became common knowledge that payment systems could be a source of systemic risk by providing a channel through which the failure of one participant to meet its payment obligations could be passed on to other participants. In their own best interest and under the influence of the overseers operators started to protect their systems against financial risks - in most cases by building Real-Time Gross Settlement systems (RTGS). Today almost every country is operating an RTGS system. There is now a widespread consensus within the private sector and the central banking community about the kind of operational requirements and financial risk controls that are necessary to make a payment system safe. A main contributor in this area has been the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). As a standard-setting body the CPSS has, for instance, drafted the Core Principles for Systemically Important Payments Systems. The Core Principles are a testimony of the consensus about standards for safety and efficiency in payment systems. The CPSS has also played a leading role in raising the awareness of the risks involved in the settlement of foreign exchange transactions. It has also followed and to some extent promoted the CLS project since its beginning. The safety of the clearing and settlement infrastructure has been a long-standing concern of the overseers. Together with the financial industry they might even have enjoyed some pride while looking at what was achieved in terms of efficiency as well as safety and soundness of operations by the industry. But clearly, since September 11, 2001, a new awareness of vulnerability has grown on us all. Those tragic events have made us rethink our approach vis-à-vis safety and operational risk. I think we all suddenly realized we had to reassess the vulnerability of our institutions and systems and, where necessary, improve their resilience. Vulnerability - a quick survey Ensuring that companies, consumers and investors have confidence in their ability to effect transactions and access their funds, securities, and other financial assets is of the highest importance in times of crisis. Therefore it is clearly in the private and public interest to ensure that, in the event of any large-scale disruption, systemic consequences are minimized. However, minimizing systemic consequences requires knowing the major vulnerabilities of the financial system. With this knowledge the responsible parties in the private sector as well as in central banks and government can in principle take adequate precautions and remedies. Three sources of vulnerability can be identified. A first source of vulnerability is economic concentration among large and complex financial institutions. This may strike you as odd. But size is a potential source of vulnerability and industrial consolidation usually increases size. The financial industry has been experiencing numerous mergers and acquisitions. This has resulted in financial services offered by an increasingly small number of large and dominant players. Even if only one of these players were to stop functioning well the financial system as a whole might suffer. The second source of vulnerability is geographical clustering. Financial institutions are heavily clustered in a limited number of important international financial centers. Economic concentration and 
 BIS Review 55/2002 3 geographical clustering tend to add up. A huge number of firms, among them the industry’s giants, may be affected in one and the same location by one and the same disruptive event. A third source of vulnerability is the large degree of connectivity and interdependency of the financial sector. Y2K and the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, highlighted this type of vulnerability. One key lesson learnt was that vulnerability extends beyond these systems since they crucially rely on utilities such as electricity and telecommunications or on service providers like S.W.I.F.T. Let me sum up again. There are three major sources of a financial system’s vulnerability: economic concentration, geographic clustering, and connectivity and interdependency. The latter are an obvious characteristic of financial networks. Networks contribute to increased efficiency and facilitate risk management. At the same time they also can act as channels as well as origins of systemic crisis. From vulnerability to resilience Hand in hand with a new awareness of the vulnerability of the financial system, those responsible for its safety and stability in private firms, in financial market infrastructures as well as in the regulatory agencies have recently been taking a new hard look at the financial system’s capacity for resilience. In retrospect the Y2K problem was a first mild but nevertheless rather valuable test. The Y2K test was mild in the sense that everybody had enough time to prepare for it. What helped in Y2K was the clear deadline. All the contingency and communication networks could be set up before the event. Many of us gathered here today knew exactly where we had to be on December 31, 1999, what we had to do and whom we had to call if there were problems. Still, Y2K was valuable to the financial community in so far as it opened our minds and increased our sensitivity for problems that nobody had encountered or envisaged before. Today, however, the situation is different and considerably more complex. The events of September 11, 2001, have clearly increased our awareness further. Looking back to the time before the attacks we seem to have tended to underestimate the probability and consequences of disruption. So what needs to be done to make sure that we do not continue to underestimate threats? How can the resilience in financial systems be improved? What are the responsibilities of each and all of us? At the level of a single financial institution objectives and measures - in terms of back up solutions, staff safety and training, testing procedures, and contingency planning in general - may have to be newly defined. A specific issue that has probably not yet received enough attention everywhere is the internal crisis management process. Establishing a crisis management committee, which coordinates decisions and communication in times of crisis, can be vital, especially for large and complex financial institutions acting globally. On top of this, crisis management needs to be tested in general. One of the simpler scenarios could be: what happens if a bank is - for whatever reason - not able to release S.W.I.F.T. messages? In addition, crisis management of a single institution must involve its customers, its business partners and peers, its service providers and its utility providers. Crisis management is therefore a very demanding activity. What applies to single financial institutions obviously also applies to institutions of financial market infrastructure, to central banks and to institutions of supervision and oversight in general. The same insights apply to everyone: Be aware of the new dimensions of systemic risk within globalized financial markets and refrain from early satisfaction with what you appear to have achieved. At this point, I would like to stress that the overall resilience of the financial sector also depends on the financial strength of each institution. In retrospect it might be said it was a benign coincidence that the September 11, 2001 attacks happened in a period of comparatively favorable economic conditions in the financial industry. Under less favorable circumstances the capacity to absorb shocks could have been considerably smaller. This is another reason why the rapid implementation of the new Basel Accord on capital adequacy is so very important for the financial system as a whole. In addition to this it is obvious that further and new tasks arise for regulatory agencies and central banks at the national as well as the international level. Addressing the issue of disaster recovery has to become part of the routine supervisory process. Supervisory guidelines and examination procedures are being adjusted in this light and they are helpful tools in increasing resilience. Also, when overseeing payment systems resilience and business continuity will have to be scrutinized anew. 
 4 BIS Review 55/2002 Finally, central banks must always keep in mind that they carry a big responsibility for resilience and stability through their role as liquidity providers. Time and time again, free and easy access to liquidity has proven to be essential in large-scale crises. Since central bank liquidity is usually granted against collateral, the linkage between the payment and the securities settlement systems has to be especially robust. The market participants have to know and understand the conditions of access to lending of last resort facilities provided by central banks so that they can shape their contingency planning and collateral portfolios accordingly. Simultaneously central banks have to take the necessary precautions to increase resilience at their own end. Costs and benefits of resilience Let me add some remarks on the costs and benefits of improving resilience. My conviction will not come as a surprise to you: investment in resilience does indeed pay out for the financial sector as a whole and for society at large, but it also pays out for financial market infrastructures and for each and every financial firm. In other words, I have no doubt that more still needs to be done at the level of single institutions, and, on top of that, at the level of the financial industry as a whole. However, voices have raised the concern that, in light of the ever-increasing cost of safety and against the background of the significant cost pressure due to deteriorating market conditions, investment in resilience might in fact be increasingly limited. But, as I said before, the higher requirements for operational reliability, for contingency planning and for crisis management stem mainly from the financial industry’s own development. Clearly, increasing concentration, geographic clustering, connectivity and interdependency are highly beneficial, but they do also have a price when it comes to the reduction of risk. We cannot enjoy the benefits without paying this price. The point here is that we all have to be very careful about how we invest in resilience. And we have to make sure that no resources are wasted. For sure, the regulatory community will keep this in mind and will do its best not to impose unnecessary burdens on the private sector. Summary and conclusion Finally, let me sum up my main points. • Today’s globalized financial industry shows impressive long-term value growth. This growth is due to market integration and technological progress. Together they led to sizable reductions in transaction costs and to expanding markets. • Every transaction eventually leads to a transfer of money. From trade to settlement usually at least one system of financial market infrastructure is involved. Overseers care for the safety of these systems. This is their responsibility. • The events of September 11, 2001, made the industry, the regulators and the overseers rethink their approach to safety. Consequently the vulnerability of the financial system and its resilience are currently being reevaluated. • Three major sources of vulnerability have been identified: economic concentration, geographic clustering and connectivity and interdependency. Networks by their very nature can act as channels as well as origins of systemic crisis. • The awareness of vulnerability leads to new and substantial demands for investment in resilience. For instance, crisis management is a demanding activity. It involves private firms, financial market infrastructures, public supervisors and oversight institutions. Without the cooperation of all of them crisis management cannot succeed. • Investment in resilience, however, is costly. The benefits of the financial sector’s value growth cannot be enjoyed without paying this price. Should the price not be paid value growth would turn out to be unsustainable. There are no stable financial systems that are not at the same time highly resilient under crisis conditions. Allow me to expand on this last point: as a representative of a central bank I assure you that central banks are not likely to close an eye on this issue. Resilience of financial service providers in general and of the financial market infrastructure in particular has been placed at the top of regulatory authorities’ agendas. Indeed, it will stay there. As much as public bodies are contributing to the 
 BIS Review 55/2002 5 resilience of the financial system as a whole, they will make demands of the private sector. As much as public bodies are willing to step in as coordinators before and during times of crisis and eventually as lenders of last resort, they also want to see private sector entities being involved and actively participating in shaping resilience and resolving crises. The responsibility for financial stability is a shared responsibility. I am fully aware that none of us can precisely estimate today the economic consequences of what we all yet have to do in order to increase the resilience of financial systems. Since this resilience is bound to be tested again harshly sooner or later, there is no alternative to rapid, serious, adequate and if necessary costly preparations by all of us. Let me end by expressing my gratitude. I enjoyed contributing to the exchange of information, evaluations and views. This is the essence of the SIBOS conference. I am particularly grateful since I know that all of us in this room as well as those financial sector professionals who were unable to attend this conference, those of the private sector as well as those from the public sector, willingly share the noble responsibility for the efficiency and stability of today’s and tomorrow’s financial systems. Thank you very much for your attention. 
 BIS Review 54/2002 1 Willem F Duisenberg: The first nine months of the euro cash era Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the International Imaging Industry Summit, Schloss Bensberg, Bergisch-Gladbach, 24 September 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to the International Imaging Industry Summit, on the eve of the world's leading trade fair "for the photographic and imaging sector", as the website says. Let me start by drawing a parallel between the Photokina and central banking, which, I must admit, is not an easy task. Both activities – and this is an important point – are future-oriented. In fact, a key objective of the Photokina exhibitors is to present "the future" here and now, in the shape of new products and new technologies. Also for central bankers, a future-oriented decision-making is crucial; in fact, it is an important element of a successful monetary policy.  A forward-looking approach was also taken by the creators of the euro. The single currency has been used as a non-cash payment instrument and unit of account since the start of 1999 and as a physical payment instrument since the beginning of this year. The introduction of the banknotes and coins was the last step in a process which formally started at the European Council held in Maastricht in December 1991 and led to the signing of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. Euro cash has now been in circulation for almost nine months and, according to a recent survey by the European Commission, around 85% of the population of the euro area countries found the changeover to the new money a straightforward process. It was completed by the end of February 2002, when the euro banknotes and coins became the sole legal tender in the 12 countries.  In my speech today, I shall not only look to the future, but shall also look back a little, over the first nine months of the euro cash era. Putting more than eight billion banknotes and close to 39 billion coins into circulation was a logistical operation of truly gigantic proportions. That it went off so smoothly was thanks to the joint efforts of all parties involved and especially to the currency's good reception by the public. First, I shall address developments in currency in circulation before, during and after the cash changeover. Second, I shall consider the use of the euro outside the euro area. In fact, there is evidence of considerable demand for euro banknotes also outside the euro area and particularly in countries neighbouring the EU. Finally, I'll be talking about a major concern of people in the euro area, namely the perceived impact of the euro banknotes and coins on inflation, or the "teuro" as this phenomenon is popularly called in Germany. While it is true that in some sectors, especially in services, price increases have been made for various reasons, the across-the-board impact on overall consumer price developments has been small. I will come back to this later as well.  Currency in circulation and banknote developments before, during and after the cash changeover Let me first of all consider what happened to the currency in circulation and euro banknotes in the months before, during and after the cash changeover. The period before the euro cash changeover saw a significant decline in currency in circulation; currency in circulation is defined as the value of banknotes and coins held by non-banks – which in turn means currency holdings by residents of the euro area not belonging to the euro area banking sector and by non-residents. From December 2000 to December 2001, the volume of national or "legacy" currency circulating in each of the euro area countries decreased by around 30%.  In the first two months of this year, currency in circulation– was strongly influenced by the cash changeover. Both euro banknotes and legacy banknotes were used in parallel to make payments. In addition, in order to make it easier to give change in the first two weeks after the cash changeover, retailers held large amounts of small euro banknotes, especially the EURO 5 and 10 banknotes. These holdings led to a steep increase in currency in circulation in January. In February, the amount of legacy banknotes held by non-banks as well as the precautionary holdings of small euro banknotes declined, leading to an overall reduction in currency in circulation. Banks also held more banknotes than usual as a precaution and, in part, for logistical reasons. Higher priority was given to supplying new euro banknotes to customers than to returning legacy banknotes to 
 2 BIS Review 54/2002 their respective national central bank, and so the latter process took some time. As a result, the number of euro banknotes in circulation reached its peak on 15 January 2002 [8.1 billion banknotes]. Thereafter, the number of euro banknotes in circulation fell until the end of August 2002 [to 7.3 billion banknotes]. In particular, the number of EURO 5 banknotes in circulation declined by 51% and the number of EURO 10 banknotes by 30% between mid-January and the end of August. In contrast to the decline in the number of small banknotes in circulation, the demand for large denominations increased steadily in the first eight months of 2002. The strongest rise in demand was for the EURO 500 banknotes, which more than doubled between mid-January and the end of August [+120%]. Demand also rose during this period for the EURO 100 banknotes, by no less than 60%. This shows that there was a rapid increase in the hoarding of banknotes in the first months of the euro cash era. Evidently, the denominational structure of the banknotes in circulation is still developing in response to the banknote requirements of cash users. Related to the substantial rise in large banknotes, from March onwards, currency in circulation increased by around EUR 10 billion each month. While the volume of currency in circulation so far has remained below the level in January 2001, this development indicates that economic agents are quickly re-building their currency holdings.  Let me also say a few words on the euro coins. As a large quantity of euro coins was transferred to banks and other professional groups prior to 1 January 2002, the increase in the number of euro coins in circulation during the first two weeks of the changeover period was only small [2.6%]. The circulation of euro coins reached its peak in mid-January 2002 [38.6 billion coins]. At the end of August 2002, there were around 36.7 billion coins in circulation, worth EUR 11.5 billion. The successful introduction and acceptance of euro cash has been certainly aided by the high quality of the euro cash. The euro banknotes incorporate a variety of modern security features that are easy to check. Their effectiveness is proven by the fact that in the first half of this year the number of euro banknote counterfeits amounted to less than 7% of that of the legacy currency counterfeits circulating in the same period last year. I can assure you that banknote research and development work within the Eurosystem is ongoing and aims to maintain the integrity of euro banknotes. First estimates of the use of the euro outside the euro area Let me now turn to the demand from outside the euro area for the euro in the first half of this year, in terms of cash and deposits. I should point out that, because of the anonymity of cash, central bankers are not usually able to determine exactly where the banknotes they have issued are circulating. Some indications are provided by cross-border transfers of banknotes via banks, but banknotes which are carried across borders by individuals are not registered.  Of all the legacy currencies circulating outside their "home" territory, it was the Deutsche Mark banknotes which accounted for the largest proportion. Moreover, people living outside the euro area also used to a certain extent some of the other legacy currencies, such as the French franc, the Italian lira, the Austrian schilling and the Spanish peseta. A large share of the legacy currencies was believed to be circulating in central and south-east Europe as well as in Turkey. Therefore, the introduction of euro cash at the beginning of 2002 was a major event not only for the euro area but also for a number of neighbouring countries where legacy banknotes from the euro area were circulating. The euro cash changeover and its aftermath offered a unique opportunity for the European Central Bank to collect first-hand information on the foreign circulation of the euro. Such information can be derived from data on the frontloading of euro banknotes to destinations abroad, from data on cross-border shipments of euro banknotes by banks, which probably comprised the main outflow in the first months of the euro cash era, as well as from evidence provided by a number of central banks in countries neighbouring the EU. All in all, although the available data and estimates are characterised by various degrees of uncertainty, there is evidence that the euro is used in neighbouring countries to a significant extent, either in cash or deposit form. Let's consider cash first. The cash changeover outside the euro area started as early as 1 December 2001, in order to facilitate the conversion to the euro of legacy currency banknotes held by non-euro area residents from 1 January onwards. Non-euro area central banks and international banks abroad received euro banknotes to enable them to meet the initial cash needs of the public and business. Banknotes worth almost EUR 5 billion were shipped outside the euro area in December 2001, more than half of them destined for eastern and central Europe, and Turkey. Since January, banks have 
 BIS Review 54/2002 3 continued to ship euro banknotes outside the euro area in order to replace legacy currency banknotes and to meet new demand. Between December 2001 and June 2002, an accumulated net amount of around EUR 23 billion euro banknotes was shipped abroad via the banking system. In the mid-1990s, the Bundesbank estimated the Deutsche Mark banknotes circulating outside Germany to be worth between EUR 32 and 45 billion. If this is taken as a rough approximation of the amount of legacy currency banknotes held outside the euro area, then the available evidence suggests that a considerable part of this has already been converted into euro banknotes.  Let's now consider euro-denominated bank deposits. They also played an important part in the cash changeover outside the euro area. Indeed, before the cash changeover, several non-euro area countries encouraged households to deposit their legacy currency cash holdings in euro-denominated accounts, rather than exchange them directly for euro banknotes. Credit institutions, particularly foreign-owned banks, widely advertised euro-denominated accounts at attractive conditions. This strategy was intended to reduce both the logistical and transaction costs related to changeover operations. In some cases, especially in south-east Europe, another objective was to boost confidence in banking systems. In co-operation with a number of central banks in countries neighbouring the euro area, the ECB has gathered data on the scale of these developments. Overall, in around 30 countries, euro-denominated deposits increased by a total of more than EUR 13 billion in 2001. Information for the first months of 2002 suggests that this may be a lasting phenomenon as euro-denominated deposits decreased only slightly.  In a nutshell, the available evidence tends to indicate that most of the legacy currency banknotes have been converted into euro, either in cash or deposit form. This suggests that the euro has successfully replaced the legacy currencies in the regions neighbouring the EU.  Let me add that – despite the considerable amount of euro banknotes transferred abroad – foreign circulation of euro banknotes only constitutes a limited proportion of the total currency in circulation. The estimated amount of euro banknotes circulating outside the euro area at the end of June accounts for only 8% of total currency in circulation and only 0.4% of the monetary aggregate M3. Therefore, while the ECB monitors these developments closely, they currently play no significant role in the assessment of monetary developments in the euro area with regard to price developments. Demand for euro banknotes over the longer term Let me also take a somewhat longer-term perspective with regard to the demand for the euro in the euro area and outside.  As already mentioned, a preliminary interpretation based on developments in the first months of the euro cash era suggests that the negative trend of currency in circulation which was observed before the cash changeover is being reversed relatively quickly. It would seem that currency holdings for transaction purposes, but also for hoarding, are being built up fairly quickly by people in and outside the euro area. But as the demand for cash has not yet taken full shape, it is too early to assess whether the cash changeover will have a long-term impact on the use of cash by the general public and, if so, in which direction. Certainly, a number of domestic as well as foreign factors will play a role in the longer-term demand for euro banknotes:  First, with regard to domestic demand, the introduction of the single currency itself has facilitated the use of cash across the euro area countries. At the same time, however, the introduction of the euro makes it possible in general to economise on cash holdings for cross-border uses, which might lead to lower cash holdings. Second, in most of the euro area countries, the euro banknote denominations are higher than those of the national legacy currencies. This might lead to changes in cash holding habits.  Third, the further integration of the financial sector in the euro area tends to work in favour of lower cross-border transaction costs for electronic payment instruments such as credit cards. This might encourage greater use of electronic payment instruments in the euro area. At the same time, however, these factors also tend to result in lower fees for cross-border cash withdrawals. Finally, regarding foreign demand for euro banknotes and coins, the close financial, economic and institutional links between the euro area and its neighbours suggest an ongoing and perhaps increasing foreign demand for euro banknotes, in particular, although probably not exclusively, in the EU's neighbouring countries. 
 4 BIS Review 54/2002 Consequently, as these factors work in different directions, it is difficult to foresee the longer-term trend in banknote developments. Impact of the cash changeover on price developments Let me now turn to an issue which has attracted much publicity over recent months. There has been a controversy in many euro area countries about whether the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has led to an increase in prices. According to a recent survey by the European Commission, more than 60% of euro area inhabitants believe that prices in all sectors have increased since January. Another 15% think that prices have risen in some sectors of the economy.  Let me first say that it is very difficult to separate out the impact of the cash changeover on prices with any degree of precision. Any price change could be due either to the changeover itself, because of, for example, rounding up to new eye-catching prices or the pass-through of cash changeover costs, or it might reflect a change in other cost factors, like wages or import prices. This implies that any estimation of the cash changeover effect on prices is surrounded by uncertainty.  In order to get some evidence on price changes which might be related to the cash changeover, it is informative to look at the sector level. Indeed, for specific services items, prices have increased more than usual, which could be related to the introduction of the euro. For example, eating out, having a haircut or having clothes dry-cleaned became significantly more expensive in the first few months of 2002, and many people in the euro area have noticed this, including myself. In general, price increases have mainly taken place in sectors with a low level of competition and where products are rather differentiated.  At the same time, however, it is important to realise that there have also been price increases due to factors unrelated to the euro. For example, in the early months of this year, the extreme winter weather in the euro area, particularly in the Mediterranean countries, led to severe supply shortages and thus to higher vegetable prices. Likewise, the rise in petrol prices in the first quarter of 2002 cannot be attributed to the cash changeover, but was the result of higher oil prices on the world market and, in some countries, higher taxes. The same applies to cigarette prices in several euro area countries. Moreover, it has to be taken into account that the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, which is used for measuring consumer prices in the euro area, is a broad index covering a very comprehensive basket of goods purchased by households. While it cannot and is not supposed to reflect the cost of living of each single household, it reflects the average cost of living of a representative household in the euro area. Therefore, while some items in this goods basket may have gone up in price partly because of the cash changeover, many other items in the basket have not shown any significant price increases. In fact, some goods have actually become less expensive over recent months. One example which might be of particular interest to you, ladies and gentlemen, is the price level of photographic and cinematographic equipment: in July this year the prices of these goods were almost 3½ percent lower than in July 2001 across the euro area. Telephone calls have also become cheaper over this period. In other areas where competition is strong there were also price reductions associated with the euro. Overall, it does not appear that the cash changeover has been a major factor in the overall development of euro area consumer prices. Eurostat, the official statistical agency of the EU, has estimated a cash changeover effect for the euro area on HICP inflation in the first half of 2002 of between 0 and 0.2 percentage points. Studies at the country level also point to limited overall effects, with some possible euro-induced price increases in certain sectors. For example, Germany's Federal Statistical Office, jointly working with the Deutsche Bundesbank, stated recently, that "the euro introduction has not had a considerable impact on the cost of living as a whole"(1) in Germany. While the effects may have varied across euro area countries and sectors, the overall impact of the cash changeover on the overall price level in the euro area has been contained. This evidence, however, contrasts sharply with the concerns and discussions in many euro area countries about the impact of euro cash on consumer prices. One reason for the gap between empirical findings and public opinion might be the fact that the general perception of price changes is more strongly influenced by the prices of small-ticket goods and services purchased on an almost                                                       1  "Six months after the introduction of euro cash - an intermediate stock-taking in official price statistics", DESTATIS press release, 2 July 2002. 
 BIS Review 54/2002 5 daily basis. Coincidentally, prices of some of these frequently purchased items, like tomatoes, petrol and tobacco products, went up, for the various reasons I have mentioned (such as winter weather, oil prices and taxes), at the same time as the introduction of euro banknotes and coins. Although these price increases were unrelated to the cash changeover, many people have unfortunately associated them with the changeover. But it is important to realise that a complete picture can only be obtained by looking at a comprehensive measure of prices, including the prices of less frequent purchases. In fact, overall consumer price inflation has been around 2% during recent months, a level which is very similar to that in December 2001, just before the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. In addition, the price prospects for the coming months point to a rate of around 2% in the euro area.  Over a longer period of time, the greater transparency resulting from the introduction of the euro and the move to exclusive euro pricing will strengthen competition in the retail sector and contain price pressures in the euro area. These permanent benefits and efficiency gains from introducing the euro will far outweigh the generally very small changeover effects on inflation.  Concluding remarks Let me sum up. The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has been a major success which was made possible by the thorough preparations of all parties involved and the good reception by the public. The euro banknotes make visible the Monetary Union and the close financial integration of the twelve euro area countries. We are very satisfied that the banknotes were immediately accepted by the public in the euro area. And as the foreign demand for the euro banknotes shows, the euro is much sought after outside the euro area as well. Finally, even though there have been effects on certain goods and services prices, the permanent benefits of the single currency and efficiency gains of introducing the euro will far exceed any short-term effects on inflation.  Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 54/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Regulation, innovation and wealth creation Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Society of Business Economists, London, U.K., 25 September 2002.  *      *      * Since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution here in Britain, virtually every generation in the industrialized world has witnessed advances in living standards. A never-ending stream of innovation has led inexorably to expanded trade and improved productivity in many nations throughout the world.  Today, we can see on the horizon vast new means of communicating and computing, practical applications of advances in biotechnology, and doubtless many other innovations. But a half-century from now, the goods and services that we produce and consume will, to a significant extent, reflect applications of insights not yet formed or even imagined. Could the residents of sophisticated eighteenth-century London, prior to Sir William Herschel's demonstration of invisible radiation, even contemplate the existence of radio waves that would reach around the world? I still have trouble grasping how the shortwave transmissions of the BBC travel thousands of miles to find their way to my bedroom at night to be picked up by my transistor shortwave radio.  Our modern electronic devices work according to the laws of quantum mechanics, which were laid out in the 1920s by Erwin Schrodinger, Werner Heisenberg, and Paul Dirac; they postulated that at the subatomic level the world did not obey the centuries-old Newtonian views of how the forces of the universe function. The major revolutions of Albert Einstein had occurred a few years earlier and nuclear power was a generation or so beyond.  I raise such examples only to emphasize that we cannot realistically project future innovations and the potential for those innovations to create economic value. Novel insights, by definition, have not previously entered anyone's consciousness. However, that unanticipated discoveries of how to create wealth will emerge in the decades ahead no longer seems as conjectural as it may have, for example, before the Industrial Revolution.  Full realization of the benefits of past innovations, and of those our grandchildren will experience, will depend on the forces of globalization already in play to develop the commercial potential of new technologies and to transmit the application of these technologies across our economies. By spreading expertise and expanding the division of labor and specialization to ever broader markets, those forces led to enhanced trade in the past half-century, which in turn has dramatically elevated the standards of living of nations that have chosen that path forward.  But an ever burgeoning global financial system also inevitably raises the potential of increasing systemic risk. At Lancaster House later this evening, I will be discussing some of the new tools of risk management and the principles that should guide the containment of systemic risk and its allocation between the private and public sectors. Here I would like to focus on a narrower, but nonetheless increasingly important, issue: the nexus of risk-taking, regulation, innovation, and wealth creation.  Owing to persistent advances in information and computing technologies, the structure of our financial institutions is continuously changing, I trust for the better. But that evolution in financial structure has also meant that supervision and regulation must be continually changing in order to respond adequately to these developments. In today's markets, for example, there is an increased reliance on private counterparty surveillance as the primary means of financial control. Governments supplement private surveillance when they judge that market imperfections could lead to sub-optimal economic performance.  But let us consider now another aspect of market regulation efforts: transparency. There should not be much dispute that markets function best when the participants are fully informed. Yet, paradoxically, the full disclosure of what some participants know can undermine incentives to take risk, a precondition to economic growth.  No one can deny that fully informed market participants will generate the most efficient pricing of resources and the most efficient allocation of capital. Moreover, it could be argued that, if all information held by individual buyers or sellers became available to all participants, the pricing structure would more closely reflect the underlying balance of supply and demand. Thus full information would appear to be the unambiguous objective. But should it be?  
 2 BIS Review 54/2002 Take, for example, the real estate developer who conceives of an innovative project that will significantly raise the value of the land on which it will be situated--provided that the site possesses suitable characteristics. Suppose further that it is costly for the developer to determine whether a given site is suitable. If he or she discovers a suitable site and is able to quietly purchase the land from its current owners without revealing the value of the project, the developer makes a substantial profit, and the community overall presumably benefits from improved land use.  But what if, before the purchase of the land, the developer was required to disclose his or her purchase intentions and, in particular, the value enhancement created by the project? The sellers then seeing the bigger picture would elevate their offers sufficiently high to extract the full value of the innovation from the developer. Under these circumstances, would any projects go forward? Clearly not, because developers would be unwilling to bear the cost of evaluating potential sites knowing that they would reap none of the benefit of discovering suitable ones. A requirement for fuller disclosure of the potential, heretofore undiscovered value of the land would engender neither more disclosure nor improved land use.  An example more immediate to current regulatory concerns is the issue of regulation and disclosure in the over-the-counter derivatives market. By design, this market, presumed to involve dealings among sophisticated professionals, has been largely exempt from government regulation. In part, this exemption reflects the view that professionals do not require the investor protections commonly afforded to markets in which retail investors participate. But regulation is not only unnecessary in these markets, it is potentially damaging, because regulation presupposes disclosure and forced disclosure of proprietary information can undercut innovations in financial markets just as it would in real estate markets.  All participants in competitive markets seek innovations that yield above-normal returns. In generally efficient markets, few find such profits. But those that do exploit such discoveries earn an abnormal return for doing so. In the process, they improve market efficiency by providing services not previously available.  Most financial innovations in over-the-counter derivatives involve new ways to disperse risk. Moreover, our constantly changing financial environment supplies a steady stream of new opportunities for innovation to address market imperfections. Innovative products temporarily earn a quasi-monopoly rent. But eventually arbitrage removes the market imperfection that yielded the above-normal return. In the end, the innovative product becomes a "commodity" made available to all at a modest, fully competitive profit.  To require disclosure of the structure of the innovative product either before or after its introduction would immediately eliminate the quasi-monopoly return and discourage future endeavors to innovate in that area. The result is that market imperfections would remain unaddressed and the allocation of capital to its most-productive uses would be thwarted. Even requiring disclosure on a confidential basis solely to regulatory authorities may well inhibit such risk-taking. Innovators can never be fully confident, justly or otherwise, of the security of the information.  Regulators may not always be able to differentiate easily between secrecy to protect intellectual property and secrecy to deceive or to commit outright fraud. Yet a supervisory system must make that distinction as best it can. There is nothing unusual about making difficult tradeoffs in regulation. In fact, it is the rule rather than the exception for most regulatory regimes--whether in the financial or nonfinancial sectors of our economies. Indeed, such tradeoffs, in a wider sense, determine the differing regulatory regimes we see around the world. Those differences in regimes reflect largely attitudes toward competition.  Competition is the facilitator of innovation. And creative destruction, the process by which less-productive capital is displaced with innovative cutting-edge technologies, is the driving force of wealth creation. Thus, from the perspective of aggregate wealth creation, the more competition the better.  But unfettered competitive capitalism is by no means fully accepted as the optimal economic paradigm, at least as yet. Some of those involved in public policy often see competition as too frenetic. This different perspective is captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago. He asked, "What is the market? It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilization? It is the struggle against nature." A major determinant of regulatory regimes is how a rule of law is applied to strike a balance between the perceived benefits of wholly unfettered markets and the perceived societal costs of overly fierce competition.  
 BIS Review 54/2002 3 There remains an uneasy balance in most countries between unleashing the forces of competition and reining them in when they are perceived to threaten the social order. With markets continuously in evolution and the political perceptions of the proper extent of regulation also changeable, it is no wonder that our regulations always seem to be in flux.  Such flux must be kept to a minimum to avoid fostering uncertainty among innovators. Moreover, shifting regulatory schemes unavoidably leave obsolescent regulations in their wake. Business people in the United States complain, perhaps with some exaggeration, that so many regulations are on the books that they are probably at all times unknowingly in violation of some of them. We at the Federal Reserve endeavor every five years to review all our existing regulations in order to revise or rescind those that are out-of-date. This schedule of review has worked well for us, and it is probably a good practice to apply to regulatory systems generally.  The extent of government intervention in markets to control risk-taking is, at the end of the day, a tradeoff between economic growth with its associated potential instability and a more civil but less stressful way of life with a lower standard of living.  Those of us who support market capitalism in its more-competitive forms might argue that unfettered markets create a degree of wealth that fosters a more civilized existence. I have always found that insight compelling. But the resistance by many to such arguments suggests a more deep-seated aversion to the distress that often accompanies the process of creative destruction.  The choices that we make in our societies on these critical issues will importantly shape the opportunities for the unforeseen, but inevitable, innovation that I noted at the outset to advance the economic well-being of our citizens.  
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 Gertrude Tumpel Gugerell: Financial regulation and systemic stability Speech by Dr Gertrude Tumpel Gugerell, Vice Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the CEPR/ESI Annual Conference: “Regulatory Challenges for European Financial Markets”, hosted by the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 21 September 2002. The references for the speech can be found on the Austrian National Bank’s website. *      *      * Introduction  Supervisors in the early post war period were used to a fairly quiet life. The regulatory regime at this time was characterized by largely repressed and nationally closed financial systems shielded from competition. The Bretton Woods system made currency risk insignificant, interest rate fluctuations were very moderate, price competition played no role because interest rate regulations were in place. There was also very little competition from non-banks and international competition was restricted by capital controls. This situation resulted in high intermediation margins with relatively low risk. As a consequence the risk bearing capacity of financial institutions was high and financial systems were very stable.  This situation has radically changed since the mid seventies. After the fall of the Bretton Woods system which was accompanied by a process of wide spread financial deregulation interest rate and currency risks increased substantially and financial systems became much more competitive all over the world. Intermediation margins came under pressure and the risk bearing capacity of the financial system decreased. Supervisors were suddenly confronted with banking crises and problems of financial instability. The sometimes sizeable costs of these crises have increasingly refocused the regulatory debate from issues of depositor protection and competition policy to issues of financial stability. Today supervisors and regulators all over the world see the strengthening of the safeguards against financial instability as one of their core tasks. But are the instruments in place today appropriate to achieve this goal? Are recent regulatory initiatives able to improve current practice?  I think it is fair to claim that many remarkable improvements have been made recently and during the past two decades. The efforts to improve capital- and risk management standards for banks have resulted in substantial advances in adapting to a financial environment characterized by reduced margins and higher volatility. The level of the debate about risk within and outside financial institutions has been rising substantially and the awareness of potential problems in assessment methods and regulatory instruments is nowadays much higher than ten or twenty years ago.  All these improvements notwithstanding, I want to argue today that we still need a further critical debate about how we think of financial instability, its causes and its economic consequences. In this debate we have to question perceived viewpoints and sometimes perhaps to go back to basics.  There are of course many more open issues than I can possibly address in this talk. So let me confine myself mainly to a particular - though important- aspect of this debate: The common perspective on financial regulation and financial instability is at the moment mainly concerned with single institutions. The discussion of financial crises and systemic risk however requires a shift in perspective from individual institutions to the financial system as a whole.  This shift in perspective is already under way. The popularity of the notions of “macro-prudential” versus “micro-prudential” approaches to regulation and supervision reflect this fact (Borio (2002)). As Andrew Crockett, the general manager of the BIS explained in a widely cited speech at the international conference of banking supervisors in Basel in September 2000, macro- and micro prudential approaches to supervision and regulation differ mainly in terms of objectives of the supervisory tasks and in the conception of mechanisms influencing economic outcomes. Whereas the macro-prudential objective can be defined as limiting the costs of financial distress for the economy as a whole and to reduce the likelihood of large scale breakdowns of financial intermediation, the micro-prudential approach is concerned with limiting the failure of individual institutions. Whereas the micro-prudential approach is based on the assumption that financial stability is ensured when each and every institution in the financial system is sound, the macro-prudential approach does not necessarily endorse this view.  
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 In the following I want to contribute to this discussion and argue why a shift of perspective from an institution-based regulatory policy to a system perspective is indeed necessary and important and why we should actively discuss these issues.  The Endogenous Nature of Financial Risk  The recent history of financial regulation - in particular the framework put forward by the Basle Committee - has been concerned to a large extent with the upgrading of capital standards for banks. One of the basic features of this regulation is the idea that capital charges required by the regulator should reflect appropriately the risk taken by the banks: they should be risk weighted. Banks that take higher risks should be required to hold more capital. The major part of the discussion about capital adequacy regulation has so far centered on the appropriate choice of risk weights. In fact a core part of the proposal for the new Basle accord deals with correcting past shortcomings in the choice of these weights.  In this process regulators have relied heavily on individual risk management models operated by the banks and audited by the supervisors. Capital charges are determined based on the results from these risk management models. The recent developments have increased the scope for model-based calculations of capital charges to a much wider class of risks.  A common feature of these models is that financial risks are taken as exogenous to the behavior of institutions. Conceptually many of the modern internal risk models look at financial risks borne by the banks in very much the same way as on the risk of the weather. Managing the risk of a financial institution is thus seen in analogy to a game against nature (See Morris and Shin (1999)).  This point of view can be perfectly sensible from the perspective of an individual bank. As an individual institution in a big international market it may make sense to view the financial risks reflected in the volatility of financial market and asset prices as largely exogenous. For the system as a whole the risks faced by the different agents in the financial system are however endogenous.  From a system viewpoint it is important to see that prices and volatility are determined endogenously in the aggregate and depend on the joint behavior of all agents. Failing to recognize this endogenous nature of financial risk can indeed lead to poor risk assessments. In particular in times of crises the weather paradigm of financial risks is seriously misleading. While in normal times the actions of many heterogeneous agents cancel each other out in the aggregate in times of crises behavior usually becomes extremely uniform and individual actions become mutually reinforcing thereby amplifying the crises. This reminds us of a basic insight in other areas of economics: What is true at the micro level may not necessarily hold in the aggregate.  In the recent academic literature various contributions by Morris and Shin (See Morris and Shin (1999)) have modeled this basic insight for an analysis of banking crises and currency attacks. Their main point is that in a financial market - contrary to weather forecasts - agents play a game against nature and against other agents simultaneously. In such a situation actions of individual agents are typically mutually reinforcing. Equilibrium behavior is characterized by simultaneous sudden switches of collective actions.  Discrepancies between individually and aggregate rational behavior arise because individual agents do not take into account the effects of their behavior on the payoff distribution of other agents. If - for example- everybody sells into a falling market prices will plummet and the crisis is reinforced.  Morris and Shin (1999) discuss the episode of the crash of the US dollar against the Yen in October 1998 as an example for the logic described above. The dollar had been continuously appreciating in the years before the crash. In the summer of 1998 it was expected that the dollar would rise even further to the end of the year. In combination with a large interest rate differential between Japan and the US, many traders took advantage of the situation by borrowing Yen, buying Dollar assets and make profit on the appreciation of the Dollar as well as on the interest rate differential. This kind of trading strategy was pursued by banks, hedge funds and even by bigger corporations. When the Russian default set in during August 1998 all agents that had participated in the so called Yen-carry strategy in the months before were all simultaneously eager to unwind their dollar positions reinforcing the fall of the Dollar and thereby deepening the crises.  Individually these strategies might have all been rational. What individual institutions and the weather paradigm of financial risks fail to take into account is the fact that the behavior of individuals changes the payoff distribution of all other individuals. Since this externality is not taken into account by current 
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 risk management technology there are reasons to believe that the models will work poorly exactly when needed most: before and in times of crises.  What conclusions can we draw from such an insight? I think the arguments put forward above support the point made in the beginning. If we want to design a regulatory framework that is able to act as a safeguard against financial instability a shift of perspective from individual institutions to a system level is essential. The current strong reliance on individual backward looking risk models has to be questioned and we have to think on how we can supplement such an approach by a form of aggregate assessment that takes the endogenous nature of risk into account as far as possible.  Summarizing these points I want to conclude that we have to ask ourselves whether we are at the moment perhaps relying too much on the use of internal risk models to determine capital charges. As I have argued, these models are rooted in a risk concept that is particularly misleading shortly before and in a crises because the endogenous nature of risk. At the onset of a crisis the process that drives the data on which risk assessments are based undergoes a structural break and changes its nature. If we fail to take these effects into account we are led to flawed and misleading risk assessments.  The Problem of Hidden Aggregate Risk Exposure  Another tension between the micro- and the macro-perspective exists in the field of banking supervision. Current practice is mostly based on the individual institution approach. It is hoped that supervisory assessment of the “soundness” of single institutions and bank by bank regulatory monitoring of risk models is sufficient to safeguard the stability of the banking system as a whole. This point of view can however be doubted. As with the problem discussed before there is a substantial difference between the single institution and the system perspective.  One of the major reasons why the individual institutions approach is insufficient is the fact that modern banking systems are characterized by a fairly complex network of mutual credit exposures. These credit exposures result from liquidity management on the one hand and from OTC derivative trading on the other hand. They have substantially increased in importance in the post Bretton Woods area by the huge growth in international capital markets. They have also become more important because the banking industry's reaction to a situation of tighter margins and increasing volatility. Banks have increasingly used new risk management techniques that try to take risks out of the balance sheet and sell it to third parties via derivative contracts, mainly through interest rate swaps.  In such a system of mutual exposures the actual risk borne by the banking system as a whole and the institutions embedded in it may easily be hidden at the level of an individual bank. Thus again the major problem of an individual institution perspective is a potentially misleading risk assessment for the financial system as a whole.  The problem of hidden risk exposure is perhaps most easily seen in the case of counterparty risk. Judged at the level of an individual institution it might look rather unspectacular. By the individual institution perspective it can however remain unnoticed that a bank is part of a chain of mutual obligations in which credit risks are highly correlated. Its actual risk exposure thus might indeed be quite substantial and can be uncovered only if an assessment can be made at the system level.  Another example of hidden exposure has been pointed out in the literature by the previous speaker, Professor Hellwig. He gave an example where the network of mutual credit obligations makes substantial exposure of the system to interest rate risk invisible at the level of an individual bank because the individual maturity transformation looks short, whereas the maturity transformation of the system as a whole is rather extreme (See Hellwig 1997). To uncover hidden exposure and to appropriately assess risk in the banking system, rather than looking at individual institutions, risk assessment should therefore make an attempt to judge the risk exposure of the system as a whole.  How a change into a more system oriented supervisory risk assessment could work in practice seems at the moment still an open issue. Even if we feel uneasy about the current practice it is not clear how a system perspective would look like in practice. This does however not imply that we should not face the challenge. To the contrary: If we take the task of strengthening the safeguards against financial instability seriously, finding an answer to these questions is indeed crucial. Let me point out at this stage that Oesterreichische Nationalbank by its research activities tries to actively contribute to this process. The results of these efforts are published in our regular Financial Stability Report and the Working Paper Series of the Bank.  
 4 BIS Review 53/2002 To summarize these remarks let me conclude that we have to rethink the current practice of how we supervise our banking systems. I have argued that the problem of the current approach based on individual institutions may fail to notice important risk exposures that remain hidden if we don't attempt to achieve a risk assessment at a system level. Spotting the build up of financial instabilities in the banking system is in any case an extremely difficult task. But the quality of such risk assessments will be greatly improved if we manage to learn how risk assessment at a system level can be done.  To be sure let me make clear that I am not arguing that the current supervisory practice is of no value in the big task of safeguarding financial stability. However, we need complementary approaches that bring in the macro-perspective of an overall risk assessment for the banking system as a whole.  The Problem of Procyclical Effects of Capital Adequacy Regulation  Another classical conflict between the micro- and macro-perspective on financial stability has extensively been discussed in the case of capital adequacy regulation. While for an individual institution it may make sense to take a defensive stance in a situation of crises, if all banks do that each of them could end worse off.  From the early days of the Basel accord concerns about these procyclical effects of capital adequacy regulation have been raised and the issue has been widely discussed. (See Blum and Hellwig (1995)). If I discuss the procyclicality issue here I am therefore telling hardly anything new. However it seems necessary to point out at this stage that we can not close the debate yet.  The mechanism by which capital standards act as a cyclical amplifier is relatively easy to understand. Capital adequacy regulation can bring banks into a situation where they have to cut back credit in a recession to fulfil their capital requirements after an adverse shock. Especially in a situation where all banks are hit at the same time, this might amplify an economic recession and increase bank insolvencies rather than prevent them.  Of course this analysis is based on the assumption that banks can not easily issue new equity and that firms can not simply substitute bank credit with other sources of finance. The effect of capital scarcity leading to a ''credit crunch'' has been observed and investigated by in the literature by Bernake and Lown (1991) and Calomiris and Wilson (1998) among others.  If there is a substantial cost connected to issuing new equity in bad times and if firms can not easily substitute bank finance by other sources, one has automatically a procyclical effect of bank lending no matter whether capital requirements are in place or not. However capital requirements may act as an amplifier.  Refining risk weights by making capital charges dependent on internal and external ratings may even exacerbate these effects because ratings also vary with the business cycle. Preliminary evidence suggests that procyclicality is likely to increase under the new proposal in particular in crises situations (See Segoviano and Lowe (2002)).  Having said this, what conclusions shall we draw from this analysis? I don't have a definite answer but I think the concerns that have been raised in the discussion have to be taken seriously and we are challenged to think about approaches that could strengthen countercyclical regulatory instruments that encourage the build up of cushions in booms that can act as buffers when times deteriorate.  Making progress in this direction requires that we are able to improve the measurement of risk through time and in the assessment of the profile of macroeconomic risks; an extremely difficult task (See Borio 2002). There are efforts to proceed in this direction in particular by work at the BIS and at other institutions but there is still much to be done.  Some authors have argued that the procyclicality concerns are largely exaggerated because there are reasons to believe that a number of other factors can alleviate or even offset these effects. (See Borio 2002). I think we don't know the definite answer yet. Theoretical arguments and the preliminary evidence combined should alert us that we have to make further progress on this issue.  The Role of Central Banks  I have argued that there is a need to strengthen the system perspective on financial regulation and financial stability and that the regulatory instruments and objectives have to be complemented by new 
 BIS Review 53/2002 5 approaches to risk assessment and supervision. At a policy level such an endeavour will necessarily involve many institutions and raise difficult policy coordination issues. Let me say a few words about the role of central banks in this process.  Modern central banking has always been intimately connected to banking supervision. This intimate link has its historic roots in the establishment of banknotes as a means of payment and the spread of commercial bank money or bank deposits as a convenient substitute for banknotes and coins. While it is the public function of monetary policy to ensure the confidence in the paper currency, ensuring stability of the relationship between central bank and commercial bank money is the ultimate function of prudential supervision and regulation of the banking system. Thus central banks have a keen interest in issues of financial stability.  As far as the shift in perspective from an individual institution approach to a more system based approach to regulation and supervision is concerned, central banks are natural institutions to contribute to such an attempt.  Central banks by their role as liquidity providers to the banking system and in their functions in prudential supervision have rich data sets that are relevant to the issues raised above. These data sets provide potentially extremely valuable information that can be used and exploited for the development of new tools and methods that can support a system approach to banking regulation and supervision.  As I have indicated in the beginning issues of financial stability have raised to the top of the agenda of economic policy discussions because the world and the financial environment have substantially changed since the mid seventies. Both financial institutions and regulators during the last decades have already learned a lot about how to live in this new world of increased volatility and tight margins. As central banks needed some time to learn how to effectively fight inflation, we will need some time to learn how to best deal with a more volatile and competitive financial environment. In this learning process policy makers can benefit a lot from the input of academic research and economic analysis. In the same way as academic research has provided very valuable insights that have helped policy makers in the conquest of inflation, the attempts to provide safeguards against financial instability will equally benefit from an active dialogue between policy and research. Initiatives such as this conference are therefore very valuable indeed and I want to emphasize that good policy solutions to the big challenge of safeguarding financial stability will depend very much on a fruitful dialogue between academic research and economic policy.  Conclusions  The discussion about financial stability and financial crises has brought us a long way since the beginning of the seventies. We have learned a lot in this process and despite of many shortcomings the regulatory environment as well as the active management of risks in banks and other financial institutions has substantially improved since then.  However many questions still have to be addressed. I hope that I have convinced you that one of the big steps that is ahead of us is the development of meaningful and effective ways to complement existing approaches to safeguarding financial stability by a more systemically oriented viewpoint. I have discussed three issues - the endogenous nature of financial risks, the problem of hidden aggregate exposure and the problem of procyclicality of capital requirements - to illustrate this point. I hope that I have convinced you that we could indeed benefit from a shift in perspective from an individual institution- to a system perspective.  If you share this view, then there is still much work ahead both in terms of research and in terms of economic policy. Policy makers will need the input from research to clarify many of the open conceptual and empirical issues that are raised in this debate. I also hope that researches find the problems that arise for policy makers sufficiently interesting and challenging to think about them and that many new ideas will result from attempts to understand the nature of financial risks and financial instability. I do hope that a fruitful dialogue between these two worlds - the world of regulatory policy and supervision and the world of academic research - will finally result in improved policy solutions for the difficult problem of financial regulation and systemic stability.  
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 Jens Thomsen: Monetary policy in the shadow of a monetary union1 Speech by Mr Jens Thomsen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the inauguration of the monetary policy committee at the Bank of Ghana, Accra, 9 September 2002. The references for the speech can be found on the National Bank of Denmark’s website. *      *      * 1. Introduction There is presently little disagreement among economists that the ultimate goal of monetary policy should be price stability. Indeed, in the statute of the recently established European Central Bank price stability is clearly stated as the primary objective of the bank, and it is made clear that support of the general economic policies in the Community is only a secondary objective. In pursuing the final target of price stability, different countries have chosen different intermediate targets to guide their monetary policy. During the last decade several countries have switched to a monetary regime based on inflation targeting.2,3 Since monetary policy is only effective with some lag, and since excessive output losses are to be avoided, inflation-targeting central banks seek to control inflation over the medium term. Expected future inflation at a given horizon thus serves as the intermediate target for an inflation-targeting central bank. This article will, however, focus on another intermediate target: the exchange rate.4 Before the creation of the European Monetary Union, most of the EU member states participated in the European Monetary System – a fixed-exchange-rate system based on a grid of bilateral central parities and intervention bands. Currently, three EU member states have not adopted the euro: while the UK and Sweden have inflation-targeting regimes and a floating exchange rate vis-à-vis the euro, Denmark follows a fixed-exchange-rate policy vis-à-vis the euro. The intermediate target for Danish monetary policy is thus the krone/euro exchange rate. The new European fixed-exchange-rate system, ERM II, came into operation on 1 January 1999 and Denmark became a member immediately, with a narrow fluctuation band of +/- 2.25 per cent around a central parity of 746.038 kroner per 100 euro. The favourable convergence position of the Danish economy made it possible to conclude an agreement on a narrow band. The standard fluctuation band in ERM II is +/- 15 per cent. Membership of ERM II was not a major change of the Danish monetary regime. As a matter of fact, Denmark has a very long tradition for a fixed-exchange-rate policy. The central parity vis-à-vis the euro corresponds exactly to the former central rate vis-à-vis the D-mark, which was unchanged from early 1987, cf. Chart 1. Furthermore, by 1982, exchange-rate realignments had ceased to be a self-initiated Danish policy instrument. The firm commitment to a fixed-exchange-rate policy originates from very poor performance of macroeconomic policy and, consequently, poor performance of the Danish economy in the 1970s. Against the background of high inflation, excessive budget deficits, permanent deficits on the current account of the balance of payments, frequent devaluations of the krone and high nominal interest rates, the Danish authorities in the early 1980s made a successful U-turn to a stability-oriented macroeconomic regime. The fixed-exchange-rate policy was, and still is, an important element in the macroeconomic framework in Denmark. See Christensen and Topp (1997) for a more detailed review of the change in Danish economic policy in the aforementioned period.                                                       1  This paper builds heavily on Jensen (2001). 2  Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2001) list 19 current and former inflation-targeting countries. 3  See, for instance, Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), Svensson (1997) and Bernanke et al. (1999). 4  Some central banks, most notably the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank, have pursued monetary targets in the past. However, Bernanke et al. (1999) argue that they were implicitly targeting inflation.  
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 While participation in ERM I and ERM II have been beneficial to the Danish economy in its own right, these exchange-rate systems and the successful introduction of the euro should be viewed in a much broader context than from a purely monetary policy perspective. EU member states co-operate on a large range of political and economic issues and have set up a common legal and institutional framework, of which the ECB is only one example. This probably contributed to a smooth transition to a common monetary policy.   The krone vis-à-vis the German mark and the euro Chart 1 Note: From 1 January 1999 a conversion has been made to depict DEM instead of EUR.  The paper is organised as follows. The first part covers the structural macroeconomic facts of importance for the fixed-exchange-rate policy. The second part deals with the technical and tactical aspects of monetary-policy implementation in ERM II. The paper concludes that a fixed nominal exchange rate vis-à-vis the euro is beneficial for a small open economy such as Denmark. 2. The Danish fixed-exchange-rate Policy It is important to emphasise that the Danish exchange-rate policy is a fixed-exchange-rate policy, and not a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate. Taken literally, this can only be true with euro area membership. However, in a Danish policy context it means that all macroeconomic policies are conducted with a view to ensuring a fixed exchange rate. There is no contingency plan if things go wrong. The two key conditions for success are a strong commitment from the authorities to abstain from creating “home made” shocks (which according to the Danish experience are far more important than exogenous external shocks) and an unconditional willingness to subordinate monetary policy to the exchange-rate strategy. Price stability  A first test of the benefits of a monetary regime is to see if it delivers on the final goal. For a central bank the key issue is price stability, and the Danish monetary regime passes the test. Inflation measured as the percentage annual increase in the harmonised consumer price index (HICP) has been stable at around 2 per cent in Denmark since the early 1990s, cf. Chart 2. The persistence of low inflation has furthermore been conducive to low inflationary expectations. In the period since the announcement of the fixed-exchange-rate policy low and stable inflation has been achieved without loss of income relative to our major trading partners, Germany, Sweden and the UK, although it should be recalled that the transition to a low-inflation economy is not an isolated Danish phenomenon. Most 3,03,23,43,63,84,04,2198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002DKK / DEMDKK/DEMCentral parity, DKK/DEM
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 OECD countries have achieved the same in the last decade, independently of their monetary-policy regimes. Consequently, Danish inflation performance cannot be taken as a general proof of the superiority of a fixed-exchange-rate regime.   Increase in harmonised index of consumer prices in Denmark, Germany and the euro area  Chart 2 Monetary policy and the business cycle  Output gap in Denmark, Germany and the euro area Chart 3 Note: Source: 2002 and 2003 are projections. OECD Economic Outlook.  A fixed-exchange-rate policy implies that the stance of monetary policy is from time to time out of line with domestic short-term cyclical needs, and is potentially a destabilising factor. When key monetary-policy interest rates are closely linked to German interest rates, and since 1999 euro-area interest rates, there is no room for independent domestic stabilisation by means of monetary policy. 01234567199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002Per cent, y-yDenmarkEuro AreaGermany-5-4-3-2-1012345198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002Per centDenmarkGermanyEuro area
 4 BIS Review 53/2002 This problem appears to be particularly severe in Denmark, where the business cycle – at least according to visual inspection – seems to be negatively correlated with the cyclical conditions in Germany and the euro area, cf. Chart 3. However, it is also possible to draw a completely opposite conclusion from the deviation in the cyclical patterns: cyclical divergence is immaterial to the success of a fixed-exchange-rate policy. The monetary-policy transmission mechanism is of crucial importance in the choice between business-cycle and exchange-rate stabilisation. The direct effect from changes in short-term interest rates to domestic demand is comparatively small in Denmark. The terms for mortgage financing, which is the most important transmission channel to the household sector, are predominantly based on fixed 20-year or 30-year mortgage bond yields. Variable mortgage lending at 1-5 year interest rates has, however, gained in importance in recent years, but is still at a relatively low level.  The basic textbook model includes only one policy instrument for short-term stabilisation – monetary policy. This is a standard formulation in the literature and also in line with practice in most industrialised countries. Discretionary fiscal policy came into disrespect after the abuse of the instrument in the 1960s and 1970s, which led to stagflation, large budget deficits and high public debt in many countries. Denmark has also suffered from this experience, but discretionary fiscal policy is still used to stabilise the economy. It is important to underline that the frequency of discretionary fiscal measures is low and far below the frequency of monetary-policy changes in countries with other monetary regimes. The government does not meet every two weeks to consider an adjustment to e.g. the VAT rate following the latest business-cycle information. During the past decade discretionary fiscal stabilisation measures outside the normal central-government budgetary calendar have been introduced on three occasions: temporary expansive measures in 1993, and contractive measures in 1997 and 1998. Furthermore, the appropriate macroeconomic impulse from the government budget to output is also taken into consideration in the annual budget negotiations. In years when fiscal policy has not been used for stabilisation purposes the fiscal impulse, i.e. the contemporaneous contribution to GDP-growth from fiscal policy in a given year, has been close to zero. As is the case in most countries it is also politically easier to increase public expenditure and reduce taxes than the opposite in Denmark. However, it is not our assessment that the reliance on a fixed exchange rate and occasional discretionary fiscal policy measures in itself has exacerbated this inherent problem. Quite the contrary, the fixed-exchange-rate policy has been instrumental in the significant improvement in Danish economic policy that has taken place in the last 10-15 years. The Danish government, supported by a large majority in the Danish parliament, is committed to use fiscal policy if inflationary developments are out of line with the exchange-rate policy. It has been publicly announced that fiscal policy will be adjusted if inflation deviates from the ECB’s definition of price stability (0-2 pct. increase in the harmonised index of consumer prices - HICP).  Fiscal measures are taken with due regard for developments in government debt as well as in the current account. Indeed, except for 1998 Denmark has had a surplus on the current account of the balance of payments since 1990, while there has been a surplus on the government budget since 1997. Furthermore and equally important, the fixed-exchange-rate policy has brought structural reforms of the tax and benefit systems and the labour market to the policy forefront as the necessary tools to ensure low unemployment and growth in real income.  Asymmetric shocks, home-made shocks and exchange-rate policy in Denmark  A floating exchange rate is often considered useful in order to insulate an economy from certain shocks in a world with nominal wage rigidity and/or limited labour mobility. A fixed-exchange-rate policy can lead to excessive and protracted unemployment in such a world, and adjustment to asymmetric shocks is – at least in theory – an important argument against a fixed-exchange-rate policy. However, the importance of this argument requires answers to the following two questions: 1) What causes large positive and large negative output gaps?  2) Is a floating exchange rate an efficient shock absorber? The Danish economy was in severe slump in 1981, reached a peak in 1986, went back into a period of slow growth, bottoming out in 1993, and has grown strongly since and exhausted the negative output gap, cf. Chart 3. The business cycle was also out of line with Germany as well as the entire euro area. The business cycle in itself and the deviation to the German business cycle cannot be explained by exogenous external factors. Firstly, the demand for Danish exports did not deviate from the trend to an extent that can explain the cyclical swings in the period under observation. Secondly, the terms of trade moved more or less in line with the terms of trade for other EU member states, ruling out 
 BIS Review 53/2002 5 external price shocks as an explanation. Hence, the roots of Danish output fluctuations are to be found among domestic factors. Accordingly, the analysis does not carry over to an economy subject to large external shocks. The trough in 1981 had its origin in the very poor macroeconomic policies of the 1970s that can be summarised as traditional Keynesian demand stimulus to the oil-price shocks. The sharp fall in nominal interest rates following the announcement of the fixed-exchange-rate policy in 1982, in combination with other austerity measures, was not accompanied by a corresponding immediate reduction in inflation expectations. This led to a decline in expected ex-ante after-tax real interest rates that triggered a boom in house prices and private consumption, leading to the peak in 1986. The until then highly preferential tax treatment of interest-rate expenditures was reduced as from 1987. A decline in actual inflation in combination with the tax changes led to a sharp increase in ex-post after-tax real interest rates that triggered the proceeding depression in the housing market and a strong increase in the private savings ratio. The Danish experience over the last twenty years is thus that “home made” domestic shocks stemming from economic policy are more important than exogenous external shocks.  Swedish krona and Danish krone vis-a-vis the euro Chart 4  The choice of exchange-rate regime is not a choice between a fixed nominal exchange rate and a floating exchange rate that evolves according to purchasing power parity. A floating exchange rate often moves relatively far away from any reasonable estimate of purchasing power parity and thus acts as a shock creator rather than a shock absorber, cf. Buiter (2000). The strength of the dollar in the mid-1980s and the present weakness of the euro are well-known examples. The importance of such unwarranted disturb-ances is most severe for small open economies such as Denmark. The exchange-rate movements depicted in Chart 4 and Chart 5 indicate that Sweden – a small open economy with a floating exchange rate and low inflation – receives far more noise from exchange-rate fluctuations than Denmark. The fixed-exchange-rate policy cannot ensure a stable nominal effective exchange rate or a stable real effective exchange rate. However, the weight to the euro in the effective Danish exchange rate is slightly below 60 per cent. Thereby, the fixed-exchange-rate policy yields a nominal hedge in a very important market for the Danish economy. This planning stability is beneficial to the business climate. A fixed-exchange-rate policy based on the nominal effective exchange rate would not offer such a hedge against any specific currency. 7,07,58,08,59,09,510,010,5SEK, DKK / EURSEKDKKJan AprJulOctJanAprJulOctJanAprJulOctJanAprJul1999200020012002
 6 BIS Review 53/2002  Real effective exchange rate in Sweden and Denmark Chart 5 Note: The real effective krone rate is based on consumer prices. Most recent observation isJune 2002.  3. Monetary policy implementation and ERM II The krone has remained close to the central parity against the euro since ERM II and the third stage of the European Monetary Union came into operation on 1 January 1999, cf. Chart 6.   ERM II band and the Danish krone vis-à-vis the euro Chart 6  In order to achieve exchange-rate stability, the interest rates of Danmarks Nationalbank are adjusted in step with those of the ECB, with due consideration of conditions in the foreign-exchange market, cf. Chart 7. A tend-ency for the krone to weaken will be met by a widening of the interest-rate differential, and vice versa. Interventions in the foreign-exchange market are used to dampen fluctuations in the krone rate.  60657075808590951001051101980198219841986198819901992199419961998200020021980 = 100SwedenDenmark72573073574074575075576076501-9907-9901-0007-0001-0107-0101-0207-02DKK/EURDKK/EURCentral rateFluctuation band
 BIS Review 53/2002 7 Key monetary policy interest rates in Denmark and the euro area Chart 7   This implies that the decision-making body should be ready to take interest-rate decisions at more or less any time, and therefore the structure of the decision-making process is quite different from that of a central bank pursuing an inflation target. Moreover, the possibility of more or less real-time evaluation of the success of Danmarks Nationalbank's monetary policy, i.e. whether the exchange rate stays within the band, implies that there is no ambiguity with regard to fulfilment of the target. Accordingly the word transparency implies something different under a fixed-exchange-rate system compared to an inflation-targeting regime. It is evident from Chart 6 that the exchange rate against the euro is far more stable than allowed by the fluctuation band of +/-2.25 per cent against the euro. In the years preceding the breakdown of ERM I in 1992-93 many exchange rates, including the krone, fluctuated widely within the narrow band, while primarily the Dutch guilder, the Belgian franc and the Austrian schilling generally fluctuated little within the bands. Obligatory intervention at the margin was not a rare event, and realignments occurred frequently in some periods. Part of the explanation for these differences in exchange-rate dynamics under the two arrangements may be a higher risk of contagion effects from other countries under ERM I due to the parity grid in place. If, for example, macroeconomic developments in one member state seemed to justify a realignment of its central parity in the ERM I, this tended to affect financial market prices in other member states as well, reflecting expectations of further realignments. In some cases this happened even though macroeconomic fundamentals did not seem to justify realignments in other countries, see for example Favero and Giavazzi for an analysis of contagion under ERM I. From a formal viewpoint there was no centre in ERM I, while ERM II consists of bilateral agreements between the ECB and each participating central bank. Problems in one country are therefore less likely to lead to problems for other countries. Of course, at the moment any contagion within ERM II can be ruled out as Denmark is currently the only member! The widening of the band to +/-15 per cent in 1993 was not considered meaningful as a basis for the fixed-exchange-rate policy of Denmark. Consequently, Danmarks Nationalbank embarked on a unilateral policy to stabilise the krone with the central parity as a point of reference – albeit from time to time a distant point of reference. This policy brought the krone to a stable position close to the central parity in early 1997. Since then, Danmarks Nationalbank’s key interest rates have shadowed the interest rates of the Bundesbank, and as of January 1999 the interest rates of ECB. In addition, Danish interest rates have been changed unilaterally in periods with upward or downward pressure on the krone and in periods of unrest in foreign-exchange markets. The most notable incidents in recent years were in the autumn of 1998 in connection with the global financial turmoil and in the autumn of 2000 immediately after the referendum that rejected euro area membership.  It is crucial for the exchange-rate policy that Danmarks Nationalbank follows ECB rates automatically without hesitation, irrespective of domestic considerations. Furthermore, the short-term interest rate differential has to be increased promptly if the krone has a pronounced tendency to weaken beyond 2,02,53,03,54,04,55,05,56,0Per centDK lending rateEuro main refinancing/minimum bid rateEuro marginal rate in main refinancing operationJan AprJulOctJanAprJulOctJanAprJulOctJanAprJul1999200020012002
 8 BIS Review 53/2002 the day-to-day fluctuations. Intervention in the foreign-exchange market cannot stand alone; but must be accompanied by increases in interest rates. It is also an integral element of the foreign-exchange defence that the interest-rate differential is increased quickly and substantially, but only reduced gradually as a delayed response to currency inflows. This policy ensures that speculation against the krone is costly and unprofitable. The predominant role of long-term fixed-rate mortgages in Denmark reduces the tensions associated with raising interest rates in order to defend the exchange rate. Furthermore, the monetary policy instruments used by Danmarks Nationalbank allow for a differentiation of monetary-policy signals that can ease the burden on “the man in the street” even further – at least in the short run. Commercial banks have unlimited access to borrowing at Danmarks Nationalbank in the weekly operations for as long as they have sufficient collateral. Danmarks Nationalbank’s lending rate is thus the decisive signal for money-market interest rates.For short periods it may be raised more aggressively than the discount rate, which is the decisive rate for the general borrowing and deposit conditions at commercial banks. See Christensen and Topp (1997) for a detailed account of the Danish monetary-policy instruments and various liquidity measures that can be implemented in the event of serious foreign-exchange unrest. The fixed-exchange-rate policy and Danmarks Nationalbank’s unconditional willingness to support the exchange rate are firmly embedded among participants in the foreign-exchange market as well as among Danish exporters and importers. The large commercial banks’ speculative behaviour in the foreign-exchange market acts as a stabiliser. If the krone lies on the weak side of the parity, the commercial banks will position themselves in support of the krone, and they will furthermore advise their customers to purchase krone e.g. sell export proceeds in foreign currency. The reverse is the case if the krone is on the strong side of the central parity. All this takes place within a narrow range around the central parity.   4. Conclusion It is clear from the preceding sections that ERM II is not very visible in the day-to-day management of the Danish fixed-exchange-rate policy.Danmarks Nationalbank seeks to stabilise the krone within a much narrower range than the +/- 2.25 per cent fluctuation band. The ERM II band serves as a safety net. It provides international support in a worst-case scenario. It is probably more important that by entering the ERM II agreement in 1998 the Danish government strengthened its commitment to pursue an economic policy in accordance with the requirements set by the fixed-exchange-rate policy.  A stability oriented macroeconomic framework conducive to growth and employment can undoubtedly be achieved in many different ways. In the case of Denmark the fixed-exchange-rate policy and ERM (I and II) membership have been instrumental to the establishment of such a framework. There are many country-specific circumstances that make life either easy or difficult under a fixed-exchange-rate regime. However, there are two fairly general lessons to be learnt. Firstly, monetary policy must be unconditionally subordinated to the exchange rate. Secondly, a fixed-exchange-rate policy is neither an approach by which lower interest rates can be achieved the easy way, nor a way to postpone structural domestic adjustments with the support of the anchor country. The primary responsibility for the establishment of a stability oriented macroeconomic framework remains with the individual country itself. 
 BIS Review 53/2002 9 Appendix Chart 1A: Differential between main refinancing interest rates in Denmark and the euro area  Note:  Bundesbank main refinancing interest rate before 1999. Minimum bid rate from June 2000. Source: Bundesbank, ECB and Danmarks Nationalbank.    Chart 2A: Interest-rate differentials between Denmark and Germany Source: EcoWin.  02468101284858687888990919293949596979899000102Percent10-year government bond yields3-month interest rates01234567apr-92apr-93apr-94apr-95apr-96apr-97apr-98apr-99apr-00apr-01apr-02PercentInterest rate differential
 10 BIS Review 53/2002 Chart 3A: Breakdown of Danish exports on recipient countries Source: Statistics Denmark.  Chart 4A: Monthly interventions by Danmarks Nationalbank, 1987-2002 Source: Danmarks Nationalbank. 2001Rest of world25%EFTA countries7%Euro area43%EU accession countries4%Other EU countries21%-5000-4000-3000-2000-10000100020003000400087888990919293949596979899000102Mill.USDNet buying of foreign currency
 BIS Review 53/2002 1 Klaus Liebscher: Regulatory challenges for European financial markets Opening address by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the CEPR/ESI Annual Conference: “Regulatory Challenges for European Financial Markets”, Vienna, 20 September 2002.  *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to the conference “Regulatory Challenges for European Financial Markets” hosted by Oesterreichische Nationalbank. I am particularly grateful to the Centre of Economic Policy Research (CEPR) and Professor Eijffinger, Dr. Hochreiter and Professor Koedijk who have organized this academic conference with a highly interesting selection of papers on a very important topic.  The financial system fulfils several essential functions for the performance of the real economy. It plays a crucial role in the allocation of resources by channelling funds from households to enterprises, it provides risk-sharing opportunities for households and firms and it helps agents to economise on transaction and information costs. An economic environment in which these functions can be fulfilled smoothly and efficiently is therefore essential for the welfare of an economy.  The accelerating process of European integration has abolished various obstacles that were previously in place because of national boundaries and different legislations. And the development of a single financial market in Europe has led to a situation where the financial system can fulfil its core functions much better than it could fulfil them two decades ago.  This integration process has been accelerated and reinforced by the introduction of the single currency. Its success has supported the process of financial market integration and structural change. There are good reasons to believe that we are only at the beginning of this process.  But financial market integration by itself is not enough to guarantee that the financial system can fulfil its functions efficiently. It has been clear to economists and policy makers for a long time that financial markets can only work smoothly and efficiently, if they can rely on a complementary legal and regulatory infrastructure. Thus the economic integration of European financial markets has to be accompanied by the necessary adoptions of regulatory frameworks and regimes.  The topic of the conference is therefore a very important one. The problems that arise in this process are a big challenge for supervisors and regulators. They are also a challenge for central bankers because central banks are traditionally among the institutions closely involved in the supervision of the financial system.  The regulatory challenges for European financial markets arise from a combination of necessary adaptations to general technological developments such as, for instance, electronic money - an issue addressed in the lectures of this conference - and the specific problems that arise from the integration of regulatory regimes that have previously been separated by national boundaries and different legislation into a framework that works efficiently for a newly integrated financial market with a single currency.  The debate about regulatory issues has attracted much attention recently by intensive discussions both at the national and the European level. At the national level the focus of the debate has been the future role of central banks in the process of prudential supervision of the banking system. The issue most intensively discussed at the European level has been the question of a centralized versus a decentralized model of supervision. These debates reflect the active response of policy makers and the general public to developments in financial markets brought about, inter alia, by the process of European integration.  Let me address these issues in turn:  At the national level we have been observing various proposals to reorganise and restructure financial markets supervision. Some countries have already taken steps of major institutional reforms.  In the course of this debate the active involvement and the key role of central banks in supervising the banking system has repeatedly been challenged. Models of new national institutions in charge of 
 2 BIS Review 53/2002 supervising banks, financial markets and the insurance industry under one roof of a general financial service authority have gained some popularity among politicians.  The merger of various supervisory fields, which have technically quite different tasks, is a highly ambitious and rather difficult organisational problem. In the same way as with mergers in industry the advantages and disadvantages of these organisational forms will have to be assessed in the light of practical experience.  Whatever reorganisation design is under debate, however, it is in any case of crucial importance to take a clear position about the role of the central bank. It's historically intimate involvement in supervising the banking system has proved useful in many countries around the world and there is a strong case for keeping this close involvement under any model of supervisory reorganisation.  The close involvement of central banks in the supervisory process has various advantages. It gives the central bank a much clearer picture of the economic reality that is behind the numbers visible in the books of banks. This information facilitates its role in safeguarding financial stability and creates a special advantage in spotting early warning indicators of financial crises and potential situations of economy wide financial distress. Moreover, as a part of the Eurosystem central banks are integrated in an already functioning network of national and supranational institutions. Such a network is of decisive importance in the light of the structural change in European financial markets that already has taken place or is likely to come in the near future.  Let me next turn to the debate about the European regulatory framework. The Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) has only recently provided an assessment of existing arrangements in the Brower Report. A central result of this assessment was that the current framework that strongly relies on national responsibilities is appropriate. The report found that there is at the same time a need to enhance arrangements for cross-border and cross-sectional co-operation, to improve the alignment of supervisory practices and to reinforce the collaboration between supervisory and central banking functions.  I want to point out that developments have already started that implement some of these recommendations. Let me just mention the activities of the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). These activities strongly rely on the close cooperation between central banks and banking supervision authorities.  Not only in the area of banking supervision, but also in recent attempts to implement the Lamfalussy recommendations in the field of security market regulation considerable progress has been made. Consistent and efficient implementation of regulatory rules has been promoted by new institutional arrangements delegating rule-making powers to a committee or regulators whereas implementation at the national level is undertaken through a committee of supervisors.  These two examples, which I have briefly touched here, illustrate that initiatives are under way and debate is ongoing. However, not all of the recommendations of the Brower Report have been implemented and many other issues still need further investigation and debate. But developments show that we are heading in the right direction.  I have argued that policy makers and central banks are well aware of the regulatory challenges for European financial markets. They have already tried to find some practical answers to these challenges. These answers are based on the principles of national responsibility, transnational co-operation and the close involvement of central banks into the supervision of the banking system. Clearly, many issues in this process are still open and need further discussion. But I am sure that your conference will make an important contribution towards a deeper understanding of those issues and to point out directions, where further activities are needed.  CEPR/ESI Price for the Best Central Bank Research Paper Ladies and Gentlemen,  It is a great pleasure now for me to announce the winner of the newly established CEPR/ESI Prize for the Best Central Bank Research Paper. This price shall promote high-quality research at European central banks, both within and outside the Eurosystem. It is important to acknowledge research papers by young European central bankers. Therefore, the CEPR European Summer Institute has established a special session of its annual conference for the three to four best submitted papers and an annual prize for the very best research paper.  
 BIS Review 53/2002 3 The paper was selected from twelve central bank research papers by the Programme Committee of this year's CEPR/ESI Conference consisting of Professor Sylvester Eijffinger, Eduard Hochreiter and Professor Kees Koedijk.  It is my privilege to announce that the CEPR/ESI 2002 Prize for the Best Central Bank Research Paper goes to Elena Carletti of the University of Mannheim and Philipp Hartmann from the European Central Bank for their paper “Competition and Stability: What's Special About Banking?”.  They examine the relationship between competition policies and policies to preserve stability in the banking sector. The core part of the paper is an analysis of the relative roles of competition and supervisory authorities in the review of bank mergers for the G-7 industrialized countries. It turns out that the widely accepted trade-off between competition and stability does not generally hold. The paper is considered by the Programme Committee as an excellent analytical contribution to the academic literature on central banking and banking supervision with important consequences for competition and supervisory policies.  I wish the winners of this year's prize a lot of success in their very promising academic and central banking career!  
 BIS Review 52/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s September report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 19 September 2002. *      *      * The Bank’s View2 Japan’s economy, despite persistent weakness in domestic demand and large uncertainty regarding the global economy, has almost stabilized as a whole with exports and production continuing to increase. With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has become moderate, private consumption remains weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is declining. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to increase due to the recovery in overseas economies.  Industrial production remains on an upward trend in response to the rise in exports and adequate reduction of excess inventory stocks. Against this background, corporate profits have started to recover. In addition, the rebound in production has been effecting labor markets, albeit marginally, with an increase in overtime hours worked and in new job offers mainly for part-time workers. However, as firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, household income continues to decrease noticeably with a plunge in summer bonuses. Thus, the employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. Turning to the economic outlook, the growth in exports is expected to slow temporarily with the impetus from overseas restocking coming to a halt, but the uptrend in exports will be maintained against the background of the moderate recovery in overseas economies. Thus, industrial production is also expected to follow a moderate uptrend despite a temporary slowdown.  With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income situation. Leading indicators suggest that business fixed investment will stop declining, but a distinct recovery in the immediate future is unlikely partly due to large uncertainty regarding overseas economies. Nevertheless, if the uptrend in exports and production continues, corporate profits will stay on a track to recovery, and this will gradually have a positive impact on domestic private demand.  Overall, it can be envisaged that the stabilization of Japan’s economy will gradually become definite as overseas economies continue the moderate recovery. However, it will take a while for the economy to show clear signs of recovery, as the pace of increase in exports and production is expected to slow temporarily while restraining forces such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, there is large uncertainty regarding exports such as the developments in stock prices in the United States and worldwide, the outlook for IT-related goods, and geopolitical factors and oil prices. In these circumstances, the recent weakness in domestic stock prices and its potential adverse effects on the financial system and the economy should be monitored carefully.  On the price front, import prices are declining mainly due to the U.S. dollar’s depreciation against the yen from spring toward summer, but international commodity prices including crude oil have recently risen. Domestic wholesale prices have weakened, reflecting the decrease in import prices to date. Moreover, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to decline.  As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the balance between supply and demand is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently weak domestic demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in capacity utilization rates will support prices to some degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices.                                                       1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on September 17 and 18, 2002. 2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on September 17 and 18 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 52/2002 Under these circumstances, domestic wholesale prices are projected to continue to be weak for a while. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. While the slower growth in imports of consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices.  As for the financial market, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is moving around 15 trillion yen as the Bank continues to provide ample liquidity. Under these circumstances, in the short-term money markets, more market participants have come to feel that there is an excess of liquidity in the market and the overnight call rate continues to move at very close to zero percent. Also, longer-term interest rates are declining. Yields on long-term government bonds followed a downtrend in line with a decline in yields on overseas long-term government bonds and in domestic and overseas stock prices, in addition to widespread perceptions among market participants that there is an excess of liquidity. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds are virtually level. Meanwhile, stock prices have been declining since the start of September in line with a decline in U.S. and European stock prices, as more investors preferred to hold off buying stocks. Stock prices are mainly moving around 9,000-9,500 yen recently. In the foreign exchange market, the yen, after being fluctuating without trend until early September, dropped in mid-September. It is currently being traded in the range of 122-123 yen to the U.S. dollar. With regard to corporate finance, private banks remain cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms continue to be severe. In the corporate bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings is still severe, but the environment for firms with high credit ratings is accommodative. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms are decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is recently moving near the previous year’s level.  The monetary base increased substantially—by around 20-30 percent—from the previous year’s level. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock remained around 3.5 percent.  Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy on the whole in terms of money market conditions. The deterioration in the financing situation of firms has come to a halt. However, the stance of investors toward firms with high credit risks remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks remain cautious. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
 BIS Review 52/2002 1 Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala: How to create a stable financial environment in emerging market economies Remarks by Mr Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Cape Town, 19 September 2002. *      *      * The title of “ How to create a stable financial environment in emerging market economies ” is almost a contradiction. The events in the past few decades will bear me out. It has been difficult for emerging market economies to maintain stable financial environment over a long period of time. Crises and disturbances have erupted every now and then, resulting in losses of output, employment and livelihood.  The problem is -- emerging market economies and stable financial environment do not always go hand in hand. Some of the reasons are obvious. Emerging market economies are the countries in the process of integrating themselves into the new environment of globalization. They are invariably at some points in their journeys in enhancing free trade, attracting foreign direct investments and capital inflows, adopting rule based supervision and control, and introducing market discipline. The risks to stability occur because they have to learn and put into place the framework and the machinery to regulate, supervise and monitor their financial markets in the tight time span of years what developed countries had taken decades to do.  For the emerging markets, globalization is like sailing out of the inland waterway where the environment is safe and calm into the international ocean with its more choppy water. The risks multiply. What can one do about this? You can, of course, opt for the easy approach. You can continue to maintain tight controls and resist liberalization. But this will hinder the development of your domestic financial markets, and also the skill of the people involved, both the regulators and the commercial banks themselves. In my opinion, the right approach is for the emerging market to create, or improve and maintain the right fundamentals. In a way, instead of trying to extend your breakwater further and further, it is better to change from the less stable rowing boat to a more sturdy and seaworthy ship, one that can handle the rough ocean better. In this respect, there are three things that I wish to highlight. The first is the need to ensure that the country conducts proper macroeconomic policy. I mention this even though it is not directly the job of supervisors because it can overwhelm everything. To take the example of Thailand, we used the fixed exchange regime for too long, but without the domestic flexibility to adjust wages and prices to correct lack of competitiveness. We therefore could not maintain the parity for long. It also led to distortion in risk perception that led to excessive foreign exchange risk mismatch, over investment in the non-traded sector and damaging speculation, especially in real estate. When we had to change to the flexible exchange regime, the exchange rate depreciated to a low point of less than 50% of its pre-crisis value before backing up to above 60. The exchange losses that occurred was, among other things, one of the major factors causing the level of non-performing loans to go up to the peak of 45%. This was almost one out of every two dollars lent out. What stress test can really prepare us for such an event? The second is to have the right infrastructure for the domestic financial markets. This topic includes many things like (a) having the proper market rules, (b) having the legal framework that facilitates the enforcement of creditors’ rights, (c) having the laws and procedures to deal with bankruptcy,  (d) having proper accounting and auditing standards as well as a reliable system of credit information on individual borrowers. 
 2 BIS Review 52/2002 I can still recall that during the 1997 crisis, the inter bank market in Thailand ceased up for fear of counter party failure. But the problem also extended to the system of commercial trade credit between ordinary companies, the sellers and buyers of goods. Today, five years after the event, the system of trade credit still has not regained its full recovery. This problem can be mitigated with the function of credit bureau that reports regularly on payment behavior of commercial firms. Third is to ensure that there exists proper supervision of financial institutions. The country has to ensure that the agency entrusted with this task has sufficient power to act. I can still remember that in Thailand long ago, when government successions often did not come from elections but through military actions, it was very common for commercial banks to have army generals sitting on their boards. Banking supervision under such an environment was a challenge. But the biggest challenge is what to do when banks suffer such losses that they are unable to continue. This happened when Thailand went into the crisis in 1997. We closed down two-thirds of our finance companies. As for the commercial banks, we had 15 local banks then. Six banks had to be taken over by the authority. The private shareholders were forced to take full losses, and new capital provided by the authority. Management was totally revamped. We have merged four of these banks into the others, and have carved out non-performing loans to a national asset management company. Two government-owned banks are now ready to be privatized to the general public. The banks that remained were forced to recapitalize. Three of them were unable to find domestic capital, and decided to invite foreign strategic partners. We allowed the foreign banks to own majority shares and control management. Now for the bad news! Despite your effort in trying to strengthen your ship, it may not always be smooth sailing. I wish to point out two dangers that may crop up. The first danger is that there are sharks lurking under water-- in the form of highly leveraged institutions and hedged funds. No matter how well you try to manage your economy, no matter how good your intentions, there will often be some things out of synchronization. This will cause your currency or your stock market to be temporarily out of balance, or even wrongly perceived to be so. This is exactly when you need some time to work out the problems. But the attack by sharks can rob you of this precious time. I asked myself -- how can these sharks create so much trouble for the emerging markets? The problem is that these sharks are often able to command oversize resources financed by large international banks. I strongly believe that these financing should be curbed.  Leveraging beyond a certain threshold is particularly risky. I propose that the international banks that give credits to such institutions should be required to weigh these risks, in their capital requirement calculations, at a much higher rate than the 150 per cent currently being considered in the new Basle Accord. The second danger is that during good weather you tend to get assistance from many international banks. They will give you tow lines hitched to their catamarans that help increase your speed. However, when your ship starts to leak, they tend to cut the lines just when you need them most. On this issue, therefore, I strongly support the idea of private sector involvement that the IMF is proposing. There should be ways for countries to cope with bank runs on the international scale. There should be opportunity for countries to renegotiate their debts with the foreign creditors, without imposing an insurmountable handicap that will prevent them from returning to the market in future. In the case of Thailand, had such mechanism existed during the Asian crisis, our non-performing loan ratio would have been less. Actually we paid back all foreign debts owed by the government and by the banks in full, with interests. We never needed any hair cut, we just needed time. But many foreign banks did not roll over the debts that fell due, despite the fact that the authority guaranteed all foreign debts of the banks. The continuous repayment caused the currency to weaken more than it should. The exchange loss was therefore greater than should have been, and hence the non-performing loan ratio. At the same time, our weak currency also created pressure on the exchange rates of our neighbors, causing the interest rate to be kept high for longer than necessary, which in turn also fed into the non-performing loan ratio. 
 BIS Review 52/2002 3 I am therefore attaching a lot of hope to the Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism now being deliberated by the IMF members. I do hope that it will offer better solutions for this kind of problems in the future. I will close by saying this. Globalization is a two way street. Relationship in the international financial market benefits both ways. Funds flow to emerging economies because they are able to generate better return for savers in the developed economies.  On the one hand, the emerging markets have to do their homework and preparation. But on the other hand, when things get temporarily out of balance, shouldn’t there be tools and safeguards to help them deal with situations better? The good news is there could, if all the countries here want to!  
 BIS Review 52/2002 1 T T Mboweni: ICBS opening statement Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the formal opening of the 12th International Conference of Bank Supervisors, Cape Town, 18 September 2002. *      *      * Good morning ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of the South African Reserve Bank, welcome to sunny South Africa. It is indeed a privilege for us to be hosting the twelfth International Conference of Banking Supervisors (ICBS). This gathering of the world's bank supervisors has been taking place every two years since 1979, in some of the most attractive venues in the world. And I am sure you will agree that Cape Town is no exception. The ICBS has become an essential forum to promote cooperation among national banking supervisory authorities in the arduous task of supervising international banking. This year it will enable about 280 representatives from some 130 countries to exchange views on a range of current issues of common concern.  One has only to glance at the programme and advance documentation to realise that ICBS 2002 will be among the most important and most demanding for delegates ever held. The steady build-up of inter-linkages and complexity in global financial systems, the events of 11 September 2001, the protracted tardy growth in the key economies of the world, and the systemic financial crises in a number of emerging market countries have all contributed to an acute awareness of the inherent fragility of the global financial system. Bank regulation and supervision is right up there in the first line of defence against financial instability, and from what I can see, the international best practice setting authorities have not dallied in responding to the challenges. Extensive work by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), as well as many other international organisations and national supervisory authorities, will form a solid base for the discussions in the next two days.  The discussions on dealing with weak banks and international bank insolvency are clearly important in these times of turmoil. Since capital is an effective, yet costly, buffer to protect depositors from the effects of banking problems, the scheduled discussion on the draft Basel II Capital Accord is very opportune. The draft accord holds the promise of ensuring that banks will have capital more relevant to their real risks, closing the gap between regulatory capital and economic capital, and eliminating many of the regulatory arbitrage opportunities that exist in the current framework. It is important that the ultimate accord is applicable not only to developed countries with banks that have sophisticated risk management models and formally rated credit risks, but also to emerging market economies and banks with portfolios of retail and small/medium enterprise (SME) loans. I am particularly pleased to note the intended discussions on the transition of emerging countries to Basel II. We await in anticipation the results of the forthcoming Quantitative Impact Study (QIS), in which South Africa is participating fully. In fact, the multinational team responsible for driving the study held an important meeting here in Cape Town just last week. I am confident that South African regulators and banks will be ready to implement the Basel II Accord by 2006. The topics relating to money laundering and "knowing your customer" processes, and those relating to operational risk, are critically important in light of the build-up of terrorist threats to financial stability. I am told that many of the countries represented here are working hard at testing the readiness of their financial systems to endure sudden crisis events, as well as ensuring that the financial system is not abused by terrorist organisations to help fund their activities. And of course, the recent spate of corporate failures around the world has made discussions on corporate governance the more imperative. So, it is indeed a remarkably relevant and extremely demanding programme in anyone's book. I am impressed, and I wish you well.  South Africa is regarded as having a dual economy. On the one hand it is an emerging market with its fair share of challenges regarding economic growth, wealth distribution, and inflation. In particular, we face the challenges of high unemployment, a low savings level, a high HIV/Aids infection rate, and a volatile currency. We are also severely affected by commodity prices, especially oil and gold.  On the other hand, South Africa is blessed with a sophisticated, privately owned, financial system comparable in many respects with the best of the developed economies. The financial sector is well regulated, as confirmed by the IMF and World Bank's joint Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). The banking sector is more than adequately capitalised, and its risks are well managed. 
 2 BIS Review 52/2002 Unfortunately, our financial sector is highly concentrated, a natural legacy of our shameful apartheid past. There is also an underlying problem of lack of broad access to basic financial services for the majority of the population, which is why I have noted with interest the topic of microfinance in emerging market economies on tomorrow's programme. In this regard it may be of interest to note that a review of the entire regulatory architecture in South Africa is currently underway to ensure that it remains appropriate to our needs going forward.  These and other challenges are, however, being tackled enthusiastically in a consultative manner, and we remain highly optimistic about the stability of our financial system, the growth prospects of our economy, and the future of our country. Being so integrally part of Africa, you can be sure that our enthusiasm also extends to the impact of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) process on the future of our continent. I view the fact that ICBS 2002 is being held in South Africa, the first time outside of the developed countries, as a symbolic indication that emerging market countries are recognised as willing and able to throw their weight behind the achievement a robust global financial system. We have been involved in best practice setting processes for a long time, paying specific attention to the special circumstances in emerging countries. Efforts in our region to harmonise regulatory and supervisory practices are well known, and the annual meeting of the Eastern and Southern African grouping of bank supervisors (ESAF) yesterday in this venue has surely advanced that cause further. We can be proudly confident that the Southern African Development Community (SADC) countries will not be found lacking in the quest to ensure that there is no weak link in the global financial system through which disturbances can be propagated. I wish you the greatest of success in all your deliberations. My final hope is that you, and your accompanying partners, enjoy the beauty of Cape Town and the many interesting aspects of our diverse society. Hopefully this will not be too much of a distraction to you, and that you are able to maintain the focus and concentration that will be required if this conference is to succeed in helping bank supervisors face up to the many challenges going forward. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 1 Lars Nyberg: IT in the financial sector Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at UNISYS, Executive Business Conference, 16 September 2002. *      *      * To begin with, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to come here today and discuss how information technology has affected the financial sector. This is a very large subject, with many possible approaches and my aim is merely to illustrate a few of these. I have also been given the chance of selecting which of them I wish to discuss, which I especially appreciate. IT and the stock market Probably the first thing one thinks of when one hears the words IT and the financial sector is the “bubble” on the stock market, the increasingly unrealistic assessment of the profits that would be generated by the new technology and the “new economy” at the end of the 1990s and the painful sobering up process when the stock market took a downturn in winter 2000. Although we all feel some unease with regard to the stock market fall when we read our old age pension forecasts, this is perhaps in the long term the least interesting aspect of IT in the financial sector. I therefore intend to limit myself to two reflections regarding the “bubble issue”. The first is that it has happened before and will probably happen again. Let me remind you of the first “IT bubble”, at the beginning of the previous century when the new technology was wireless telegraphy. No less than 150 companies with some connection to this information technology were introduced onto the New York stock exchange in 1901 and early 1902. In 1907 there was only one of these companies left that was making a profit and paying dividends, and even this company’s stock market value had halved since its introduction. As far as I know, no one then spoke of a “new economy” that would follow on from the technical developments, but this may be due to insufficient research on my part. Otherwise, the similarities are both striking and depressing. As we all know, if we cannot learn from history, we are doomed to repeat it. My other point is that the burst bubble has certainly made one of the stock market’s main tasks more difficult, namely conveying risk capital between savers and companies - it is no easy task at present to acquire risk capital through new share issues. However, this does not mean that the financial system as a whole is under threat. On the stock market, the banks act as intermediaries and are not directly affected by the downturn, as they only to a limited extent own or mortgage stock market shares. Of course, the income from portfolio management and share trading is declining, and many operators outside of the banks may experience problems, but this does not comprise a threat to the system. It is a completely different situation when a bubble on the property market bursts, as was the case in Sweden in the early 1990s. Then the value of the banks’ collateral declines and this can lead to an acute crisis, if the price fall is sufficiently severe. We have seen the effects of this in practice, as I hope we all remember. Yet another issue is what effect the downturn on the stock market may have had on the real economy and thereby on economic activity. Of course, a deep recession could comprise a threat to the stability of the banking system, but this seems an unlikely prospect at present and I do not intend to take up that issue today. Is a financial sector a good thing to have? It is easy to express irritation in sweeping statements about the financial sector in general and the banks in particular; especially when the value of mutual funds falls or we feel that the banks want us to carry out all of our own banking services over the Internet without the aid of knowledgeable bankers in an office. I shall return to the latter issue later, but let me first remind you that the financial system is actually an essential part of the economic infrastructure in every modern society. It is possible to manage without a steel industry or shipyards, but for society to function one must have an infrastructure, a transport sector, an energy sector and also a financial sector. The most obvious task for the financial sector is to ensure that the payment system functions. We must all be able to pay our bills in a secure manner, preferably also in a simple and speedy manner, i.e. we must know that the 
 2 BIS Review 51/2002 party to which we are sending money actually receives it. There are many countries in the world where this does not function and this is as much of an obstacle to development as when roads and railways do not function. The banks are the institutions that handle the major part of the payments. It is because they are so important to the financial sector that they are subject to such comprehensive legislation and that they are the companies most closely monitored by Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority). We may have views on how the banks should set charges, handle their customers and so on, but without them our lives would certainly be more complicated. In this context it is worth noting how much IT in a broad sense has helped the banks to develop and simply means of payment. It is not so long ago that one received a weekly wage in the form of a brown envelope containing banknotes, handed out on a Friday afternoon. Nowadays our wages are paid directly into our bank accounts and we receive notice of this in a bank statement. Nor do we have to go very far to pay our bills; we can sit at our desks and fill out giro forms or - even easier - pay through the computer. The time we used to spend queuing at the bank can now be used in a more fun or more productive manner, or hopefully both. I am not one of those who enjoyed standing in a queue at the post office on a Saturday morning to pay my bills. The savings in resources attained through improvements in the efficiency of the payment system since the days of the brown envelopes have actually been estimated at around five per cent of GDP. This is a productivity gain from which we all benefit. In many emerging economies the potential productivity gains from a functioning payment system would of course be even greater. Sweden - an IT country Sweden and the other Nordic countries are currently, alongside the USA, world leaders in the use of IT. If one looks at the percentage of households with access to the Internet, in 2000 Sweden with an estimated 61 per cent held second place in the EU. Only the Netherlands had a higher percentage. If we instead look at expenditure on IT in relation to GDP, Sweden came top among the EU countries in 2001. Sweden is an IT country. Why have developments moved so quickly in Sweden? There are many answers to this question, but allow me to mention a couple I believe to be important. One concerns the deregulation of the telecommunications market. The Swedish Telecommunications Administration’s monopoly began to break up as early as the 1980s, but the real turning point came in 1993, when the Administration was privatised as Telia. The market was opened up and exposed to competition; new challengers could gradually take over more than a quarter of the total market and a significantly greater part of the mobile telephony and Internet telephony segment. At the same time, technical developments were very rapid. Fiberoptics enabled lower costs for long distance calls and increased the speed of transfer of large amounts of data, which benefited the development of the Internet. Together, increased competition and rapid technological developments led to a fall in prices with regard to both telephony and Internet connection. The lower prices for users have probably contributed to the widespread use of the Internet in Sweden. The new technology was perhaps available in all essentials to all developed countries, but the views on deregulation varied. Only eight of the 25 member countries, today 30, of the OECD allowed competition in the telecommunications market, while the remaining countries retained a monopoly. There is also a clear connection between use of the Internet and competition. Competition is allowed in the telecommunications markets of six of the nine countries with the highest Internet usage. These countries have also experiences an increase in access to the Internet six times as fast as countries that have a monopoly market. Another reason for the rapid development in Internet usage in Sweden could be connected to the structure of the Swedish banking system. The banking sector in Sweden is dominated by a small number of large operators, all listed on the stock market and with a strong incentive to rationalise their operations. They have also had the resources to rapidly implement new technology. The same applies in the Netherlands, which has a similar bank structure. The more Internet services a bank can offer its customers, and the better they are, the more customers will use the Internet bank and the cheaper the administration costs will be for the bank. If we compare this with the USA, which has a bank market consisting of a large number of small operators, developments there have not been anything like as rapid. Only a few US banks offer advanced Internet services. The range of services is also much smaller than in Sweden. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 3 There is a lot to be gained by making payments via the Internet, both for the banks and for their customers. Sweden, like the other Nordic countries, has a giro-based payment system. Giro payments corresponded to more than 95 per cent of the total value of payments made in 2000 and to over 70 per cent of the number of transactions. Giro instruments are traditionally paper-based. However, the Internet enables the paper-based giro system to be speeded up by making it paperless. Preliminary figures indicate that approximately 130 million giro payments were made over the Internet during 2001. Between 1998 and 2000 the number of giro payments initiated over the Internet increased by a good 890 per cent. Today all Swedish banks offer Internet banks with rapidly growing range of services. Studies also indicate that Sweden is way ahead with regard to utilisation of Internet services. At the end of 2001 there were more than 3 million bank customers subscribed to Internet banks. For the banks the electronic payments entail considerable opportunities for rationalisation, probably to a much greater extent than could be foreseen just a few years ago. Some time ago I met the manager of a banking office in Stockholm who told me that he now had the same number of employees as five years ago, but his turnover was almost 50 per cent higher. This was largely due to the fact that the companies (including small and medium-sized companies) that had earlier been serviced by the bank could now carry out many of their transactions themselves via the Internet bank, which simplified their work and facilitated cash management. The companies could, for instance, with one click (as we say nowadays) pay all wages through a paperless transfer from the company’s account to the employees’ accounts and at the same time do the bookkeeping and pay slips, all without the long paper strips that needed to be manually checked. Already today, the Internet banks contain much more than merely the opportunity to make payments and check one’s account balance. One function on the Internet that will probably lead to increased competition within the finance sector is the existence of companies that offer price comparisons. There are, for instance, several independent companies on the Internet today which enable a simple comparison of mortgage costs or provide assistance in finding the most beneficial insurance policies. Competition will increase with regard to share trading, mutual funds, insurance and mortgages, even from abroad. One reason for this is that the Internet will cause a reduction in entry barriers, i.e. that the costs connected with starting a business and achieving critical mass with regard to customers will not be as high as before. New companies today do not need to establish far-reaching office networks, which is proved by companies such as Skandiabanken and companies known as Internet stockbrokers. Finally, it is perhaps worth pointing out that IT in the financial sector does not merely consist of the Internet. Many of the instruments that are currently traded in the markets, particularly derivative instruments such as options and swaps, are completely dependent on modern information technology to be priced and traded at all. As derivative instruments are mainly used to buy and sell financial risks in a cost-efficient manner, it is possible to say that IT comprises a base for modern financial risk management, as it is put into practice on dealers’ tables around the world. IT is also a necessary condition for the methods used to calculate financial risks in portfolios of securities or credits. The new Basel Committee rules on capital adequacy in banks, to take an example, are entirely dependent on such calculations. Network effects in the payment system The banking sector in Sweden is, as we know, strongly concentrated. This can raise questions in certain contexts as to how well competition functions. However, the concentration has also enabled, as I pointed out earlier, a more rapid exploitation of network effects and economies of scale connected with IT developments. Let me go into this in more depth, hopefully without becoming too abstract. The development of payment services is governed, just as on other markets, by supply and demand. Supply is affected by costs and technology, while demand is affected by factors such as price, acceptance, comfort and accessibility. Advantages of scale within the production of payment services arise as these services are often connected with high fixed costs and relatively low flexible costs. Building up a new computer system is expensive, but every transaction that passes through the system costs less. The economies of scale effects provide incentive for various types of co-operation and joint solutions, where producers join forces to utilise the economies of scale and spread costs over greater volumes. There are also advantages of scale on the demand side, the in the form of positive network effects. Positive network effects mean quite simply that a particular system becomes more usable the more people who use it. 
 4 BIS Review 51/2002 The classical example is the telephone - who wants one if no one else has one? With regard to payments, positive network effects mean that the benefit for the consumer of using a particular payment system grows in relation to the size of the system. This means that their willingness to pay also increases. Network effects also influence the introduction of new technology and here the consumers’ expectations of the future scope of the system play a decisive role. Consumers can continue using a certain payment instrument or system, even if a superior alternative is available, because the old system/instrument is established and accepted and has a large market share. To continue with the telephone analogy, imagine you were the only one with a new GSM telephone, what use would it be to you if everyone else was still using NMT? The fact that GSM is considered to be a superior system is hardly any comfort. The producers therefore have greater opportunity to reach a critical mass when new systems are being introduced if they co-operate with one another. The ATM co-operation, where customers can withdraw money from an ATM regardless of whether they have an account with that particular bank, is a good example of this. It also shows that co-operation, even if it essentially benefits the customers, may come into conflict with the Competition Act. The Swedish banks’ approach to launching e-money in the Cash system is another example, to which I will return shortly. One example where the banks did not co-operate in the payment market is the service of digital invoicing systems. Up to spring 2002 the banks were offering two different, non-compatible systems, “e-giro” and “e-faktura”. The existence of two digital invoicing systems was an obstacle with regard to getting both companies and households to utilise the new technology. Today the banks are investing in making the systems compatible with one another and the goal is that invoicers and invoicees will be able to reach one another regardless of which bank they use. If this succeeds, it should lead to increased acceptance from customers and enable critical mass to be achieved more easily. Will cash disappear? The use of cash in Sweden has halved since the mid-1950s, which is of course a result of the technological developments with card payments and later Internet payments offering good substitutes for payment with banknotes. However, the decline in the use of cash has slowed down in recent years and the M0 money supply is currently around SEK 90 billion, or 4 per cent of GDP. Cash is suitable for certain types of transaction, including, unfortunately, those that people don’t want registered, and there is perhaps a lower limit for the demand for banknotes. In addition, the alternative cost for cash has been low in recent years, as a result of low inflation and low interest rates. However, the use of cash in Sweden is higher than in other Nordic countries. The important alternatives to cash are charge cards (or credit cards) and Cash cards. Charge cards and credit cards currently account for more than one quarter of all transactions, which is a lower figure than for the other Nordic countries. With regard to purely electronic money, there is currently only a national issue in Sweden, and that is the Cash card. This project involves every bank issuing its own e-money that is downloaded into a chip in the respective bank’s charge card or credit card. The Cash system has not yet attained sufficient critical mass to become accepted, which also applies to the corresponding systems in other countries. Perhaps the old cash and new charge cards offer too good substitutes. In this context it may be interesting to note one aspect of how cash is distributed. The dominant quantity of withdrawals is through ATMs, but the ATM network in Sweden differs considerably from the networks in other countries. In Sweden we have only approximately 300 ATMs per million inhabitants; in Europe only Greece and Turkey have fewer. On the other hand, we have by far the largest number of transactions per ATM. We thus have fewer ATMs, but use them more. This ATM structure is probably due primarily to the fact that the banks have placed their ATMs by bank offices and only there. In many other countries, cash dispensers are located in shopping centres and other places where people are active, regardless of the location of bank offices. This development is also beginning to appear in Sweden, at least in the larger cities. Abroad the ATMs often have independent owners, who charge a small sum (SEK 10-15) to customers wanting to use their ATMs. The customers are happy to pay this for the benefit of being able to withdraw cash on the spot rather than having to go several blocks to find a bank and stand in line there. One may wonder why both the use and distribution of cash show different patterns in Sweden than in other countries. Evidently, we like cash, even if it is difficult to get hold of. So although developments 
 BIS Review 51/2002 5 are clearly moving towards increased use of cards and paperless payment instruments, the cashless society still lies some way in the future. IT reduces the risks IT makes the payment system more efficient in a number of different ways, some of which I have already indicated, but technology can also contribute to reducing risks. Trade in shares, bonds and currencies with the accompanying derivative products entails, for instance, that large credit risks arise between the banks managing the payments, what are known as settlement risks. The necessity of reducing these risks has become increasingly clear. Let me take foreign exchange trading as an example. The foreign exchange market has a huge daily turnover. On two occasions the credit risks in foreign exchange trading have become uncomfortably evident; when Bankhaus Herstatt was declared bankrupt in 1974 and when Barings Bank fell in 1997. These risks can easily be passed on through the global financial system, because of the different time zones, and can bring about serious disturbances. There has therefore been a global collaboration on a project called CLS, Continuous Linked Settlement, for some years now. All of the dominant foreign exchange banks in the world are taking part in this project, with the aim that a joint system will settle all of the members’ foreign exchange transactions. This will enable payment in one currency to be made directly against payment in another, which will entail the credit risk that arose earlier disappearing. IT in a broad sense has, of course, also been necessary for the security of the systems for large payments that central banks around the world develop or oversee, where the trend in recent years has been towards real time gross settlement. Our own RIX system is an RTGS system, as is the TARGET system used by the ECB. I would be happy to discuss this, but it would involve a deviation from my subject here. Conclusion In conclusion, I would like to make two reflections. Firstly, it is of course the case that IT, while increasing both the efficiency and security of the financial system in general and the payment system in particular, also increases risks of a purely operational nature. Operational risks were strongly in focus prior to the new millennium, particularly in the financial sector, and extensive preparations were made to guard against them. With hindsight, it is easy to talk about making a mountain out of a molehill, but the lack of problems was of course largely due to the fact that they had been foreseen and due precautions taken. One positive consequence of all the fuss around the new millennium was that openness regarding security and IT was increased and that attention was drawn to the need for routines to manage crises. At the same time, it can also be concluded that the IT systems proved to be fairly robust. The consequences of the terrorist attacks in the USA on 11 September last year could actually be handled to a large extent as there were security arrangements for most of the central financial systems. However, these events emphasised the importance of taking into account such potential threats as terrorism and other physical threats to the financial system when establishing security routines. My second reflection is of a more human nature. After having given a whole speech on IT in the financial sector it is easy to give the impression that the banks and other institutions operating on the financial markets consist merely of technology and money. That is not the case. Fundamentally they are not about technology or money, but about people and the relations between people. All successful managers of financial companies, particularly bank managers, are aware of this. Technology is a useful aid, but a customer who does not receive a respectful, personal and competent reception at one bank will choose another next time. That is the way things will probably remain and we should be glad of it. Thank you. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 1 Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Iceland in a global setting Keynote speech by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Euromoney conference on the Nordic Financial Markets and Investment Opportunities, Stockholm, 13 September 2002. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to participate in this ambitious conference on the Nordic Financial Markets and Investment Opportunities. I will in my remarks today mainly focus on aspects relating to Iceland. Size separates Iceland from the other Nordic Countries, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Other factors separate the Nordic Countries as well. Finland is a member of the European Union and the Economic and Monetary Union, EMU, as well. Denmark and Sweden are members of the European Union but are outside the EMU. Norway and Iceland are outside the European Union but maintain very close ties to it, particularly through the European Economic Area Agreement. That agreement makes Norway and Iceland a part of the single market of the European Union, which entails among other things that they are obliged to maintain financial market legislation, which fully conforms to that of the European Union.  The Nordic Countries have different monetary regimes. Finland is a member of the EMU, Denmark is linked to the EMU through an ERM II agreement entailing that the Danish krona is very closely tied to the euro. Sweden, Norway and Iceland have chosen an inflation-targeting regime as their monetary framework (Iceland in March 2001). Thus, price stability is the main objective of monetary policy in all of these countries and has in fact become the recognized single target for monetary policy in numerous countries. The reason for this emphasis on price stability is that it creates the best conditions for balanced growth and increased welfare.  The Icelandic financial market has developed very rapidly over the last ten to fifteen years. It is a small market by definition, but has nevertheless the same institutional set-up as larger industrial countries. Aside from the Central Bank, these include commercial banks, savings banks, securities companies, various investment funds, insurance companies, large and important pension funds and last but not least a stock exchange - linked with the other Nordic exchanges - where the shares of 60 to 70 Icelandic companies are listed and traded on regular basis. Supervision of the activities of all of these institutions is in the hands of a unified financial supervisory authority that has broadly the same legal powers and follows the same methods and standards as supervisory agencies in other European countries. Important rationalisation has taken place in the Icelandic financial system. Until a few years ago, two of the main commercial banks were fully government owned and so were a host of so-called investment credit funds. The funds were unified in a single institution, which was subsequently privatised. The Government has also reduced its stake in the commercial banks over the most recent years and intends to have them largely or fully privatised by the end of the current electoral term next year. The privatisation process creates opportunities for continued rationalisation in the financial system creating ample opportunities in the period ahead, including closer ties with foreign financial institutions. It is tempting to put recent economic developments in Iceland into the context of developments in some of the other Nordic Countries about a decade ago. Liberalisation of the Icelandic financial markets was more or less completed in the mid-1990s when the last restrictions on the movement of capital between Iceland and other countries were removed. Our liberalisation came a few years later than in the other Nordic Countries. You will recall that in some of the other Nordic Countries, liberalisation was followed by a boom period in the economy, partly or largely fuelled by a rapid growth of credit and in some cases large fiscal deficits. At the same time, these countries were pursuing a fixed exchange rate policy vis-a-vis the ECU. Developments in the domestic economies were such that the fixed exchange rate policy was gradually undermined, the rapid credit growth of banks resulted in weakening loan portfolios when asset prices fell, the exchange rate fixety gave way to floating, the currencies depreciated and inflation rose. The current account of the balance of payments also deteriorated. 
 2 BIS Review 51/2002 Developments in Iceland from the latter half of 1990s until the present time resemble in many ways the experience of some of the other Nordic Countries a decade earlier but differ also in important respects. Soon after liberalisation, domestic demand picked up, fuelled by rapidly rising credit in the wake of intensified competition in the financial sector and a sharp increase in credit availability. At that time, Iceland was pursuing a fixed exchange rate policy but not as rigidly fixed as the other Nordic Countries had done a decade earlier. The expansion in the economy at the end of last decade led to a very rapid rise in the current account deficit, climaxing in year 2000. Through the effects of a tightening monetary policy, the exchange rate of the króna gradually appreciated. In the spring of the year 2000, expectations in the market shifted for a variety of reasons, one of them being concerns about the current account deficit. Subsequently the króna began to depreciate and continued to do so more or less uninterrupted but on the whole in an orderly fashion over a period of a year and a half until the end of November last year. By that time, it had fallen by about a third against other currencies. This large depreciation is not without precedent in other countries. In that respect, I might mention, since we are in Stockholm and since I have drawn some parallel with the other Nordic Countries, that the Swedish krona fell in broadly similar proportions over a period of time after the exchange rate was floated in late 1992. The depreciation of the Icelandic króna fed into domestic prices and inflation picked up significantly. Late last year, the exchange rate had clearly overshot sharply on the downside. Then expectations turned around again. It was clear, among other things, that the economy was cooling down and that the current account deficit was shrinking fast. Optimism also arose once prospects improved that the inflation spike, which followed the exchange rate depreciation, would subside quickly again. The króna began to appreciate and has by now regained an important part of its earlier value. Inflation has subsided sharply again this year and expectations are that the inflation target of 2½ percent will be achieved before the end of the year. The large current account deficit recorded in the year 2000 also began to shrink rapidly, it fell by more than half in the year 2001 and the outlook is for approximate balance this year. These developments demonstrate the resilience and adaptability of the Icelandic economy; moving from a very large current account deficit to virtual balance in the course of two years and reducing inflation from bordering on a two-digit rate to 2½ percent within one year. Although developments in Iceland showed many of the same characteristics as those in some of the other Nordic Countries during the post-liberalisation rapid expansion, such as credit expansion, current account deficit, exchange rate depreciation and so on, Iceland escaped the difficulties suffered by banking systems in some of the other countries.  Icelandic bank credit grew very rapidly in the late 1990’s and into the year 2000 and a sizable portion of the credit expansion was financed with credit from abroad. The capital adequacy ratios of banks fell for a while but nevertheless remained comfortably above the minimum required and internationally recognised levels. The year 2001 also turned out to be quite favourable for the banks, a development which continued by and large into the current year. Consequently, the capital position of the banks has improved and all the major banking institutions have relatively strong capital adequacy ratios at present. Loan losses have increased, as was to be expected in the wake of the credit expansion, but nowhere on the scale experienced in some of the other Nordic Countries a decade ago and very much less than they did during the downturn in the Icelandic economy around and after 1990. The conclusion to be drawn is, therefore, that the Icelandic banking system weathered the relatively turbulent post-liberalization boom period of 2000 and 2001 pretty well and is well poised to meet new challenges, including continued rationalisation and intensified competition from foreign banking institutions. In the most recent decades, the Icelandic economy has also seen structural shifts. The importance of fisheries as a generator of foreign exchange revenue has diminished in relative terms - to less than a half of the total - while the importance of other sectors has risen, such as manufacturing industry, information technology and tourism. In these developments, Iceland is among other things drawing benefits from globalisation to strengthen the foundations of the economy. Foreign direct investment regulations are liberal with the exception that such investment is not permitted in the fishing sector. Foreign direct investment is most noticeable in power intensive industry, such as the production of aluminium, which is based on Iceland’s abundance of untapped renewable energy resources. Recent changes in corporate taxation in Iceland, lowering corporate taxes to among the lowest to be found, serve to attract foreign business to Iceland and encourage Icelandic companies with international operations to favour Iceland as the base of their operations. 
 BIS Review 51/2002 3 Direct investment by Icelandic companies abroad has risen rapidly in recent years and in a variety of areas, such as fisheries and fish processing, pharmaceuticals, retail commerce and financial services. These developments also benefit the Icelandic economy in the long run as they integrate Iceland further into the global economy, allow Iceland to draw more easily on the experience of others and bring in dividends. Reflective of this development is the fact that Icelandic banks have begun to grant credit to borrowers in other countries on a measurable scale, particularly in areas where they have a competitive advantage in analysing the soundness of the prospective borrowers. The title of my presentation is Iceland in a Global Setting. What I have briefly described is a country that has followed the path of many countries, including the Nordic Countries, in liberalising its economy, both internally and externally. This has exposed the economy to market forces and competition from abroad and a monetary regime bent on securing a low rate of inflation was chosen. Iceland is, as mentioned, not a member of the European Union and membership is not on the agenda of the present Government. Iceland operates its own small currency on the margins of the US dollar and the euro. These facts place firm requirements on economic policy while at the same time offering Iceland to reap important benefits from globalisation. This is indeed born out by developments over the last few years that were years of rapid growth of GDP and years which tested the ability of economic policy makers to steer the economy in an environment of liberalised markets and capital movements. More generally, the lesson to be drawn from our experience is that countries only stand to gain from full participation in the global economy. Aside from subjecting the domestic economy to competition from abroad, it disciplines economic policymaking. The market is a strict master and serves painful punishment for mistakes or ill-thought initiatives. 
BIS Review 51/2002 1 David Dodge: Canada’s economic performance after an eventful year Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 18 September 2002 *      *      * Good afternoon. I was delighted to accept your invitation to speak to you today. I’d like to spend some time reflecting on the evolution of the Canadian economy and what we as Canadians have achieved in the past few years. Then I will talk a bit about the outlook and the uncertainties facing the global economy, and how Canada’s successes on the fiscal and monetary fronts will help us weather those uncertainties. But first, I’d like to say how much I appreciate the chance to return to the University of British Columbia campus. Five years ago, I was here as a Senior Fellow in the Commerce Faculty. While my current job is different, there is one common thread that unites this institution and, indeed, all Canadian universities, with the Bank of Canada—a commitment to excellence in research. The Bank of Canada fellowship program Indeed, a strong research environment has long been a hallmark of the Bank. We also want to encourage research relevant to our business, especially with respect to monetary policy and financial system stability, at universities all across Canada. That is why I am very pleased to announce today that the Bank of Canada is launching a Fellowship Program to foster high-calibre research in crucial economic areas. The program will be open to professors at Canadian universities who have a record of high-quality research. The Bank fellowships will pay a salary stipend and provide funding for graduate research assistants and expenses. We plan to award two fellowships the first year, and one each year after that, for a total of six fellowships by 2007. We hope the program will expand the pool of leading-edge research conducted across this country and strengthen Canadian expertise in areas critical to our mandate, such as macroeconomics, monetary economics, international finance, and the economics of financial markets and institutions. Expanded research and a broader knowledge base will benefit the Bank of Canada, universities working to build strong economics departments and, indeed, all Canadians. And I am particularly pleased to be launching our Fellowship Program here, at a university that is committed to producing the type of ground-breaking analysis we hope to encourage. Improving the policy framework When I first arrived at UBC in the fall of 1997, Canada was completing a decade of struggle to get our economic policies right. During the period 1988 through 1997, we took some important steps towards improving both our monetary and fiscal policies. The Bank of Canada, responding to the high and unpredictable inflation rates of the 1970s and early 1980s, adopted at the end of the 1980s a monetary policy aimed at achieving price stability. To make this commitment more concrete, the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed in 1991 on a series of inflation-control targets aimed at bringing the 12-month CPI inflation rate down to 2 per cent - plus or minus 1 per cent - by December 1995. The decline in inflation was achieved in fairly short order - by January 1992, inflation was close to 2 per cent. The agreement has subsequently been extended three times, retaining the 2 per cent target midpoint. For almost ten years now, inflation has been well under control, and households and businesses now believe we will continue to achieve the inflation targets. Inflation expectations are well anchored, not just for the near term, but well into the future. Almost a decade of low inflation makes it easy to forget how difficult it was to achieve our inflation targets, and the economic price that was paid to achieve the tremendous benefits of low and stable inflation. 
2 BIS Review 51/2002 Back when I was teaching here, federal and provincial governments were in the midst of the painful but necessary process of fiscal consolidation. The federal government had been working to curb the rising debt-to-GDP ratio, but it really wasn’t until 1995 that the government had done enough to tip the scales decisively toward deficit reduction. And it was 1997 before the cumulative effects of all those deficit-reduction measures put federal fiscal policy back on a sustainable track. The debt-to-GDP ratio at the federal level has since fallen to less than 50 per cent, from a peak of 71 per cent in 1995. And while some provinces are still struggling to maintain budget surpluses, all have taken important steps to put their fiscal houses in order. Governments and the Bank of Canada were working to get public policies - the fiscal and monetary framework - right. The private sector was also restructuring to take advantage of the opportunities provided by the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement and to increase its productivity and competitiveness. It is not surprising that during those years of adjustment we had slower growth than the United States. But by the late 1990s, our economy was beginning to reap the benefits of those restructuring efforts. The end result of all this effort - the adoption of inflation targets, the fiscal improvement and the private sector restructuring - was that Canada’s economy became better able to weather major shocks such as the Asian crisis, or last year’s global slowdown. Indeed, over the period from 1997 to 2001, Canada averaged annual economic growth of about 4 per cent, while the U.S. average was about 3.5 per cent. And while the U.S. economy fell into recession last year, ours did not. Although the productivity growth of Canadian companies has not been as strong as that of firms in the United States, we have seen encouraging signs that investments in technology and training are leading to greater productivity gains here. Indeed, business sector labour productivity in Canada grew at an annualized rate of 2.0 per cent from 1997 to 2001, much higher than the 1.2 per cent average over the 1990-96 period, and only a bit below the revised 2.3 per cent rate of productivity growth recorded in the United States. As we look forward, we see positive signs for future productivity growth in Canada, thanks to the efforts of Canadian firms to adjust to new technologies and incorporate them into their business processes. The shocks of 2000-2001 Indeed, the economy has held up remarkably well when you consider that we have been hit with four major shocks during the past couple of years. First, there was the meltdown in the technology and telecommunications industries, which began in late 2000 and the effects of which are still being felt today. The second was the broader economic slowdown in 2001 that affected, to various degrees, the economies of most countries. Third, and overshadowing every other event last year, was the 11 September terrorist attacks. With the first anniversary just passed, this seems like an appropriate time to reflect on the extraordinary events that have buffeted the North American economies since that terrible day, and to review how the Bank of Canada responded to those events. Our most immediate responsibility was to keep Canada’s financial system functioning. Our next responsibility was to promote consumer and investor confidence. Therefore, the Bank of Canada took extraordinary monetary policy action. On 17 September last year, we reduced our key policy interest rate outside our scheduled announcement dates. Between September 2001 and January 2002, we lowered interest rates by a total of 200 basis points to help mitigate the impact of 11 September on an already-weakening economy. It turned out that consumer confidence in Canada was not as badly shaken as had been feared. As the immediate geopolitical and economic uncertainties diminished, consumers responded strongly and quickly to the monetary stimulus. Interest rate-sensitive sectors, such as housing and automobiles, showed remarkable strength. Indeed, in the fourth quarter of last year we saw annualized GDP growth of almost 3 per cent, when most analysts were expecting the Canadian economy to shrink. However, as we recovered from the 2001 slowdown and from 11 September, the U.S. economy was hit by a fourth shock - loss of confidence in the integrity of financial reporting and analysis as a result of Enron, WorldCom, and other accounting and corporate governance scandals. Unfortunately, the uncertainty caused by these problems in the United States has spilled over into other financial 
BIS Review 51/2002 3 markets, including ours. This has created additional caution for businesses and appears to have delayed the expected recovery in investment worldwide. In spite of these four economic shocks, Canada’s economic performance has been, in comparison with other countries, rather good. Clearly, this has been a difficult year for the mining and forestry industries in British Columbia, for grains and oilseeds producers in the Prairies, and for the telecom industry across the country. But overall, our economy has consistently exceeded the average growth rates of the G-7 countries since 1997. And both the IMF and the OECD predict that Canada will post the strongest growth rate of the G-7 in both 2002 and 2003. I want to emphasize that Canada’s recent strong performance isn’t just good luck. It is the result of having a solid policy framework, both in terms of inflation and fiscal control. The benefits of this framework are well understood, not just by the government and the Bank of Canada, but by Canadians in general. We stuck to that framework during the recent economic turmoil, and we are now seeing a clear payback for the tremendous investment that Canadians made in opening this country to free trade, and in getting our macroeconomic framework right in the 1990s. That framework holds and will continue to serve us well. If anyone still needs convincing of that, Canada’s recent economic performance provides compelling evidence. Canada’s economic prospects Canada’s economic growth so far this year has exceeded expectations. Real GDP jumped by 6.2 per cent at annual rates in the first quarter of 2002 and rose by 4.3 per cent in the second quarter. The Bank of Canada believes that keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable is the best contribution monetary policy can make to strong and sustained growth in Canada. We run monetary policy in a symmetrical way. That is to say, we pay equal attention to persistent pressures that could move us away from our 2 per cent target - whether above or below. When strong demand pushes the economy against the limits of its capacity and threatens to raise future inflation above the target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy and mitigate those inflation pressures. When demand is weak, as we saw in 2001, future inflation is likely to ease. So the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate the economy, and absorb economic slack, consistent with keeping inflation on target. The significant easing of monetary policy during 2001 was a key factor behind the strong growth of household demand in the first half of this year. Let me now turn to the outlook. In our April Monetary Policy Report, we said that the recovery in the Canadian economy began sooner, and was considerably stronger, than anticipated. Consumer spending and residential construction were reflecting the stimulus from both monetary and fiscal policy. Canada’s export volumes had begun to grow once again, as the U.S. economy began to recover. By the time of our Monetary Policy Report Update in July, we were also seeing a rebuilding of inventories and an increase in spending on machinery and equipment. These were suggesting a broadening of the recovery across economic sectors. The July Update still reflects our view of the economy. As we said two weeks ago, domestic demand in Canada remains stronger than expected, bolstered by the substantial amount of monetary stimulus still in the economy. Canada’s record of job creation has been nothing short of remarkable, with almost 400,000 new jobs since the beginning of the year. This strong job growth is reinforcing the confidence of Canadian consumers. In addition, medium and small businesses continue to invest. All this paves the way for higher output and ongoing strong domestic demand. But at the same time, there are downside risks and uncertainties, mostly originating from outside Canada. Near-term prospects for growth in the United States and the major overseas economies appear to have weakened. Private and public sector economists have revised down their near-term growth forecasts for the United States, Europe, and Japan. This could imply that Canada’s exports, which were already slightly weaker than anticipated in the second quarter, could continue to be affected by slower growth in global demand. The geopolitical situation remains quite unsettled. Finally, in the United States and Canada, we are still working through the corporate governance issues that have contributed to this year’s financial market volatility. History has taught us that during periods of uncertainty, business and consumers tend to sit on their hands until the outlook is clearer. 
4 BIS Review 51/2002 Let me conclude. It remains the Bank’s view that as the Canadian economy continues to expand and to approach capacity, further timely and measured reductions in the amount of monetary stimulus will be necessary. Let me remind you what I mean by “timely and measured.” “Timely” relates to the fact that there is always a lag between our policy actions and their effect on the economy. “Measured” relates to the judgments that we make at each fixed announcement date about the pace at which the economy is approaching full capacity, taking into account new information and data as they become available. Our current view is that the fundamental underlying strength of the Canadian economy has not changed since our July Monetary Policy Report Update. Domestic demand may well be stronger; at the same time, the external uncertainties bearing on the outlook appear to be greater than they were in early July. We will provide a detailed view of our outlook for the Canadian economy in our next Monetary Policy Report, on 23 October. ******************** This past year has certainly been full of challenges. Over the last decade, Canada has put in place the right macroeconomic policy framework to weather major shocks and take advantage of opportunities. We are confident that this framework will stand us in good stead in the future. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 1 Jean-Pierre Roth: The long path to restoring faith in financial markets Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the CEO Luncheon of the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce, Zurich, 4 September 2002. *      *      * At the outset I would like to acknowledge the long-standing ties between the Swiss-American Chamber of Commerce and the Swiss National Bank. In the past, members of the Governing Board have been invited to speak before this select audience. It is a great pleasure and honor for me to continue this tradition. My remarks today will focus on the present challenges faced by the global economy: a crisis in confidence which has pushed equity prices to unexpected lows and an economic recovery which does not seem to take the desired path. Nevertheless, I am convinced that the fundamentals are in place for a return to sustained growth. Inflation is low in almost all industrial countries, monetary policy is supporting the recovery, household consumption still plays a stabilizing role and public finances - despite short-term difficulties - are not far from equilibrium. While numerous factors are responsible for the present economic uncertainty, the prolonged volatility witnessed in equity markets has hit investors particularly hard. In hindsight the stock market correction fits partially the classic story of fundamentals; one that is driven by a bubbles collapse in dotcom companies and the anticipated slowdown in economic activity. However, the increased volatility in equity markets has also been pronounced because of peculiar events: the integrity of financial analysts’ recommendations and the increased spread of fraudulent accounting practices. It is the latter that has struck the financial markets particularly hard in recent months. U.S. firms, such as Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing and Xerox, have become household names not because of their services and products but for their alleged accounting abuses. Investors in these firms undertook investment decisions based on apparently false information. The fear is that only the top of the iceberg has been revealed and more unpleasant news is expected to fill the front pages of the daily newspapers. The fallout from the financial scandals has unearthed several dormant issues that twitch the nerves of financial markets. In turn, this has generated considerable discussion in the financial press, on the airwaves, and in the corridors of government buildings. While the issues are complex, the list of proposed solutions is long. This all suggests that consensus and reform will not be achieved overnight. Trust as an asset As in all walks of life, trust is a valuable attribute. Central banks, as well, value the importance of credibility and trust. Allow me a few minutes to explain why these qualities are important to the National Bank. At the same time, they can provide a good illustration as to why these same qualities are equally important for the private sector. Let me begin with what I mean by trust. Trust is a term that is closely related to confidence and credibility. Trust is understood to mean when individuals share a mutual understanding that the rules of conduct governing their network work well and make things better for everyone. Trust can therefore be thought of as a kind of social capital - a shared asset that benefits everyone. Just as we speak about trust between individuals and public institutions, the same is true for publicly traded firms that interact with markets. With trust, economic systems and networks are more efficient for less effort is spent on monitoring and checking. With the establishment of trust, confidence is developed. Over time, as trust is built up, confidence and credibility are developed. Maintaining price stability is a key trust-building responsibility of the Swiss National Bank. Protracted changes in the price level, as a rule, stem from a malfunctioning of the monetary system. Price stability is important particularly because relative prices in our market economy govern the production and consumption of individual goods. Changes in the price level are liable to give misleading signals and lead to expensive mistakes in planning and investment. Inflation has other dire consequences. For the less fortunate - those unable to protect themselves against price increases - inflation means an erosion in purchasing power. This is especially true for fixed income investments. In contrast, for those that can protect themselves against inflation, it means 
 2 BIS Review 50/2002 that considerable resources are squandered in trying to hedge against inflation. These efforts should be put to more productive use. With price stability and trust in place, the list of economic benefits is long. In particular, the price development becomes more stable and predictable. This allows financial markets and businesses to operate more efficiently. As for the National Bank, it can conduct monetary policy more easily with expectations strongly anchored. A key feature of trust is that it must be underpinned by transparency. We too have learned from past experience that Swiss monetary policy gains from increased transparency. Earlier than most central banks, we have embraced the notion that it is better for the conduct of monetary policy if people can understand what their central bank is thinking, doing and why. Transparency also eliminates the doubts that the central bank is working with an informational advantage. Information asymmetries breed mistrust and skepticism. It is much easier to instill trust in an institution if it is open about its goals and strategies. All this enhances the National Bank’s accountability and reinforces the trust we have fostered. What steps has the National Bank taken to improve the transparency of monetary policy? We have a long tradition of setting monetary targets, but since the announcement of our new monetary strategy more than two years ago, the discussion of monetary policy is even more clearly defined by norms, rules and procedures than before. The explicit definition of price stability gives Swiss citizens a yardstick for measuring how the central bank has performed. Changes to the target range for the policy instrument - the 3-month Libor - are commented by a press release. They are also discussed after each Quarterly Board Meeting, which are fixed in advance. At our biannual press conferences, we provide our assessment of the economic situation. At these occasions, we inform the public how we judge the risks facing the economy and present our inflation forecasts for the next three years. The forecast should guide the public in monitoring inflationary risks. Given all this, we have taken the extra step to publish the forecasting models that are used to generate our inflation forecasts. The meaning of faith in financial markets Trust is relevant not just for central banks but also for the entire business and financial community. Trustworthy business standards are one of the most important forms of social capital. Trust is paramount to the efficient operation of financial markets, which is a key ingredient of a well-functioning economy. This trust includes confidence in the people who run the companies, and in those who watch them. It also means that the information required to make sound investment decisions is disclosed fully and accurately. The disclosure moreover must be fair. There must be confidence that insiders are not trading on information unavailable to everyone. Only when all these components of trust are in place do we have healthy, efficient financial markets where everyone benefits. What is lost when accounting fraud and the abuse of management power occur? Skepticism sets in about the truthfulness of routine financial disclosures. Companies find it more expensive to raise funds because once trust is broken, fewer investors are willing to participate, and those who remain demand a premium for the increased risk of being misled. A lack of reliable information also leads investors to make poor investment decisions, so capital is misallocated. In short, financial markets operate less efficiently, with fewer rewards for everybody. Avoiding a widespread loss of trust requires a systematic and co-ordinated effort to fix the flaws and weaknesses that can undermine investor confidence. It is important that there is a set of reasonable rules - so that chief executives, boards, and their auditors truly and fairly disclose the financial position of their companies and that investing public can rely on the truth, fairness, and completeness of that disclosure. Now, in spite of the specific flaws that several well-known firms have revealed, it has become clear that much of the public’s confidence in the efficient operation of financial markets remains intact. The recent events involving accounting fraud and abuse of management power remind us that we cannot be complacent even once it is felt that the current problems are behind us. Memories can fade quickly. Even if the worst is behind us, the responsibility lies in the market participants to apply the lessons of this particular period to stop its recurrence in the future. We must continue to be vigilant. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 3 The market’s response The market participants have already reacted by themselves. We have seen much self-evaluation in recent months. I am encouraged by how seriously these issues are being taken. The market is enforcing its own discipline. Corporate boards are re-examining their roles and taking a closer look at what is being done in their companies. Investors are demanding greater reconciliation between pro forma financial statements and generally accepted accounting principles. But this is not enough. The apparent breakdown of the checks and balances that served us reasonably well in the past has prompted debate about the need for tougher financial market rules. Potentially new rules need to be written. And when unscrupulous market participants or practices are revealed, authorities must come down on them with full force. To do otherwise is to do markets a disservice. Only strict reprobation will restore and maintain confidence that the rules are being enforced. Regulatory and supervisory bodies around the globe have begun to deal with the high-profile bankruptcies. In the United States, the Financial Accounting Standards Board is looking at proposals to determine when so-called special purpose entities should be consolidated on company balance sheets. The Securities and Exchange Commission has proposed new rules for more detailed and timely corporate disclosure. Major firms, in response to those demands, are changing their corporate reporting methods. There is the clear recognition of the need to eliminate potential conflicts of interest - where auditors are able to offer additional services. This has raised other issues of rotation of auditors to prevent cozy relationships undermining the integrity of the audit. A periodic change of the firm might have led to more serious questioning of the accounts. Further, some US firms have announced plans to include, as an expense, the cost of executive stock options. The changes aim to more accurately describe the revenues and costs associated with companies’ primary business. And Standard and Poor’s has introduced new benchmarks for reporting corporate earnings. These are all positive examples of participants working together to enforce the spirit of the rules under which financial markets operate. What has been done recently in Switzerland to improve the transparency of Swiss financial markets? Some efforts have already started some time ago. Most notably, the Swiss Exchange and the Swiss Business Federation “economiesuisse” co-ordinated their efforts to develop two sets of rules which became effective on July 1, 2002: The “Swiss Code of Best Practice” and the “Directive Concerning Information on Corporate Governance”. This will hopefully lift the standards for corporate governance and improve the level of transparency for the publicly traded firms in Switzerland. We have also seen political initiatives aiming at more transparency in remunerations. Business uncertainty It would be shortsighted to believe that the recent stock market reaction has only been the result of misconduct and the lack of corporate governance. The world economy is still digesting the consequences from the deep retrenchment in capital spending, which started in 2000 in the high-tech and the telecommunications sectors. The investment climate was further muted by the terrorist attacks of last September, hitting hard other sectors such as air travel, tourism, and insurance. In short, there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the adjustment of investment spending and the dim prospects of corporate earnings. While the worldwide weakness in business investment lies at the very heart of our present problems, at the same time the most recent signals from abroad reveal that new potential risks have emerged. The most recent economic indicators from the United States show that domestic demand is growing less strongly than anticipated. The confidence indices registered a decline for the months June and July. The labor market has recently shown increasing signs of weakness; both in terms of employment and hours worked. These recent developments weigh heavily against household spending, which has been considered the lifeline of the U.S. economy. The fear is that many households are stretched, adding fears to the strength of household consumption and the resilience of the U.S. economy to withstand further shocks. U.S. households on average have low levels of savings and have begun to dip into housing wealth to maintain their consumption habits. While such savings imbalances do not support the crisis 
 4 BIS Review 50/2002 in investment, the recent signals from the labor market, should they deepen, bring new risks to consumption and the robustness of the U.S. economy. Here in Europe, although the economic picture is slightly different, the economic prospects are not brighter. Economic hopes pinned on exports and consumption, do not appear to be resilient across Europe. The potential for further stimulus on the fiscal and the monetary front appears to be limited. On the one hand, the stability pact does not allow for further fiscal stimulus. On the other hand, the European Central Bank is unwilling to provide the same amount of monetary stimulus as its U.S. counterpart. The reason is simple. Inflationary pressures in the Eurozone continue to be a stumbling block for lower interest rates. The recent deterioration of the international business sentiment and the prolonged uncertainty witnessed in the financial markets has also influenced negatively the growth prospects in Switzerland. Our view at the beginning of 2002 was that economic growth for the current year would be moderate. Our GDP forecast was 1% growth for 2002. Other institutions were more optimistic. All in all, however, there was considerable agreement among forecasters that Swiss household consumption would register moderate but stable growth and that the economy would experience a recovery in the second half of this year. The recovery was to be underpinned by strong growth in exports. The economic information that stemmed from the first quarter of this year was consistent with the scenario just described. First quarter real GDP came in slightly stronger than expected. Although real GDP growth was only 0.6% in the first quarter, an important consideration was the upward dynamics after gloom had set in the second half of 2002. As anticipated, real growth was supported by private consumption. Confidence indices and leading indicators were all pointing up, reinforcing the view that the economy was on track. As is the case abroad, the most recent economic figures question whether the recovery scenario for 2002 remains valid. Information from various economic indicators is painting a consensus picture of weak growth. The negative numbers cover the broad contours of the Swiss economy. These sectors include construction, investment, tourism, financial services, and export-oriented industries. None of this means that the Swiss economy is not able to stay afloat. But those that have steered a ship know: it is not enough to have water under the rudder, one needs to plot continuously a course that will safeguard the vessel. The first rule of caution in seamanship and in monetary policy - is to keep away from situations in which adverse shocks will lead to trouble. With the recent interest rate reductions in the target range, we have tried to steer a prudent course that seeks to offset potential adverse shocks that would jeopardize economic recovery in Switzerland. On May the 2nd, we lowered the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.5 percentage points to 0.75% to 1.75%. With this step, we reacted to the rapid appreciation of the Swiss franc against the major currencies, which led to an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions in Switzerland, thereby threatening the economic recovery. We reduced the interest rate range by a further 50 basis points on July 26th. The current target range lies between 0.25% and 1.25%. We reacted to the increasing signs from Switzerland and abroad that point to a delay in the economic recovery and slower-than-anticipated economic growth in 2002. We now forecast the average growth rate for real GDP to fall clearly short of 1% in 2002. In addition, the further appreciation of the Swiss franc tightened the monetary conditions, which were regarded to be undesirable under the current environment. Concluding remarks It is more than one year that we are in this difficult economic situation. The loss in business confidence began with the downturn in economic activity lead by a sharp correction in capital spending. The path to economic recovery has been recently overshadowed by the loss in investor confidence, which found its origins in the highly publicized scandals involving fraudulent balance sheets. This setback in investor confidence undermined the required trust in financial markets that the right rules are in place and that those rules are being enforced. Although I am confident that stronger rules will merge to restore trust in financial markets, consensus will not be achieved overnight. Corporations must continue to build on the social capital that is entrusted in them by investors. They should promote the efficient operation of financial matters, and optimize the benefits that markets can bring to everyone in society. However, as long as the rules of the game prize short-term gain over long-term earnings stability, the temptation to cheat by 
 BIS Review 50/2002 5 manipulating the market will remain strong. Reforms cannot remove risk from investment, but firms can do more to promote transparency and ensure that their risks are properly disclosed. It is thus vital for firms - not just politicians and the public - to determine if there are weaknesses in legislation or regulation so that they too can correct and begin their part of the process of rebuilding investor confidence. But the present challenges are not only those of better regulation. The global economy is also facing a crisis of confidence, which interferes with investment decisions and dampens activity. Against this international backdrop, we have reacted swiftly to the changing winds that bring new risks to the domestic economy. The latest reductions in the target range are aimed at injecting further monetary stimulus in our economy. These actions are undertaken with an eye on keeping price stability in check. This is the best contribution the Swiss National Bank can make to restore confidence in the economy and promote a strong and sustainable recovery. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 1 Urban Bäckström: In the wake of financial turmoil Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Conference on WorldCom and Enron - aftermath in the US and lessons for Sweden, held in Stockholm, 5 September 2002. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to discuss this interesting topic. The circumstances connected with WorldCom and Enron unquestionably raise some burning questions to do with the roles of the owners, the boards and the auditors, as well as with construction of the rule system. There is a risk, however, that a drive for quick solutions will result in hasty conclusions. Experience shows, in my opinion, that when dealing with complex problems, there is often much to be said for reflection and closer consideration. In many cases it is not until some time has passed, enabling us to gain a better understanding of what happened, that we are in a position to take the steps that are truly important and crucial. My starting point here is that the events to do with WorldCom and Enron are a part of a broader context. In the first place they are, of course, directly connected with the recent years’ stock-market bubble. But at a deeper level I believe they stem from two major processes and that, as so often happens when things go quickly, our current institutions - in a wide sense - have not quite kept up with the course of events. • One major process that left its mark on the 1990s is the breakthrough in technology, above all for computers and telecommunications. This had been on the way for a number of decades and began to flourish in many parts of the world as it became increasingly clear what the microchip had to offer. It can be likened to the development of the steam engine in the late 18th century or the combustion engine and the electric motor a century later. As we know, those earlier technical breakthroughs had far-reaching consequences for the development and transformation of our society. The process is not - either then or today - a simple progression. But the setbacks are manageable and pave the way for new advances. Many of the setbacks originate in faulty expectations of the new technology’s impact. • The other major process has to do with the financial system’s deregulation in recent decades. As a result, we now have a world where capital markets and capital flows are about as free as they were before the outbreak of World War One. With the Great Depression and World War Two, the idea of returning to a less restricted financial system failed to catch on. It was not until the 1980s that deregulation reached Sweden, after starting somewhat earlier in many other industrialised countries, including the United States. A free financial system is needed in order to promote the development of new technology and a genuine social transformation. But it does also entail a number of risks. It was the new technology that provided the driving force behind companies such as WorldCom and Enron, just as it was the supply of capital from the deregulated financial system that enabled them to grow as they did. But these were not the only enterprises that exploited the new technology and benefited from the free capital market. It was the euphoria and even hysteria about many companies that led to the formation of a stock-market bubble. According to some measurements, the average levels that share prices reached in relation to more fundamental values in the late 1990s were higher than ever before. So it is hardly surprising that the falling trend in recent years has involved such large losses around the world. Share prices tend to return sooner or later to values that are a better reflection of fundamental factors. A closer look at the recent stock-market bubble reveals a number of more specific features that call for special reflection. It looks as though share prices for IT and technology oriented companies were driven primarily by new and rather inexperienced investors, cheered on by managements in need of capital to cover current spending as well as by analysts from banks and investment companies that handled the share issues. Media around the world also seem to have lent their voice to this tendency. Seen in this wider perspective, events in recent years raise a number of questions that I now want to consider briefly. How should we view financial bubbles, what causes them and what can we do about them? What drove the latest bubble, what can we learn from it and what is needed more generally to make stock markets function more efficient? 
 2 BIS Review 50/2002 Nothing new about periods of undue optimism One important lesson is that in a deregulated world, waves of excessive due optimism can arise and result in pronounced financial cycles. In the 1990s there were several periods of financial turbulence. One was Sweden’s own bank and currency crisis about a decade ago. At the same time there were problems in other countries and turbulence in the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM). That was followed by the crises in Asia and Mexico, the problems with the major hedge fund Long Term Capital Management, Russia’s suspension of payments, the IT bubble and, most recently, the difficulties in Latin America. Further back, there have likewise been periods of excessive optimism and financial crises. Here, briefly, are the most spectacular items in Sweden’s economic history. • The first real financial crisis in Sweden occurred back in 1857. It mainly involved the real estate market and obliged the government to support the banking system for the second time in our history. The first occasion had been in 1668, when the Palmstruch Bank was taken over by parliament and ultimately became what we now call the Riksbank. • Not long after, in the 1870s, the next wave of excessive optimism had to do with rapid industrial development, not least the construction of railways. Stockholms Enskilda Bank, for example, was in difficulties at the height of the crisis in 1878. • Another serious setback for what was then the “new economy” occurred in 1907. The potential profits from hydroelectric power and electrification, forest industries and iron ore had been exaggerated. • Then we have the undue optimism after the end of World War One, with a major investment boom and speculation in real estate and shares that peaked in 1921. It may be worth mentioning that measured in constant prices, it was not until the 1980s that turnover on the Stockholm stock exchange again reached the level in 1918. That says something about the strength of the speculation at that time. • After that, as we all know, there was 1929 and the early 1930s, with a falling stock market, banking problems and the Kreuger crash as prominent events in Sweden. • More than fifty years then passed before Sweden experienced another period of genuine financial turbulence in the late 1980s. The world, including Sweden, was hit by the stock market collapse in October 1987. A bubble developed in Sweden’s real estate market and subsequently burst, severely damaging the financial system. Resolute action by the political system in the early 1990s did, however, prevent a financial meltdown that might have plunged our country into an even deeper crisis. This brief review shows, I believe, that in periods with a heavily regulated financial system, the world economy has been somewhat less prone to generate pronounced financial cycles. It should be born in mind, however, that the regulations also created other problems which impeded long-term growth. Innovations and new enterprises are hardly stimulated when banks and markets are closely regulated. So it is symptomatic that the high growth in the 1950s and ‘60s came mainly from the rationalisation of existing firms rather than from new enterprises. When the deregulation of trade and of markets for goods and services got under way again in the decades after World War Two, attention was naturally drawn to the financial barriers that the tight regulations had set up against future growth. An awareness of the need for new, expanding companies and the emergence of new markets made it natural to promote this with a freer financial system. While this financial deregulation was probably both natural and necessary, it also meant that the world economy again became vulnerable to the kind of exaggerated optimism, with the attendant risk of pronounced financial cycles, that had characterised the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Meanwhile, the institutions connected with the financial system had lagged behind. By “institutions” I mean everything in and around the financial system that affects its development. Examples are sets of rules, the banking system as such, the general public, the political system, the authorities and the media. The shortcomings took various forms. Important rules were wrongly formulated or non-existent. The banking system lacked the necessary know-how for risk management, both for its own institutions and for its clients. People had become used to credit being rationed and were now suddenly able to borrow large amounts. The political system, the authorities and professional economists all stressed the advantages of deregulating the financial system but were less clear about the risks. In their struggle for readers, listeners or viewers, the media sometimes forgot to question and scrutinise important 
 BIS Review 50/2002 3 elements of what was happening. Think how much advice about share transactions has been passed on airily in recent years without a careful scrutiny. In the early 20th century these financial cycles and the risks of major crises were given a lot of thought by economists, not least those of the Austrian School. They pointed to the existence of transitory risks in the process of adjusting to a higher rate of productivity growth in connection with technological breakthroughs. At first there is a good circle: rising productivity tends to pull share prices up, making it easier to finance new investments. New investments and a growing capital stock lead through capital deepening to even higher productivity growth. When productivity goes on rising, however, expectations may become excessive and push share prices up still more. In certain cases, moreover, expectations of increased profits may lead to higher lending. All this can generate a vicious circle where a further increase in asset prices results in a continued expansion of credit. With excessive euphoria, the expansion of the capital stock may go too far. Sizeable investments are made in sectors that will never yield the expected return. The subsequent adjustment accordingly involves a marked fall-off in investment activity and thus a weak development of demand. Both the excessive investment earlier and the inevitable correction of asset prices contribute to this. The setback can also lead to problems in the financial system in general. Much of what the Austrian School had done was forgotten during the half-century of regulation from the crisis in the 1930s to the 1970s. Political economy was dominated instead by Keynesianism. It may also be the case that the efficient market hypothesis has been interpreted too freely. This theory largely amounts to a warning that the market is basically the best judge of a share’s real value. Under normal conditions that is probably true. When a bubble has got under way, however, the market’s normal information processing tends to be disrupted and prices are driven instead by impenetrable forces of a psychological nature. In many respects the financial turbulence in the 1980s and ‘90s was a rude awakening for many economists, decision makers in economic policy, authorities, representatives of the business and banking communities and people in general. I find it important to underscore how broad was this lack of insight into how financial problems arise. One cannot single out a person or group as being solely responsible for how things took a turn for the worse. Perhaps a society has to undergo a learning process on a broad front so that earlier mistakes yield new insights. Economic policy decision-makers like myself are, of course, no exception here. But as financial turbulence does not inevitably lead to a serious crisis in the real economy, we need to ask why it is that in certain cases output and employment do suffer severe setbacks and the attendant deflation. Much will have been gained if we can learn to tell whether or not an extensive share price fall, for example, besides being troublesome enough for many people, is likely to result in a situation with general deflation, rapidly falling output and rising unemployment. An answer to that question was suggested in the summer of 1999 by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan: While bubbles that burst are scarcely benign, the consequences need not be catastrophic for the economy. The bursting of the Japanese bubble a decade ago did not lead immediately to sharp contractions in output or a significant rise in unemployment. Arguably, it was the subsequent failure to address the damage to the financial system in a timely manner that caused Japan’s current economic problems. Likewise, while the stock market crash of 1929 was destabilising, most analysts attribute the Great Depression to the ensuing failures of Policy. Most things indicate that when banks run into trouble on account of financial turbulence, the supply of credit may dry up and the payment system cease to function. It is under such circumstances that output and employment have tended to suffer severely, leading to actual deflation. That, of course, is what prompted the Swedish political system’s resolute intervention at the time of the bank crisis here about a decade ago. It was a matter, not of protecting the banks as such or their owners from losses, but of safeguarding the banks’ central function in our economy. Maintaining a modern market economy would be virtually impossible/ without an efficient credit supply and payment system. In the present context it is positive that the banking sector is functioning well even though stock markets around the world have fallen steeply in recent years. There are also many signs that the banking sector has learnt a good deal from the financial problems in the last few decades. As regards general economic policy, we know that focusing on low and stable inflation creates a better and securer environment for economic policy decisions on the whole. A credible long-term commitment to low inflation does away with some of the uncertainty about future income streams, 
 4 BIS Review 50/2002 which are what ultimately determine the fundamental value of various kinds of asset. Such a commitment should also provide better conditions for financial decisions. But there is more to it than that. As representatives of the Austrian School pointed out, business cycles are not exactly alike. As a result of exaggerated euphoria, a basis for risks that may lead to future instability can be created even before the threat of inflation becomes more visible. In the event of rapidly rising asset prices, with the associated risk of financial instability, a central bank should therefore keep a watchful eye on credit expansion in the economy. Under such circumstances the central bank may need to intervene in the interests of financial stability. In my opinion, interest rate adjustments should certainly not be ruled out if they are judged to be effective. In other contexts I have mentioned the desirability of such a “flexible inflation targeting policy” and believe that support for action of this type is to be found in current legislation. The recent share price bubble was not accompanied by any undue expansion of credit. This was no doubt partly because the Swedish bank crisis is still so fresh in people’s minds and banks here have made the process of providing credit much more rigorous. The IT and telecom bubble in the 1990s So much for financial bubbles in general and what general economic policy can do. There is, however, more to learn from WorldCom, Enron and the whole of the IT and telecom bubble. American studies suggest that the new technology which enabled people to do their own share trading on the Internet attracted many people who were unfamiliar with saving in shares. These new and less experienced players concentrated in particular on shares that are quoted on the technology oriented Nasdaq exchange, which greatly influenced the pricing of similar shares around the world. While more professional and institutional investors accounted for 90 per cent of trading on the New York exchange, during the stock market boom around half of Nasdaq’s turnover came from private individuals. Studies also indicate that companies, analysts and banks had incentives to use somewhat questionable means of attracting inexperienced investors to buy shares in new enterprises. Lacking an adequate cash flow, many new technology companies were dependent on raising money from new share issues to pay their employees and procure equipment. That in turn called for a high share valuation. This gave managements an inducement to “doctor” reports and statements about their company’s future performance. The disclosures about WorldCom and Enron clearly show how an environment developed in which managements also stood to gain from stretching the accounting regulations in order to meet market expectations. It also looks as though the same environment left its mark on the large corporations’ auditors, who likewise needed to modify the extent and direction of their services in order to generate income and profits and survive in the new economy. In certain respects it amounted to breaking the law. In other instances it was the law that was not sufficiently clear or extensive. Analysts and investment banks that earned money by arranging share issues evidently lacked an incentive to make a critical appraisal of corporate reports and statements. This deprived the inexperienced investors of the necessary help and support. A look at, for example, the advice that was provided before stock markets began to fall tells the same tale: recommendations to sell made up less than one per cent of all advice. The media latched onto the stock market boom with reports of rapidly rising share prices. Instead of taking a critical look at what was happening, the notion that the new economy offered chances of earning a quick profit became the conventional wisdom. The part played by human psychology for herd behaviour in financial markets has in fact given rise to a new school of financial knowledge, known as Behavioural Finance. Two key concepts in this analysis are just conventional wisdom and wishful thinking. There’s nothing odd about that. When people make investment decisions they function in much as the way as in other contexts. A familiar example is our reluctance to enter a restaurant that is empty - we generally prefer one that already has many guests, particularly if there is a long queue outside. We simply rely on the good judgement of others and assume that all those inside have made the right choice. By arriving at a better understanding of how people behave, we can certainly do a good deal to prevent unduly large mistakes in market pricing and perhaps ultimately reduce the occurrence of financial bubbles. 
 BIS Review 50/2002 5 Functional institutions are crucial for economic development Today as well as earlier, the financial turbulence is an additional inducement to create better conditions in many parts of the economy for the institutions involved in the financial system and corporate management. It would be wrong to suppose, however, that regulations and other measures are capable of eliminating financial turbulence altogether. Like the business cycle in the real economy, cyclical movements in the financial world cannot be excluded as long as a market oriented distribution of saving and investment is considered desirable. The learning process in which we are all involved does at least help us to understand the mistakes that have been made and what they can teach us. The focus at present is very much on the roles and actions of the owners, boards and managements of listed companies. Self-preservation alone will no doubt lead to much being done to restore investor confidence in these corporations. Auditors around the world are presumably also devoting a good deal of thought to their various functions. Accounting issues are very much on the agenda. Many banks are also considering ways of providing clients with better analytical advice about share investment. A one-sided producer oriented approach, with the emphasis on getting clients to buy the bank’s products, is unlikely to work in the longer run. Bank managements are tending to look instead at how to make their approach more consumer oriented. What is good for the client is presumably good for the bank as well. The structure of internal incentives also needs to be adapted to encourage a long-term relationship. It seems reasonable to suppose that some newspaper managements are likewise thinking about how their readers’ interests can best be served. Without in any way claiming to be exhaustive, these examples illustrate the major forces that are at work in many parts of our society with a view to making things function better than they did in the recent stock market boom. In addition there are of course the deliberations of economic policy decision-makers, authorities and international institutions. The message I want to put across today is primarily that there are no simple solutions that would prevent a repetition of what we have been through. We must also realise that the spontaneous healing mechanisms in a market economy can take time to work. They probably need the support of better institutional rule systems, for example in accounting practice. At the same time, I would be cautious about intervening too much, for instance by complicating matters with rule systems or unduly detailed supervision by authorities. It is a question of striking a balance so that the sound forces in the economy are free to act while tendencies that may develop into a crisis are held in check. How this is to be achieved is something that market players and the competent authorities continuously have to consider and try out in the light of experience. 
 BIS Review 49/2002 1 J(cid:252)rgen Stark: Cyclical and architectural issues of the international economy Keynote speech by Dr J(cid:252)rgen Stark, Vice-President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the conference on the international financial architecture organised jointly by the Deutsche Bundesbank and the American Council on Germany, Frankfurt, 6 September 2002. *      *      * Dear colleagues and friends, ladies and gentlemen, Allow me first to join the previous speakers in extending a very warm welcome to all of you. I am glad to see how many managers and first-rate experts from the financial community as well as academics and others have found the time to attend this conference. Our subject today is the international financial architecture, including the state of the global economy and its interaction with exchange rate developments among the key currencies. We will thus have an opportunity to discuss some of the current major problems confronting the world economy. When initiating this conference at the beginning of the year, my friends from the American Council on Germany and I did not anticipate that, in the meantime, the economic and financial problems globally would become even more pronounced than they were at the time. In addition to disappointing economic growth in the industrial countries, we are facing a series of further financial crises in emerging market economies. Uruguay and Brazil have added to the list of ongoing debt problems. In this disturbing setting, a revival of stronger growth in the industrial countries and improvements in the functioning of the international financial system are of critical relevance for enhancing the living standards of the populations around the globe. I trust that this conference will make us see the existing challenges a little more clearly and that it will shed some light on how best to resolve the most pressing issues. In my keynote address, I would first like to discuss recent developments in the world economy before touching upon matters of crisis prevention and crisis management. I am looking forward to an interesting debate by the panellists, both among themselves and with the audience, about many of the issues which I shall try to identify. I. The state of the world economy Even though recent news about the world economy has not been exactly cheerful, let me start on a positive note. Judging by the data now available, the world economy remains on the road to recovery. Growth in the USA, in the euro area, in the accession countries and in emerging East Asia is positive at present, and there are good prospects that the upswing will become stronger. We should remember that the fundamentals in most of these countries are supportive. The combination of low inflation and low interest rates, in particular, should be beneficial. Also, in Japan the recession seems to have bottomed out. A recovery of the world economy from its recession was by no means a foregone conclusion. Nevertheless, the remarkable stabilisation points to strong underlying resilience, fostered by increasingly flexible markets and by timely policy responses. However, the mild recession has not managed to purge all of the excesses accumulated during the previous expansion. The recovery is currently accompanied by several ongoing adjustment processes, with disequilibria that built up throughout the 1990s still being corrected. Most visible and much commented on are the marked declines in the stock markets, which have lost further ground worldwide over the past couple of days. Moreover, the US dollar has depreciated against other major currencies, thus facilitating the necessary adjustment of the large US current account deficit. Equally, the reduced inflow of capital into emerging market economies should be seen as part of the correction of unsustainable trends. This applies also to FDI. Particularly in Latin America, the earlier high FDI inflows were in large measure attributable to privatisations of utilities, financial institutions and 
 2 BIS Review 49/2002 other enterprises, not to greenfield investments. With the supply of such investment opportunities declining, FDI inflows are bound to decline as well. Of course, we would be better off today if some of the imbalances could have been prevented. The correction of these imbalances now contributes to economic slack. This raises the question of the extent to which the build-up of the bubbles in the stock markets and, in some countries, on the housing market was due to overly expansionary policies. Whether central banks should try to prick such bubbles is open to debate. A good part of the current slack in the world economy reflects a return to more normal underlying conditions. Inflated expectations are in a process of being corrected. It is also true that we are moving through a recovery period in which the risks tend to be more on the downside than on the upside. Let me mention four potential downside factors. First, risk aversion has soared, as the credibility of profit forecasts has been dented by misreported earnings and uncertainty about the impact of stock options. In this jittery environment, any news that might further impair investor confidence can have a negative impact on the stock markets. The US Congress has been quick to take legislative action in an attempt to restore confidence in the US corporate system, where the problems emerged first and were most severe. But, since trust is easily lost yet difficult to regain, the current atmosphere is still characterised by nervousness and the fear of further scandals. Second, owing to weaknesses in the banking systems of some industrial countries, there is a risk of a deterioration of financing conditions. Those banks which, for some time now, have been exhibiting low profitability and are in the midst of restructuring seem to be especially susceptible to credit restraint. If the world economic situation remains subdued, an increase in non-performing loans might put their balance sheet positions at risk and require them to limit their exposure further. Third, with the US current account deficit remaining at high levels and the re-emergence of a fiscal deficit, it only can be hoped for that the adjustment process will be a gradual one. Finally, the heightened tensions in the Middle East, in particular the threat of an invasion of Iraq, have made the price of oil rise substantially over the last few weeks. Higher oil prices imply losses in the real income of oil importing countries, with an impact on investment and consumption. Persistent tensions in the Middle East could thus seriously dampen the economic recovery. Allow me also to briefly highlight recent developments in some major countries and regions, thereby identifying a number of other uncertainties. The US economy was growing at a brisk pace early this year and then expanded much more slowly in the second quarter. In particular, investment and consumption have not performed as strongly as one might wish. While the latest figures indicate that the decline in investment is bottoming out, capacity utilisation still remains at low levels. This points to a sizeable supply overhang, which cautions against the idea that investment will soon be acting as a significant stimulus to growth again. In addition to the uncertainty as to where investment is heading, consumption - which had been the main supporting force of growth in the US until recently - appears to be loosing much of its steam owing to slower employment growth and thus lower increases in real income. On the other hand, the negative wealth effects from the declining stock market have been offset by lower mortgage rates so far, enabling households to enter more beneficial debt profiles. However, as mortgage rates cannot keep on declining for ever, the wealth effects from the declining stock market will increasingly come to be felt as a drain on consumer spending. Incidentally, the corrections taking place in the world stock markets and in the financial statements of companies are shedding a new light on the (cid:147)New Economy(cid:148), which originated in the US in the mid-1990s. If you recall, the new paradigm had it that growth was strongly driven by large and steady increases in productivity, that in a world of rapid technological progress there was no relation between realised profits and share prices and that the business cycle was dead. The latest data indicate that productivity per hour in the US - where most of the (cid:147)New Economy(cid:148) was meant to have taken place - averaged a growth rate of 2 % in the period 1996 to 2001. This is still significantly above the average of 1.2 % for the preceding period from 1982 but certainly less than the figure of 3 % or more that was circulated not so long ago. To me, this downward revision seems to be a powerful indication that the wonderlands of the (cid:147)New Economy(cid:148), where the classical economic rules 
 BIS Review 49/2002 3 cease to be relevant, are still some way off. Yet, it also has to be conceded that the innovations in the ICT sector have been feeding through to the economy as a whole, enabling many people to work more efficiently. And, in the end, this will be the lasting impact of the ICT revolution. All in all, I conclude that the signals from the worlds(cid:146) largest economy are mixed at this juncture. However, while negative news have gained prominence over recent weeks, in my view the most likely outlook is a continuing expansion, although one that is more moderate than previously thought. Current cyclical developments in the euro area display a high degree of synchronicity with the US. Following negative growth at the end of 2001, the euro area has entered into a moderate economic recovery. Both monetary and fiscal policy have given stimuli. Owing to the extensive social safety nets, the automatic stabilisers have been the main channel of fiscal expansion. However, the strength of the recovery is disappointing. At the heart of the matter lies continued weak domestic demand. The euro area seems to lack the ability to initiate a strong and sustainable expansion on its own. This, of course, is intrinsically linked to the rigidities still present in our labour markets. In an environment of slow growth, the deteriorating fiscal positions of some European countries have prompted a debate on the future of the European Stability and Growth Pact. Any attempts to weaken the Pact are counterproductive and should be resisted. Fiscal discipline is a sine qua non for a satisfactory functioning of the monetary union in the longer run. The existing rules are simple and transparent and they give countries with sound policies sufficient leeway to let their automatic stabilisers work in a downturn. Instead of trying to weaken these rules, more attention should be paid to preventing them being fudged by creative accounting. If we look at Germany, which accounts for one-third of the euro area(cid:146)s GDP, the expansion has, so far, even fallen short of that in other member states of the euro area. Since emerging from its mild recession around the beginning of this year, the German economy has not progressed beyond the initial stages of a recovery and lingers in a state resembling lethargy. The fact that, after half a year of expansion, the dynamic factors have not managed to take root in any crucial way can be attributed to continued weak domestic demand, to the ongoing contraction of the construction sector and to the repercussions of strikes in the metal and electronic industries. The confidence of consumers and investors has not least suffered from the ongoing stock market decline, which is more pronounced than the losses in the US. This stock market effect was also an important factor in the third consecutive monthly drop in the latest  Ifo business climate indicator, which was released last week. However, even if the cyclical recovery were to resume quickly, Germany would not witness notably higher growth rates on a sustainable basis unless policymakers were to be more forceful in tackling the existing structural rigidities, particularly on the labour market. While the situation in the US and Europe is characterised by subdued optimism, the hoped-for return of growth in Japan is still uncertain. The deflationary situation persists. Moreover, the economy remains vulnerable owing to the high amount of non-performing loans. This burden hampers the activities of both the banks and their corporate clients. Nevertheless, recent economic data seem to indicate the beginning of a recovery, mainly driven by a pick-up of external demand - notably for ICT products. As about one-third of these exports are destined for the US, the strength of the recovery will depend substantially on the continued propensity of American firms and households to spend. The situation in the emerging markets is quite mixed. In the rest of East Asia the picture looks fairly bright. Partly due to rising intra-Asian trade and strong domestic consumption, several economies in East Asia were able to achieve impressive growth rates during the first half year of 2002. Similarly, the transition countries have been performing quite well on the whole. Most of these countries will grow this year at a similar brisk pace as in 2001 and may even grow a bit more strongly next year. The generally positive development in Asian and European emerging markets stands in stark contrast to recent events in Latin America. In Argentina the economy will contract by more than 10% this year and the social situation is still deteriorating dramatically. The situation in Brazil remains of particular concern, even after the announcement of a new IMF package. Equally worrisome is the situation in Uruguay and a number of other Latin American countries. Only Chile and Mexico appear to be relatively unscathed by the turmoil in the region. 
 4 BIS Review 49/2002 II.  Strengthening crisis prevention Recent developments in emerging market countries have made it clear that financial contagion emanating from crises in other emerging markets is much less of an issue today than it was a few years ago. Neither the Turkish crisis nor the Argentine default have sent out shock waves comparable to those of the Mexican crisis of 1995 or the Russian crisis of 1998. The spreads of countries in East Asia and Central Europe have scarcely been affected by the current events. Creditors and investors have apparently learned to discriminate better between individual borrowers. This change reflects, on the one hand, better information on country conditions and, on the other hand, a better risk assessment. It also reflects better macroeconomic policies and the implementation of internationally agreed standards and codes. However, we have no reasons for complacency. Even if sell-offs of emerging market debt as an asset class no longer appear to be institutional investors(cid:146) preferred response to a crisis, the impact of other forms of contagion should not be underrated. This can still be observed in Latin America. Of course, the sharp contraction of the Argentine economy has real spill-overs for its most important trading partners in the region. An additional transmission channel of the Argentine crisis was the run by Argentine citizens - as well as by residents of Uruguay - on their dollar accounts with banks in Uruguay after bank accounts in Argentina had been frozen. In the process, Uruguay quickly ended up with a dollar shortage and thus faced the risk of its banking system breaking down. Permitting the dollarisation of the banking system without ensuring that a commensurate amount of dollar liquidity would remain available in the financial system made Uruguay, not least, a victim of its own regulatory and supervisory weaknesses. When the Argentine currency-board regime was abandoned, contagion effects also resulted from the government(cid:146)s decision that the banks(cid:146) dollar liabilities had to be converted into peso at a much higher exchange rate than the assets. The banks could not anticipate such unfair treatment that implied huge losses. According to market participants, this unusual measure has noticeably increased risk aversion vis-(cid:224)-vis other countries in the region. Here, we have an example of what has been called political contagion: investors are afraid that other countries might feel encouraged to adopt similar disruptive measures. I conclude from the recent financial crises of emerging market economies that contagion can still be a problem for countries with weak fundamentals. Current turbulence in Latin America is therefore to a large extend a reflection of country-specific factors. In order to ensure a more stable development of emerging market economies and to contain the risks of contagion as much as possible, the international community has launched a comprehensive approach to crisis prevention. The strategy, developed by joining the forces of many international groupings and organisations, involves a number of institutional procedures designed to help identify the major weaknesses of individual countries and remedy them as soon as possible. First and foremost, reforms aimed at achieving sound monetary and fiscal policies will always be crucial to avoiding any type of balance of payments crisis. Experience has also taught us that the impact of a currency crisis will be exacerbated dramatically if external vulnerabilities have been allowed to take hold in the banking system. Moreover, emerging markets need to develop effective liability management approaches, aimed at reducing the role of short-term debt denominated in foreign currencies as well as limiting the concentration of amortisations within a short period of time. In the same vein of reducing foreign-currency risk, emphasis needs to be placed on the strengthening of domestic markets for long-term debt. It is obvious that in some emerging markets, the sustainability of macroeconomic policy adjustment remains an issue, (cid:147)because of the sensitivity of the economy to policy and the weakness of political support(cid:148) (B. Eichengreen). For that reason most emerging countries need to reinforce their legal and institutional framework. In this respect, protecting property rights by means of transparent and enforceable regulations is key. The rule of law helps to strengthen the fundamentals of any economy, as a reliable legal framework encourages domestic and foreign investors to undertake projects with long-term perspectives in mind. Moreover, building strong public institutions can help reduce uncertainties regarding future policies. In democracies governments change. However, changes of government should not undermine the proper functioning of the institutional framework. For example, institutions should remain committed to ensuring the transparency of the policies pursued. Institutions should also be designed to achieve a solid macroeconomic and financial environment. In particular, establishing central bank independence may be considered best practice. In countries where central 
 BIS Review 49/2002 5 banks have no comprehensive supervisory functions, establishing independent regulatory agencies could equally be helpful in ensuring effective regulation and supervision of financial institutions and markets. While this list of useful policy reforms can be extended substantially, I shall confine myself to one further aspect, namely to underscoring how important it is, in the interests of crisis prevention, to choose an appropriate exchange rate regime. The recent wave of international debt crises began in the mid-1990s. Most of the countries involved had previously maintained fixed exchange rates but subsequently switched to floating-rate regimes under the pressure of their balance of payments problems. Exchange rate fixings have, in fact, inevitable shortcomings at a time of increasing international capital flows. Under (cid:147)fair weather(cid:148) conditions, a fixed or inadequately adjusted exchange rate can be helpful in attracting foreign capital for financing current account imbalances if higher interest rates in the borrowing country are apparently not offset by a corresponding exchange rate risk. As experience has shown, however, fixed exchange rates cannot be maintained over the longer term if foreign creditors have lost confidence in the economic policy of the debtor country. Dramatic exchange rate depreciation then proves, first and foremost, to be a powerful means of accentuating crises, whereas a regime of flexible exchange rates might have helped to prevent the crisis in the first place. The fact that Brazil is being hit by a further capital account crisis in spite of its floating exchange rate by no means weakens the arguments for floating regimes. Brazil indexed a substantial share of its domestically issued public debt to the exchange rate of the dollar. When the current political uncertainties (relating to the presidential elections in October) triggered a depreciation of the real, the fiscal position deteriorated accordingly, thus raising suspicion among holders of Brazil(cid:146)s international debt as to whether the fundamentals were as strong as believed and whether the authorities would be able to service their external obligations as scheduled. The advantages of floating have therefore partly been thwarted by exchange rate indexation of public debt. I do not deny that fixed exchange rates may continue to function satisfactorily under very special circumstances. Also, countries less integrated into the international financial markets may be able to continue operating traditional exchange rate pegs quite successfully. In the interests of crisis prevention, however, these latter countries should not miss the right moment for a change of regime if their integration into the world financial system advances. III. Improving crisis management Direct crisis prevention measures of the kind I have mentioned are the first line of defence for ensuring a smoother longer-term development of the world economy. Nevertheless, in spite of all such efforts, further financial crises will probably occur in emerging market economies. How best to resolve future crises therefore remains an issue of utmost importance. Here, we need to find an appropriate balance between the role of official financial support and the role of private sector involvement (PSI). In the longer run, the proper functioning of international financial markets will only be ensured if private creditors and investors not only reap the benefits of their decisions and good luck but also bear the potential costs should developments turn out badly. The effective application of this principle is one of the fundamental preconditions that has to be in place for any market economy to function in a satisfactory manner. This principle is similar in importance to the need for price stability. Central banks are mandated de jure or de facto to contribute to maintaining the stability of the financial system and have therefore always been among the proponents of adequate PSI in crisis management. Official large-scale financing packages that sharply reduce or even eliminate the need for PSI would inevitably involve moral hazard on the part of both lenders and borrowers. However, bailouts would not only weaken market discipline and heighten crisis risk. Since the IMF ultimately gets paid back and investors might escape without taking a severe hit, it is the general public and particularly the poor of the debtor country that have to shoulder the full economic costs of excessive debt burdens. Reliance on bailouts is therefore also questionable on equity grounds. Although the need for PSI in the resolution of capital account crises has been increasingly acknowledged, practical progress in implementing this principle has so far been modest. The lack of progress owes something to the fact that the existing official framework for PSI, as adopted by the International Monetary and Financial Committee of the IMF (IMFC) at its meeting in Prague in 
 6 BIS Review 49/2002 September 2000, gives too much leeway for discretionary decisions in favour of extraordinary official financing. According to the IMFC(cid:146)s Prague communiquØ, the official response to capital account crises should distinguish between cases where debt restructuring appears unavoidable and other cases where the debtor country seems to be undergoing a relatively short-term crisis of confidence. Regarding restructuring cases, a consensus exists within the international community on a systematic application of PSI. This consensus implies, in particular, that private creditors should be treated in a manner that is comparable to bilateral official creditors (Paris Club) and that, among the group of private creditors and investors, no category of lenders should be considered inherently privileged. Furthermore, the framework rightly insists on PSI relying as much as possible on voluntary solutions. In this respect, it is helpful that the Prague communiquØ recognises the possibility of a temporary payment suspension in the event of private creditors(cid:146) unwillingness to cooperate fairly with the debtor country. Consequently, the IMF can continue to support a defaulting member country within existing access limits, provided the debtor is seeking to work cooperatively and in good faith with its private creditors and is meeting other programme requirements. In contrast to the strict PSI rules for restructuring cases, the Prague framework admits that exceptional access to IMF financing, combined with policy adjustment, would be justified in the event of capital account problems if and when the Fund believes that confidence among market participants can be restored quickly. In addition, the IMF may encourage private creditors to help contain such crises voluntarily. However, the Fund would have no coercive role should voluntary PSI in the form of debt rollovers remain unsatisfactory. While the Prague approach was applied successfully in a number of recent financial crises in smaller insolvent countries (Pakistan, Ukraine, Ecuador), the underlying distinction between solvency problems and liquidity problems quickly displayed its inherently political dimension when Argentina, the second most important borrower among all emerging market economies, was hit by a confidence crisis at the end of 2000. Early in 2001, the IMF - pushed by its major shareholders - provided exceptionally large financial support almost automatically, despite the serious doubts Fund staff must have had from the outset regarding Argentina(cid:146)s longer-term solvency. In September 2001, the IMF(cid:146)s exceptional financial support was even further enhanced. In November 2001, it was acknowledged indirectly that the approach taken in the case of Argentina was not actually in line with the Prague communiquØ. Anne Krueger, the Fund(cid:146)s First Deputy Managing Director, publicly made the point that, in her opinion, there remains a gaping hole in the international financial architecture as long as we lack incentives to help countries with unsustainable debt restructure their maturities promptly and in an orderly way. Given this gap, Anne Krueger justified bailout operations as the only available mechanism to deal with solvency problems of countries with complex and internationally significant debt burdens. In order to avoid this in future, she proposed the establishment of a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism (SDRM) that would copy some important features of national insolvency regimes. As proposed, the SDRM would have four pillars. First, following a suspension of payments, the debtor country would be temporarily protected from possible litigation by private creditors. Second, the mechanism would provide creditors with some guarantees that the debtor country would act responsibly during the stay. Third, providers of fresh money would receive some kind of preferred creditor status. Finally, the mechanism would enable a requisite majority of creditors to make restructuring agreements binding on all private creditors. If an SDRM existed, creditors would have incentives to reach agreement with the debtor of their own accord, so the mechanism would rarely need to be used. At present, similar but less effective incentives rely on the risk to creditors of being faced with a unilateral standstill, as acknowledged by the Prague communiquØ. However, optimism that an SDRM could be implemented soon would not be warranted. Many judicial and practical problems, including the role of the IMF in the SDRM and the scope of debt to be submitted to the mechanism, require further analysis. Also, an international agreement on the required legal basis would be time-consuming. At all events, the IMF(cid:146)s initiative has given fresh impetus to the international debate on improving crisis management procedures. G-7 Ministers and Governors joined that discussion quickly. In April 2002, they submitted an Action Plan which not only supported further work by the IMF on the proposed SDRM but also envisaged developing a market-based approach to sovereign debt restructuring as a priority. Their idea is that 
 BIS Review 49/2002 7 most objectives of an SDRM might be achievable on a contractual basis. The practical work is now being performed by legal experts from G-10 authorities in cooperation with a group of private sector lawyers. The contractual approach aims at designing a model template of collective action clauses that could be suitable as standard language for use in all international debt documentation, similar to some clauses already applied as market practice for international bond issues under English and Japanese law. As potential restructurings of international bank loans are handled satisfactorily by the London Club, the focus of the contractual approach is on sovereign bond documentation, but consideration will also be given to how the provisions might be designed for use in syndicated sovereign loans. It is the G-7(cid:146)s intention to finish this work, including consultations with emerging market borrowers, very soon - hopefully by the Annual Meeting of the IMF at the end of this month. In the end, all these efforts to enlarge and strengthen the tool kit for crisis management will not help very much to enhance the role of PSI as long as we do not succeed in limiting access to IMF financing more effectively. The Action Plan of G-7 Ministers and Governors rightly states that, given the planned development of a market-oriented approach to sovereign debt restructuring, they are prepared to limit official sector lending to normal access levels except when circumstances justify an exception. In this respect, the crucial question is whether it will be feasible to make the preconditions for exceptional access to IMF financing much more constraining than they are at present. The official community is agreed that debt sustainability, including liabilities vis-(cid:224)-vis the Fund, must be a precondition for all financing decisions of the IMF - whether taken within or above normal lending limits or whether addressing current or capital account problems. This requirement reflects the need to safeguard the Fund(cid:146)s resources, which must remain available for all member countries on a revolving basis. In a capital account crisis in which the country(cid:146)s government is the relevant borrower in international markets an assessment of debt sustainability has to address at least two aspects. In the final analysis, the IMF needs to form a judgement as to whether a realistic adjustment programme would enable the borrower to meet its external obligations in the medium term in full and on time. In this context, attention also has to be paid to the debtor(cid:146)s ability to internally generate the budgetary funds required for debt-service payments. However, all such debt sustainability assessments are highly conditional and prone to a wide range of risks. Unanticipated international or domestic shocks could change the dynamics of what was previously considered a sustainable scenario. Meaningful sustainability assessments should therefore incorporate relatively unfavourable assumptions about the development of key economic factors, such as GDP growth, interest rates, exchange rates and commodity prices. Nevertheless, in spite of much room for improving the analysis, sustainability assessments will always remain a matter of judgement. Positive debt sustainability assessment, together with a strong adjustment programme, should be the only key for exceptional access to IMF resources in a capital account crisis. However, owing to the inherent difficulties of distinguishing reliably between sustainable and unsustainable debt burdens, the IMF has used exceptional access as a rule rather than an exception in the recent past. Not surprisingly, in many instances the objective of helping to restore market access was not achieved and, what is more, this approach became the root cause of moral hazard and more volatile capital flows. In order to roll back the part played by exceptional access it will be necessary to introduce additional safeguards. In addition to a positive assessment of debt sustainability, exceptional access could be made dependent on convincing arguments that failure to provide such support might threaten the global financial system. If such systemic criteria applied, it would also have to be demonstrated why a temporary standstill (like a bank holiday in a national banking crisis) would not be a suitable alternative and whether any expected contagion effects would be better mitigated by lending to the crisis-stricken country rather than to the potentially affected countries. It remains to be seen whether the G-7 will be able to conclude its current discussion on exceptional access policy in parallel with the work on the contractual approach of sovereign debt restructuring. The new extraordinary financing package in favour of Brazil, which will be discussed by the IMF Board today, does not foreshadow a change of policy on the part of the Fund and thus makes me less optimistic that a satisfactory agreement on a reform of access policy among the G-7 will be achievable soon. So, the new Brazilian package has raised a lot of serious questions with regard to Fund policies. I am sure they will play a major role in our discussions today. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 1 Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala: The role of non-bank financial institutions in relation to monetary policy Speech by Mr Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Regional Seminar on Non-Bank Financial Institutions in East Asia Region, Bangkok, 4 September 2002. *      *      * I wish to congratulate the Securities and Exchange Commission of Thailand and The World Bank for organizing such an interesting seminar in Bangkok, and to thank them for inviting me to share my thoughts with you today.  I can see that the topics in the seminar will cover many important aspects of non-bank financial institutions’ operations -- ranging from the regulatory and supervisory framework to capital market development as well as the issue of governance. But I am the only person touching on monetary policy aspect. Monetary policy does affect an important part of your business, which is the bond market. Because the one factor reflected in the bond market yield curve is inflation expectation. Therefore, if the framework and the conduct of monetary policy result in low and predictable inflation, it will help curb volatility of the yield curve and support development of the bond markets. Change in monetary policy stance also directly affect interest rate and hence the bond market. Thus, it pays for you to understand monetary policy. Monetary Policy in Thailand In order for you to do that, I have to start by telling you about how the monetary policy framework has evolved here in Thailand. Since the end of the Second World War, Thailand employed the regime of fixed exchange rate one way or another. At the beginning our currency was fixed to the British Pound, and later to the US Dollar - first directly, then later via a basket with a very heavy US Dollar content. The regime had served us very well. It provided certainty for international trade, and it helped to attract foreign investment. We were able to maintain the parity with the US Dollar for more than 18 years until 1981 when we had our first devaluation. The pressure on our parity in the early days was slight. Thailand’s exports at that time were rice, rubber, tin and teak. Our production costs for those items were among the lowest in the world. However, beginning from the 1980’s, we began to industrialize. Our industrial exports which was only 33 % of the total exports at the end of the 1970’s quickly rose to 76 % in 1990 and even further to 86% today.  With industrialization, we began to find that our productivity did not keep up with our major trading partners, particularly the US, and pressure on the parity began to build up. Our domestic costs of production have never been flexible downward. To ask for a wage and salary reduction was unthinkable then - as it is today. Our only choice was to devalue. The devaluations that occurred were not always smooth. More than once, they brought on political tension, between those in the government who believed in it and those in the opposition, or even the military, who thought otherwise. In one incident, it even caused a change in the central bank governor. Finally, we had to float our currency in 1997. Since then, we have adopted Inflation Targeting as our monetary policy framework. A core inflation target was announced at between 0 and 3.5 % per annum. The central bank will regularly monitor economic changes and make forecasts. If we see that the rate of inflation has a tendency to exceed the range, we will adopt a tighter monetary policy stance by increasing the policy interest rate, and vice versa if we see it going under the range. The policy rate that we use is the 14 day repurchase rate.  
 2 BIS Review 48/2002 This is completely different, of course, compared to the days of fixed currency regime when interest rates in Thailand would move mostly in tandem with the US rates.  The change in the monetary policy framework therefore affects the financial environment and your businesses a great deal. Development of the bond market What other change also happened? One very important change that has occurred in Thailand is the rapid development of the bond market, which took off after the 1997 crisis. The bond market is an important tool for safety and soundness of the financial institution system. It allows the intermediation process to proceed uninterrupted when the banks are temporarily in difficulty. But more importantly, it helps with liquidity management. In the case of Thailand, the government throughout the 1980’s had been very disciplined in their fiscal policy. They maintained balanced budgets in most years. As a result, no new government bond was issued, as old ones were being retired. Without a deep and liquid government bond market, growth of corporate bond was also slow. When the crisis erupted, financial institutions that could not seek liquidity from the inter bank market were stuck without liquid instruments in hand. Some of them might have survived had the bond market been more active. After the crisis, the government had to issue massive amount of bonds to cover losses in the financial system. Today, the Thai bond market is therefore much larger, at 38 % of the GDP. We have a much more active market. What does an active bond market mean to monetary policy? I will highlight three points. First is the implication on transmission mechanism. When the central bank wants to change stance in monetary policy, it changes interest rate up or down. But it does not directly change the interest rates along the whole spectrum of the yield curve. It only affects the key policy rate, which in the case of Thailand is the very short-term 14 day rate in the repurchase market.  However, to have an impact on the real economy, there must be a way to transmit this signal all the way to the financial activities that determine economic transactions, such as business capital formation, household consumption and savings. The traditional channel is through commercial banks. And now we have another channel through the corporate bond market. This channel is poised to grow more rapidly in the future. The second aspect is that central bank also operates in the government bond market in its conduct of monetary policy. It can sell and buy bonds to pump money in or out of the system, through their open market operations. An efficient, deep and liquid bond market therefore will not only help make the intermediation process competitive and active - but also allow the central bank to transact in the market more effectively.  The third aspect is the function of the bond market in managing the capital flows. Emerging market economies when they are successful tend to attract capital inflow very quickly, and in very large quantity. Unfortunately, if things turn bad, the outflow of capital can also be equally quick and in as large a quantity. How can one better manage this volatile capital flow? To some extent, I think the risks can be mitigated with a well functioning bond market.  If we can make it function as a temporary reservoir to store the incoming water, and more slowly releasing it to the various users of fund within the country, at the right pace for absorption - if the market selection process can be made such that only the projects with really viable, economic prospects are granted the fund - and, if the foreign owners of fund can be persuaded to hold the instruments denominated in borrowers’ own currency, thereby shifting the position on the foreign 
 BIS Review 48/2002 3 exchange risks from the borrowers to the investors, then the bond market can be a safer channel for capital flows than the commercial banks. At this point you may disagree that if foreign investors in bonds want out, they will still sell the bonds, causing the prices to be sharply lower anyway. This is true. But price volatility in the bond market is still better than a run on your banks. Therefore an efficient bond market can help lessen the adverse impact that volatile capital flows may have on the financial institutions. A sound financial system is of course a necessary condition for the conduct of monetary policy. The role of non-bank financial institutions Let me now turn to the non-bank financial institutions. What can be your roles in relation to monetary policy? I can offer four suggestions. Number one, you can make yourself an efficient player in the market. The more efficient the competitors, the better the market is.  But in order to compete well, you will have to be well capitalized, well organized with good governance and risk management processes. Number two, you can help establish market codes and practices that conform to world standards. The market needs rules to ensure smooth trades and dispute resolutions, and to guard against manipulation. The industry has an important role to play in the setting of rules and codes of conduct. Number three, you can help ensure that the market has a wide variety of products. We should aim for a market that can offer many kinds of contract, to serve those needing to unbundled or rearrange all kinds of risks at competitive prices. And lastly, you can build for yourselves a good analytical capability. It will prevent herd behavior, and help to stabilize the market.  But more importantly, proper project analysis can ensure that capital is channeled only to the good projects. It can help prevent over expansion of businesses, over diversification and over enthusiasm that inevitably winds up as non-performing loans in the end. Ladies and gentlemen The task of the central bank in monetary policy is to ensure that it sets the right policy, and that its policy is transmitted through to the overall economy. The financial system through which their policy is transmitted must also be safe and sound. Non-bank financial institutions do indeed have vital roles to play here. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 1 Otmar Issing: Monetary policy in a changing economic environment Speech by Professor Otmar Issing,1 Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the Symposium “Rethinking Stabilisation Policy”, Jackson Hole, 30 August 2002. *      *      * I intend to focus my remarks on the challenges facing monetary policy in a rapidly changing world. I shall start by examining the nature of economic change confronting monetary policy in its daily execution. In the absence of an unambiguous mandate to maintain price stability and of a clear strategy to sustain it, the ongoing task of identifying the latest economic shocks may easily  distract the central bank from the need to maintain a firm sense of direction in the longer run. Next, I will advance an interpretation of why the transition to European monetary union – involving, by all standards, a state of acute uncertainty – could be accomplished in the smooth manner in which it proceeded. In this context, I will highlight the role of two complementary policy perspectives. These two principles of good policy are conducive to flexible and timely responses to unfolding events and, at the same time, insure policy against myopia and short-termism and keep it solidly anchored to its medium-term objective.  Cyclical and structural change Economic change – and the uncertainty which it brings about – has three dimensions. At the ground level, we have cyclical, that is transitory and/or non-structural, economic shocks coming along continuously. The theory of economic policy normally assumes that such shocks are ‘additive’ in nature, in that they do not pose a controllability problem for policy. Nevertheless, they have to be properly identified in real time. Econometric theory has spent decades devising sophisticated identifying restrictions to isolate different types of shocks from the tangle that appears in the data. The purpose of these exercises is to trace the propagation profile of exogenous impulses through the economic system. But nothing close to a consensus view has emerged. In fact, inference is often non-robust across various identification schemes.2  As a consequence, central bankers are given little guidance as to the nature of the stochastic disturbances which drive the business cycle on average. Of course, model-selection itself is at stake here, as competing modelling paradigms can only be put to a test – and discriminated – by matching their quantitative implications with the dynamic shock responses that one sees in the data. If the latter can only be generated on the basis of controversial identification restrictions, the empirical benchmark becomes elusive. For all these reasons, central bankers must exercise judgement when they encounter perturbations, and they cannot rely on any single approach to reasoning through the implications of such shocks.  At a higher level, and a lower frequency, we have structural change. This induces parameter – i.e. multiplicative – uncertainty, as innovations tend not only to persist, but become embedded in the coefficients through which key variables respond to exogenous forces. Monetary policy-makers, again, find themselves at a crossroads. For one thing, it is extremely difficult for them to decompose in real time what is due to structural change and what stems from normal cyclical sources of fluctuation, as these events tend to come together. But, more fundamentally, central bankers perceive the uncertainty surrounding structural variation as of a higher order of magnitude – and of a different nature – compared to the way parametric risk is treated in much of the literature. I believe this type of our measure of uncertainty is closer, in this case, to a Knightian concept wherein probability distributions for model coefficients cannot be articulated. A further source of uncertainty, of a strategic sort, stems from the endogenous – at times unpredictable – process whereby agents form their expectations. This process has a strategic, game-                                                      1  I would like to thank Massimo Rostagno for his valuable contribution. 2  Various alternative methods to identify monetary policy shocks generally produce comparable qualitative results, in the sense that inference is reasonably robust across a large subset of identification schemes. However, this does not appear to be the case for exercises aimed at identifying shocks to technology. Furthermore, there is some disagreement as to the extent to which different shocks have been responsible for output variation in the past.  
 2 BIS Review 48/2002 theoretic flavour as the central bank and its way to respond to the events is very much part of the picture, and in some way it is driving the formation of views about the future.   Incidentally, the identification of the disturbances stemming from cyclical, structural or expectational disturbances is further complicated by the ex-post statistical revisions which may at times overturn the empirical platform on which central bankers have to make their decisions in real time. And it is superfluous to remind this audience of the paramount measurement problems that cloud state variables such as the output gap, the NAIRU, the steady-state real interest rate which are of key importance in mainstream macroeconomic discussions.  Institutional change  Complexity reaches its climax in the presence of large-scale institutional change, however. This source of change is sufficiently rare in history to escape econometric testing, and sufficiently severe to impart a profound discontinuity in the data-generating process. Times of institutional change are times in which the signal extraction problem for central banks is most acute. Structural change may be associated with a widely dispersed range of expectations. These, in turn, may behave erratically and fail to co-ordinate on a focal point.  The ECB has some examples to tell in this regard. When the European Central Bank started conducting policy in 1999, area-wide back data were only scantly available, many statistical indicators were still under construction. More importantly, the presumption was that the creation of the euro area would itself imply a major regime shift. Therefore, the statistical patterns emerging from past data – if and when made available by aggregation of national figures – might not be informative of the structure of the new economic entity, or might even be misleading. Under such circumstances, it could not be taken for granted that private agents could immediately form expectations consistent with the new regime, and thus instability in behaviour could not be ruled out.  In some sense, we were studying the evolution of a moving object, which was changing for the very reason that it was being observed, as in the famous Heisenberg paradox. Real time misperception, false inference, Knightian uncertainty, all the usual professional hazards of central banking, plus something else seemed to be compounded – let’s be conservative – by a factor of three.  Indeed, the ECB did preside over a monumental transition. The money market, for one, underwent a historical transformation on the eve of the launch of the euro in January 1999. Eleven national markets, so diverse in terms of participants, operating conventions, settlement structures, credit facilities, had to merge into a unified trading area almost overnight. New payments systems for large-value transactions were implemented. Capital markets traditionally protected by currency fragmentation and national regulations were opened up to arbitrage and straight competition.  Yet, the transition was smooth and the abrupt switch in structural relations, which many observers had seen in the offing, did not materialise after all. Markets immediately recognised the new rules of the game. They adjusted swiftly to the new monetary policy environment. Since 1999, overnight rates have limited their fluctuations on the dates of monetary policy announcements to less than five basis points on average, a sign that policy was reasonably predictable.3 The 10-year break even inflation rate obtained from French index-linked bonds – a crude measure of inflation expectations – has consistently signalled the degree of credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy to maintain inflation in line with its announced definition of price stability. This indicates that markets have perceived our pattern of response to the events as transparent and consistent over time.  All this has to be measured against the magnitude of the disturbances which intervened in the course of the first three and a half years of our existence. Since 1999 the euro area has weathered a number of major economic or financial turbulence world-wide preserving a degree of monetary and economic stability that would have hardly been conceivable before the advent of Monetary Union. The euro area has gone through a sequence of energy price shocks with only limited and short-lived impact on inflation expectations. And a long trend of foreign exchange depreciation – recently reversed – as well as a marked correction in stock prices since early 2000 have done little to shake the confidence in the euro as a solid store of value.                                                        3  See V. Gaspar et al (2001), ‘The ECB Monetary Policy Strategy and the Money Market, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 47, July; and P. Hartmann et al (2001), The Microstructure of the Euro Money Market, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 80, October.  
 BIS Review 48/2002 3 Anchoring expectations in a changing environment How was all this possible? How could uncertainty of the highest degree fail to leave a mark in the records? In my view the ECB’s success in anchoring expectations right from the start has not fallen from the sky nor has it been entirely “inherited” from the past. Instead, I would argue, our success can be attributed in good measure to the ECB’s monetary policy strategy and the more general principles which underlie our policy making. Not least, it has been a reflection of our philosophy that markets are powerful, sometimes overwhelmingly so, but nevertheless in need to be guided by a central bank, not meddled with.  First, the way we committed ourselves to the overriding mandate to be the guardians of price stability in the euro area – which we received from an international Treaty – anchored expectations in a time of accelerated change. The ECB’s announcement of a quantitative definition of price stability – which is symmetric in the sense that it is incompatible with inflation as well as with deflation – was immediately acknowledged by our counterparts. It is important to add that price stability according to our definition is to be maintained over the medium-term. The medium-term orientation of our monetary policy strategy and our aversion to fine-tuning of short-term developments in prices and real variables has helped to provide a firm compass while the economy was sailing through the uncharted turbulent waters of 1999 and subsequent years. It deflected the risk that, amidst exceptional uncertainties, the central bank may itself become an additional source of noise. Ultimately, it provided a degree of leverage over expectations on the eve of the transition to the new currency that could pin them down solidly to the intended objectives of policy.4 The mandate and the independence that it ensures endowed the new institution with a stock of credibility that facilitated its operations and its interactions with the markets from the first day of monetary union.  Secondly, our strategy has helped to sort through a wealth of conflicting statistics and has provided a reliable roadmap and a sense of direction.5 We have built into our strategy two complementary perspectives over the workings of the economy, one in which money and credit are attributed a key role in the formation of prices. And one in which real variables receive pre-eminent attention as the determinants of price pressures in the short term, and where monetary factors are treated only implicitly. Under what we call the first pillar, we thoroughly monitor monetary and credit indicators on the basis of those analytical frameworks which can sensibly incorporate developments in money. Under this pillar, we announce a reference value for M3 growth which, if realised on average over the medium term, should in normal circumstances indicate that policy is consistent with the achievement of price stability. I shall return to this principle shortly, as it will constitute the focal point of my remaining observations. Under the second pillar we review a broad set of non-monetary indicators and assess their implications for price setting over a short to medium-term horizon.  These two mutually-reinforcing perspectives provide robust indications for a policy aimed at price stability, which survive the cross-checking of competing models and the rise-and-fall cycles of fashions in economic thinking.  Keeping a firm sense of direction  But how can a monetary policy framework induce prompt action in the face of ever changing circumstances, and at the same time maintain a firm sense of direction? Here there is clearly potential for destabilising mechanisms setting in. Constantly bombarded by economic news, a central bank risks becoming hypnotised by the latest indicator, by the markets’ likely reaction to the latest indicator, by the markets’ anticipation of the central bank’s response to the latest indicator, and so on into infinity. This mechanism can lead monetary policy gradually astray from its foremost role of providing a firm medium-term anchor for the economy.                                                        4  On the connection between a central bank’s predominant focus on price stability, its aversion on real fine-tuning and its credibility assets, see V. Gaspar and F. Smets (2002), ‘Monetary Policy, Price Stability and Output Gap Stabilisation,’ Paper presented at the Conference ‘Government and the Economy: The Pros and Cons of Counter-Cyclical Macro Policy’ (New York, 11 July).  5  For a more precise description of the ECB monetary policy strategy, see ECB (1999), ‘The Stability-Oriented Monetary Policy Strategy of the Eurosystem,’ Monthly Bulletin, January; ECB (2000), ‘The Two Pillars of the ECB’s Monetary Policy Strategy,’ Monthly Bulletin, November; and O. Issing et al (2001), ‘Monetary Policy in the Euro Area,’ Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 4 BIS Review 48/2002 So, at the risk of oversimplifying, let me now turn to consider two general principles of prudent monetary governance which may help central banks to reconcile the need for prompt action and a firm medium-term orientation.  First, a central bank always needs to tailor action upon the origin, the magnitude and the nature of the shocks which hit the economy from time to time. As I tried to argue above, this is a highly demanding exercise, because shocks do not come about with labels: they have to be identified first, in real time. But there are no shortcuts or excuses: no simple rules linking policy to one or two privileged indicators can substitute for an accurate examination of shocks and a careful analysis of their potential for transmission into prices over a sufficiently extended span of time ahead. A corollary to this principle is that the horizon for policy action cannot be set in advance, as I shall argue more extensively below. Second, a central bank can benefit from keeping an eye fixed on the single long-term compatibility condition that monetary economics has to offer to practitioners, free of model-specificities and restrictive assumptions. Namely, that over a sufficiently extended period of time money should grow at a rate which is consistent with trend growth in real output and the central bank’s definition of price stability. In more general terms, this principle embodies the ancient wisdom of the quantity theoretic law that it is the growth of money that ultimately anchors the development of prices. Each one of these two principles – if taken individually – entails some guidance for the monetary policy-maker, which, however, is partial. A monetary policy strategy – such as the one adopted by the ECB – can be seen to provide a robust framework for monetary policy decision-making, which heeds these two general principles in a way in which they reinforce and complement each other. The lesson suggested by the first principle is that disturbances have to be evaluated, as they come about, according to their potential for propagation, for infecting expectations, for degenerating into price spirals. And preventive action should not be delayed, as it becomes clear that shocks – whatever their origin – may take hold in the economy and evolve into inflationary or deflationary pressures over the medium term. The time dimension of these possible developments varies with the type of shock, the initial macroeconomic conditions, the prevailing financial sentiment, the international environment and many other variables. Therefore, the horizon for monetary policy cannot be set in advance. Sometimes it pays to look far ahead, beyond the average lag of monetary transmission. Sometimes, the economy can be expected to return to price stability within a much shorter horizon. In all events, a central bank has to ensure that expectations be quickly reverting to its declared objective of policy.   The policy recommendation implicit in the second principle is simple: do not ignore the information that monetary developments contain for medium-term price developments even if the relationship between money and prices may not come through strongly at shorter horizons. This principle also provides an antidote against the pitfalls of exceedingly forward-looking rules.6 Looking into the future with a vigilant eye, as the first principle suggests, is a fundamental element of good policy. But, by constantly looking ahead, one should not lose sight of the intended trajectory of policy and the need to act consistently over time. One should always be constantly aware of possible, inadvertent slippages from the intended long-term direction. In the end, monetary policy needs to ensure a path of money supply which is consistent with maintaining price stability over the medium term. Trends in money velocity can be incorporated in such a longer-term benchmark, to account for the evolving structure of the monetary exchange. But, in the end, there can be no sustained inflation without systematic accommodation in monetary aggregates.  The key point that I want to bring out here is that neither of these two principles can stand alone. Both are in need for mutual cross-checking. The first principle suggests that the central bank move its interest rate policy instrument in reaction to the disturbances that are considered to have implications for price stability in the medium term. But these actions – taken at successive points in time – may not prove to be consistent over time and could thus, cumulatively, result in systematic divergence from the desired objective. Thus, the course of policy followed in the attempt to counter perturbations via shock-specific responses needs to be ascertained against the straight line provided by the quantity theoretic reference of the second principle. If that line turns out to have been departed from for an extended period of time, then policy, sooner or later, has to be brought back onto the right course.                                                        6 A discussion of the problem of excessive forward-lookingness in monetary policy is provided in M. Woodford (2000), ‘Pitfalls of Forward-looking Monetary Policy,’ American Economic Review, vol. 90(2), 100-104.. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 5 Incidentally, it is worth noting that historical episodes of asset price ‘bubbles’ have tended to be accompanied by strong and persistent deviations from that reference line. Thus, a monetary policy strategy that monitors closely monetary developments and measures them against a medium term reference growth rate may – as an important side effect – also contribute to limiting the emergence of unsustainable developments in asset valuations. Asset prices, by themselves, are not a suitable goal for monetary policy. In the long run the relative price of assets is mainly driven by underlying real factors – e.g. technological developments and preferences – which cannot be controlled by monetary policy. But monetary aggregates and credit developments in situations of financial instability can signal to what extent consumption, investment, labour and price setting decisions are been affected by conditions of financial disorder, excessive euphoria or disillusion.       Conversely, the second principle too, if followed in isolation, is subject to potential difficulties. As first pointed out by William Poole more than thirty years ago, there are many short-term shocks to the amount of money demanded for each unit of nominal income, which monetary authorities would do better ignoring and accommodating. These unexplained innovations may be simply related to seasonal noise in the money creation system, or transitory forces driving around transactions habits. They may reflect reversible movements in the preference for liquidity, in- or out-flows of foreign exchange transiting through checkable accounts, or else. In the case of Europe, it cannot be ruled out that the process of financial integration may have affected the income velocity of monetary aggregates. In these circumstances, having to hit a constant rate-of-growth target for, say, base money on a near-term horizon would result in ample fluctuations in short-term interest rates. And this instability would likely be transmitted to prices and output causing unnecessary fluctuations in these variables. In this context, the first principle of good policy, prescribing a careful filtering of disturbances, provides important safeguards against such policy-induced instabilities. In fact, it underlies the ECB’s decision to adopt a reference value for monetary growth, which is not a monetary target. And it also supports the need to look at monetary developments from a medium-term perspective. Nevertheless, as long as money demand relationships are reasonably stable – as has been the case in Europe in contrast to the US – information from monetary developments should provide robust indications of medium-term price pressures. Paraphrasing an expression of Paul Samuelson, we were given two eyes: one to watch money and credit aggregates and one to watch everything else. Ultimately, these two policy perspectives are to be combined in a single strategy which subsumes them both in a unified – albeit complex – and robust framework for action. This strategy lends policy-makers an accurate perspective over the economy to respond expeditiously to the events, and at the same time insures them against systematic slippage. Concluding remarks I shall conclude with a number of observations which have been recurrent in my remarks above.  First: there is no simple escape for a central bank from a serious analysis of economic change, which comes in the form of shocks and noise. These changes are often opaque and present themselves in disguise, but they may contain information which cannot be discarded on a priori grounds. There is no escape to a serious analysis of economic perturbations. Certainly, following deceptively simple policy rules of one sort or another is no viable cure to complexity. Second: the change in money demand is one of the most difficult to decipher. Looking ahead, these shocks may even augment in number and magnitude – as has been the case in the US and elsewhere in the past – which would make filtering and reading the signals coming from money a difficult undertaking. But the central bank should not deny itself the opportunity to take advantage of all the information that they carry with themselves. The conviction that money matters and contains invaluable information for policy is shared across central bankers wedded to different monetary policy strategies.7  Third: while looking into conjunctural signals, a central bank should never fall prey to myopia and short-termism. Monetary theory has provided a compass for measuring how the course of policy has deviated in the past and will likely deviate in future from the straight line consistent with price stability                                                       7  See for example M. King (2002), ‘No Money, No Inflation – The Role of Money in the Economy,’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer; and L. Meyer (2001), ‘Does money matter?’ Homer Jones Memorial Lecture (St. Louis, 28 March), in Bank of International Settlement Review No. 25 (30 March).   
 6 BIS Review 48/2002 and a sustainable growth path. This quantity theoretic reference should be consulted regularly and taken seriously. Monetary policy cannot react mechanistically to monetary variables, and the weights that a central bank attaches in its considerations to the various headline measures of money supply are state-dependent: they cannot be set in advance. Thus, there may be extended periods of time in which observers do not detect reactions to monetary indicators. In our strategy, for example, the weights are conditional on the analysis of monetary shocks, which is conducted under the first pillar. This analysis is aimed at purging the developments in monetary aggregates of the noise with which they are usually observed. This analysis yields more reliable measures which can be used for policy orientation.  But if deviations in these measures of money from the long-run trajectory consistent with price stability are ample and persistent, a central bank should intervene, if the anchoring properties of money are to be reinstated and made operative.  
 BIS Review 48/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Economic volatility Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 30 August 2002. *      *      * Over the past two decades we have witnessed a remarkable turnaround in the U.S. economy. The aftermath of the Vietnam War and a series of oil shocks had left the United States with high inflation, lackluster productivity growth, and a declining competitive position in international markets.  But rather than accept the role of a once-great, but diminishing economic force, for reasons that will doubtless be debated for years to come, we resurrected the dynamism of previous generations of Americans. A wave of innovation across a broad range of technologies, combined with considerable deregulation and a further lowering of barriers to trade, fostered a pronounced expansion of competition and creative destruction.  The result through the 1990s of all this seeming-heightened instability for individual businesses, somewhat surprisingly, was an apparent reduction in the volatility of output and in the frequency and amplitude of business cycles for the macroeconomy. While the empirical evidence on the importance of changes in the magnitude of the shocks impacting on our economy remains ambiguous, it does appear that shocks are more readily absorbed than in decades past. The massive drop in equity wealth over the past two years, the sharp decline in capital investment, and the tragic events of September 11 might reasonably have been expected to produce an immediate severe contraction in the U.S. economy. But this did not occur. Economic imbalances in recent years apparently have been addressed more expeditiously and effectively than in the past, aided importantly by the more widespread availability and more intensive use of real-time information.  But faster adjustments imply a greater volatility in expected corporate earnings. Although direct estimates of investors' expectations for earnings are not readily available, indirect evidence does seem to support an increased volatility in those expectations. Securities analysts' expectations for long-term earnings growth, an assumed proxy for investors' expectations, were revised up significantly over the second half of the 1990s and into 2000.1 Over that same period, risk spreads on corporate bonds rose markedly on net, implying a rising probability of default. Default, of course, is generally associated with negative earnings. Hence, higher average expected earnings growth coupled with a rising probability of default implies a greater variance of earnings expectations, a consequence of a lengthened negative tail. Consistent with a greater variability of earnings expectations, volatility of stock prices has been elevated in recent years.  The increased volatility of stock prices and the associated quickening of the adjustment process would also have been expected to be accompanied by less volatility in real economic variables. And that does appear to have been the case. That is, after all, the purpose of a prompter response by businesses: to prevent severe imbalances from developing at their firms, which in the aggregate can turn into deep contractions if unchecked.  As might be expected, accumulating signs of greater economic stability over the decade of the 1990s fostered an increased willingness on the part of business managers and investors to take risks with both positive and negative consequences. Stock prices rose in response to the greater propensity for risk-taking and to improved prospects for earnings growth that reflected emerging evidence of an increased pace of innovation. The associated decline in the cost of equity capital spurred a pronounced rise in capital investment and productivity growth that broadened impressively in the latter years of the 1990s. Stock prices rose further, responding to the growing optimism about greater stability, strengthening investment, and faster productivity growth.                                                        1  These are earnings-weighted projections for S&P 500 corporations as reported by securities analysts to I/B/E/S, a financial research firm. The roughly twenty-year history of this series confirms a pronounced upward bias in these long-term projections of analysts of approximately 4 to 5 percentage points in annual expected growth. There is little evidence, however, one way or the other, of bias to changes in the rate of growth. 
 2 BIS Review 48/2002 But, as we indicated in congressional testimony in July 1999,2 "... productivity acceleration does not ensure that equity prices are not overextended. There can be little doubt that if the nation's productivity growth has stepped up, the level of profits and their future potential would be elevated. That prospect has supported higher stock prices. The danger is that in these circumstances, an unwarranted, perhaps euphoric, extension of recent developments can drive equity prices to levels that are unsupportable even if risks in the future become relatively small. Such straying above fundamentals could create problems for our economy when the inevitable adjustment occurs."  Looking back on those years, it is evident that increased productivity growth imparted significant upward momentum to expectations of earnings growth and, accordingly, to price-earnings ratios. Between 1995 and 2000, the price-earnings ratio of the S&P 500 rose from 15 to nearly 30. However, to attribute that increase entirely to revised earnings expectations would require an upward revision to the growth of real earnings of 2 full percentage points in perpetuity.3 Because the real riskless rate of return apparently did not change much during that five-year period, anything short of such an extraordinary permanent increase in the growth of structural productivity, and thus earnings,4 implies a significant fall in real equity premiums in those years.  If all of the drop in equity premiums had resulted from a permanent reduction in cyclical volatility, stock prices arguably could have stabilized at their levels in the summer of 2000. That clearly did not happen, indicating that stock prices, in fact, had risen to levels in excess of any economically supportable base. Toward the end of that year, expectations for long-term earnings growth began to turn down. At about the same time, equity premiums apparently began to rise.  The consequent reversal in stock prices that has occurred over the past couple of years has been particularly pronounced in the high-tech sectors of the economy. The investment boom in the late 1990s, initially spurred by significant advances in information technology, ultimately produced an overhang of installed capacity. Even though demand for a number of high-tech products was doubling or tripling annually, in many cases new supply was coming on even faster. Overall, capacity in high-tech manufacturing industries rose more than 40 percent in 2000, well in excess of its rapid rate of increase over the previous two years. In light of the burgeoning supply, the pace of increased demand for the newer technologies, though rapid, fell short of that needed to sustain the elevated real rate of return for the whole of the high-tech capital stock. Returns on the securities of high-tech firms ultimately collapsed, as did capital investment. Similar, though less severe, adjustments were occurring in many industries across our economy.  Some decline in equity premiums in the latter part of the 1990s almost surely would have been anticipated as the continuing absence of any business correction reinforced notions of increased secular stability. In such an environment, the relatively mild recession that we experienced in 2001 might still have been expected to leave equity premiums below their long-term averages. That apparently has not been the case, as the tendency toward lower equity premiums created by a more stable economy may have been offset to some extent recently by concerns about the quality of corporate governance.  * * * The struggle to understand developments in the economy and financial markets since the mid-1990s has been particularly challenging for monetary policymakers. We were confronted with forces that none of us had personally experienced. Aside from the then recent experience of Japan, only history books and musty archives gave us clues to the appropriate stance for policy. We at the Federal Reserve considered a number of issues related to asset bubbles--that is, surges in prices of assets to unsustainable levels. As events evolved, we recognized that, despite our suspicions, it was very                                                       2 Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 22, 1999. 3  For continuous discounting over an infinite horizon, k (E/P) = r + b - g, where k equals the current, and assumed future, dividend payout ratio, E current earnings, P the current stock price, r the riskless interest rate, b the equity premium, and g the growth rate of earnings. The relationship holds for both real and nominal variables. If k is assumed to be 0.6, the average over the second half of the 1990s (taking account of payouts made through share repurchases), a rise in the P/E of the S&P 500 from 15 to 30, with r and b unchanged in real terms, implies an increase in g of 0.02 in real terms. 4  If earnings are a constant share of output in the long run, then real long-term earnings growth is the product of productivity growth and growth in labor force hours. In this exercise, the growth rate of hours, driven by demographics, is assumed not to change; hence, the growth rates of earnings and productivity are the same. 
 BIS Review 48/2002 3 difficult to definitively identify a bubble until after the fact--that is, when its bursting confirmed its existence.  Moreover, it was far from obvious that bubbles, even if identified early, could be preempted short of the central bank inducing a substantial contraction in economic activity--the very outcome we would be seeking to avoid.  Prolonged periods of expansion promote a greater rational willingness to take risks, a pattern very difficult to avert by a modest tightening of monetary policy. In fact, our experience over the past fifteen years suggests that monetary tightening that deflates stock prices without depressing economic activity has often been associated with subsequent increases in the level of stock prices.  For example, stock prices rose following the completion of the more than 300-basis-point rise in the federal funds rate in the twelve months ending in February 1989. And during the year beginning in February 1994, the Federal Reserve raised the federal funds target 300 basis points. Stock prices initially flattened, but as soon as that round of tightening was completed, they resumed their marked upward advance. From mid-1999 through May 2000, the federal funds rate was raised 150 basis points. However, equity price increases were largely undeterred during that period despite what now, in retrospect, was the exhausted tail of a bull market.5  Such data suggest that nothing short of a sharp increase in short-term rates that engenders a significant economic retrenchment is sufficient to check a nascent bubble. The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble is almost surely an illusion.  Instead, we noted in the previously cited mid-1999 congressional testimony the need to focus on policies "to mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion."  * * * It seems reasonable to generalize from our recent experience that no low-risk, low-cost, incremental monetary tightening exists that can reliably deflate a bubble. But is there some policy that can at least limit the size of a bubble and, hence, its destructive fallout? From the evidence to date, the answer appears to be no.6 But we do need to know more about the behavior of equity premiums and bubbles and their impact on economic activity.7  The equity premium, computed as the total expected return on common stocks less that on riskless debt, prices the risk taken by investors in purchasing equities rather than risk-free debt. It is a measure largely of the risk aversion of investors, not that of corporate managers. An increased appetite for risk by investors, for example, is manifested by a shift in their willingness to hold equity in place of psychologically less-stressful, but lower-yielding, debt.                                                        5  Stock prices peaked in March 2000, but the market basically moved sideways until September of that year. 6 Some have asserted that the Federal Reserve can deflate a stock-price bubble--rather painlessly--by boosting margin requirements. The evidence suggests otherwise. First, the amount of margin debt is small, having never amounted to more than about 1-3/4 percent of the market value of equity; moreover, even this figure overstates the amount of margin debt used to purchase stock, as such debt also finances short-sales of equity and transactions in non-equity securities. Second, investors need not rely on margin debt to take a leveraged position in equities. They can borrow from other sources to buy stock. Or, they can purchase options, which will affect stock prices given the linkages across markets.   Thus, not surprisingly, the preponderance of research suggests that changes in margins are not an effective tool for reducing stock market volatility. It is possible that margin requirements inhibit very small investors whose access to other forms of credit is limited. If so, the only effect of raised margin requirements is to price out the very small investor without addressing the broader issue of stock price bubbles.   If a change in margin requirements were taken by investors as a signal that the central bank would soon tighten monetary policy enough to burst a bubble, then there might be the appearance of a causal effect. But it is the prospect of monetary policy action, not the margin increase, that should be viewed as the trigger. In a similar manner, history tells us that "jawboning" asset markets will be ineffective unless backed by action. 7  The sharp stock market contraction on October 19, 1987 of more than one-fifth requires especial further study. Equity prices rose sharply during the spring and summer, again despite the rise in short-term rates through late summer of that year. The price collapse clearly had some of the characteristics of prolonged and far larger bubbles, but stock prices quickly stabilized without significant effect on economic activity. And, in line with later episodes, the failure of the collapse to have an economic impact seems to have contributed to subsequent higher stock prices. 
 4 BIS Review 48/2002 In this case, the cost of equity confronting corporate managers falls relative to the cost of debt. With greater access to lower-cost equity, managers are able to finance a higher proportion of riskier real assets with a lessened call on cash flow and fear of default.  Thus, it is generally the changing risk preferences of investors, not of corporate managers, that govern the mix of risk investment in an economy. Managers presumably employ market prices of debt and equity coupled with the calculated rate of return on particular real investment projects to determine the level of corporate investment. To be sure, managers' personal sense of risk aversion can sometimes influence the capital investment process, but it is probably a secondary effect relative to the vagaries of investor psychology.  Bubbles thus appear to primarily reflect exuberance on the part of investors in pricing financial assets. If managers and investors perceived the same degree of risk, and both correctly judged a sustainable rise in profits stemming from new technology, for example, none of a rise in stock prices would reflect a bubble. Bubbles appear to emerge when investors either overestimate the sustainable rise in profits or unrealistically lower the rate of discount they apply to expected profits and dividends. The distinction cannot readily be ascertained from market prices. But the equity premium less the expected growth of dividends, and presumed earnings, can be estimated as the dividend yield less the real long-term interest rate on U.S. Treasuries.8  If equity premiums were redefined to include both the unrealistic part of profit projections and the unsustainably low segment of discount factors, and if we had associated measures of these concepts, we could employ this measure to infer emerging bubbles. That is, if we could substitute realistic projections of earnings and dividend growth, perhaps based on structural productivity growth and the behavior of the payout ratio, the residual equity premium might afford some evidence of a developing bubble. Of course, if the central bank had access to this information, so would private agents, rendering the development of bubbles highly unlikely.  Bubbles are often precipitated by perceptions of real improvements in the productivity and underlying profitability of the corporate economy. But as history attests, investors then too often exaggerate the extent of the improvement in economic fundamentals. Human psychology being what it is, bubbles tend to feed on themselves, and booms in their later stages are often supported by implausible projections of potential demand. Stock prices and equity premiums are then driven to unsustainable levels.  Certainly, a bubble cannot persist indefinitely. Eventually, unrealistic expectations of future earnings will be proven wrong. As this happens, asset prices will gravitate back to levels that are in line with a sustainable path for earnings. The continual pressing of reality on perception inevitably disciplines the views of both investors and managers.  As I noted earlier, the key policy question is: If low-cost, incremental policy tightening appears incapable of deflating bubbles, do other options exist that can at least effectively limit the size of bubbles without doing substantial damage in the process? To date, we have not been able to identify such policies, though perhaps we or others may do so in the future.  It is by no means evident to us that we currently have--or will be able to find--a measure of equity premiums or related indicators that convincingly presage an emerging bubble. Short of such a measure, I find it difficult to conceive of an adequate degree of central bank certainty to justify the scale of preemptive tightening that would likely be necessary to neutralize a bubble.  As we delve deeper into the questions raised by the developments of recent years, the interplay between structural productivity growth and equity premiums, so evident during the past business cycle, is bound to play a prominent role. We need particularly to determine whether the periodic emergence of market bubbles, which have occurred so often in the past, is inevitable going forward. As financial wealth becomes an ever-more-important determinant of activity, we need also to understand far better how changing equity premiums affect and reflect real and financial investment decisions. If the equity premium has so demonstrable an influence on our economies as it appears to have, the value of further investigation of this topic is evident.  * * *                                                       8  From footnote 3, k (E/P) = D/P = r + b - g, where D is current dividends. Hence, D/P - r = b - g 
 BIS Review 48/2002 5 In conclusion, the endeavors of policymakers to stabilize our economies require a functioning model of the way our economies work. Increasingly, it appears that this model needs to embody movements in equity premiums and the development of bubbles if it is to explain history.  Any useful model needs to credibly simulate counterfactual alternatives. We must remember that structural models that do a poor job of explaining history presumably also will provide an incomplete basis for policymaking. Often the internal structure of such models has been employed to evaluate the effect of various stabilization policies. But the results from models whose internal structure cannot successfully replicate key features of cyclical behavior must be interpreted carefully. The recent importance of movements in equity premiums and asset bubbles suggests the need to better understand and integrate these concepts into the models used for policy analysis.  I anticipate productive discussion of these and other issues related to stabilization policy over the next couple of days.  
 BIS Review 47/2002 1 David Carse: Anti-money laundering and the role of supervision Speech by Mr David Carse, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers, Hong Kong, 23 August 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Introduction I welcome the opportunity to talk to the Institute on the subject of the fight against money laundering and the role that supervision plays in this. This is a good time to speak on this subject since we are currently reviewing our 1997 anti-money laundering guideline in the light of the latest developments in this area. I will use this speech to highlight some of the issues that we are addressing. It is also a useful occasion for me to remind the bankers gathered here today how important it is to combat money laundering. This should really go without saying and I do not intend to dwell on it too much. The key message is that authorized institutions (“AIs”) should view anti-money laundering systems as an essential means of self-preservation - and not as a nuisance or an unnecessary expense that is imposed upon them. The events of 9/11 have heightened the international concern about money laundering. There is less and less patience with jurisdictions, and their banks, that do not comply with the international standards laid down by bodies like the Financial Action Task Force (“FATF”). The FATF has begun to “name and shame” jurisdictions that it regards as non-cooperative countries and territories (“NCCTs”) in tackling money laundering. Such NCCTs will be subject to sanctions if they do not come into line. Moreover, banks from NCCTs are caught under the newly enacted US Patriot Act. Such banks, and any others regarded as higher risk from a money laundering perspective, will be subject to increased scrutiny by their US correspondent banks and the US authorities. At worst, higher risk foreign banks could eventually find themselves shut out of the US payments system. Hong Kong has a good reputation internationally as a financial centre that takes seriously the need to combat money laundering. I am sure that you will agree that we all have a vested interest in keeping it that way - which means that we need to keep in line with international standards as they evolve. The role of the HKMA The role of the HKMA in this is to work with the other relevant authorities in Hong Kong - the Commissioner for Narcotics, the law enforcers and other regulators - to ensure that we have an effective framework to deter, detect and report cases of money laundering. Our particular responsibility relates to AIs. It is our job to verify that AIs have adequate policies, procedures and controls in place to enable them to: • identify suspicious customers and transactions; • report suspicious transactions to the Joint Financial Intelligence Unit (“JFIU”); and • assist the law enforcement authorities through providing an audit trail. We do this through issuing guidelines that lay down the minimum standards that institutions should incorporate in their anti-money laundering systems. We then carry out on-site examinations to check that these standards are being adhered to. This year we introduced a two-tier, risk-based approach towards examinations. In cases where AIs may be at higher risk of money laundering, we conduct more in-depth examinations using specialist teams. This may involve sample testing and visits to branches to look at how controls actually work in practice and to ascertain at first hand the knowledge and awareness of staff. In more routine cases, higher level review of anti-money laundering controls is conducted, generally as part of our normal risk-based examinations. We intend to supplement our own examinations with a system of self-assessment by compliance officers of AIs on risk indicators of money laundering within their own institutions and the quality of 
 2 BIS Review 47/2002 controls. This will be done using a structured self-assessment framework that we aim to release to the industry later this year. This should help the HKMA to conserve its own resources and direct them where they are most needed. But it should also serve to remind AIs that they have the primary responsibility for making sure that their own house is in order. The HKMA guideline Checking that standards are being observed is obviously important. But it is necessary to ensure that the standards themselves remain effective in dealing with risks. That is why we are currently engaged in reviewing our anti-money laundering guideline. In doing so, we are making particular reference to two main sources. The first is the paper on Customer Due Diligence for Banks issued by the Basel Committee in October 2001. The other is the consultation paper released by the FATF in May of this year on its review of the FATF Forty Recommendations that set the international standards on anti-money laundering. I would strongly recommend that all AIs familiarise themselves with both documents. Comments on the FATF Consultation Paper are due by the end of this month. The process of revising the FATF Recommendations will probably not be completed until some time next year. Final revisions to our own guideline will probably have to wait until then. In the meantime, however, we are reluctant simply to leave our existing guideline unchanged. There may be a number of areas where it is possible for it to be updated to reflect the current international consensus and to draw together pieces of guidance on particular issues that have appeared in circulars over the last few years. We are considering the best way to do this. One option is to issue a supplement to the existing guideline, pending the final revisions. Whatever we do will, as always, be the subject of consultation with the industry. In some places the revised standards may have to be tighter and permit fewer exceptions than at present. But we will try wherever possible to be sympathetic to AIs’ concerns on compliance costs. Terrorist financing The most obvious thing we need to do is to incorporate into our guideline specific recommendations relating to terrorist financing. In particular, we need to make AIs aware of their responsibilities under the United Nations (Anti-Terrorism Measures) Ordinance that was enacted in July of this year and will begin to come into operation in the near future. The New Ordinance is intended to meet Hong Kong’s commitments under the FATF’s eight Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing. To that end, it criminalises the financing of terrorism and associated money laundering and provides for the freezing of terrorist-related funds. It also imposes an obligation on AIs and other persons to report knowledge or suspicion that funds are linked to terrorism. We have already asked AIs to report to the JFIU suspicious transactions that may be related to terrorism. But the legal obligation to do so is now clear and unambiguous, as is the criminal offence of dealing in terrorist funds. AIs therefore need to ensure that they have the necessary measures in place to comply with the law. This is not an easy task. It is accepted that terrorist financing is difficult to detect even when AIs are provided with lists of terrorist suspects. The FATF published in April of this year a document called Guidance for Financial Institutions in Detecting Terrorist Financing that I would recommend you to look at. Among other things, this provides advice on the characteristics of financial transactions that may arouse suspicion, particularly when one or more of the parties is known or suspected to be a terrorist or terrorist organisation. Even if there is no evidence of a direct terrorist connection, a transaction should still be reported to the JFIU if it looks suspicious for other reasons. This obviously applies to remittances as well as the opening of an account. It may subsequently emerge that there is a terrorist link. Thus, success in the fight against terrorist financing depends in large measure on the overall quality of AIs’ controls against money laundering - in particular, their ability to detect suspicious transactions. 
 BIS Review 47/2002 3 The customer due diligence process This in turn depends on an institution’s knowledge of its customers and what is a normal pattern of account activity for a particular customer. It is crucial therefore for AIs’ to have effective systems for customer due diligence. The main essentials are already there in the HKMA’s guideline, which requires AIs to make reasonable efforts to determine the customer’s true identity. But the process may need to be articulated more clearly so that AIs are in no doubt about what they should be doing. The FATF’s Consultation Paper is useful in spelling out the main elements of the due diligence process, namely: • to identify the direct customer; • to verify the customer’s identity; • to identify the person with beneficial ownership and control, who may be different from the direct customer; • to verify the identity of the beneficial owner and/or the person on whose behalf a transaction is being conducted; and • to conduct ongoing due diligence and scrutiny. A number of features stand out from this. First, the process of know your customer is a two-stage process - identification and verification. Second, there is a clear obligation on institutions to look behind the corporate veil, nominee or trustee to the ultimate beneficial owner. If necessary, this means following the chain of ownership or control to the natural persons at the very end of the chain. There are obvious practical difficulties in this, which we can discuss with the industry. But the basic issue is whether it is safe for institutions to establish a banking relationship if they do not really know with whom they are dealing. The third point to note is that the due diligence process does not apply simply at the time the relationship with the customer is entered into. It must be an ongoing process using detection and reporting mechanisms that can pick up large or unusual transactions. The compliance officer appointed to take overall charge of the institution’s anti-money laundering efforts should play an active role in the monitoring process and should not simply be the passive recipient of ad hoc reports from front-line staff. It also follows that AIs must not only know their customer but also know their customer’s business and the source of funds flowing into the account in sufficient detail to establish a benchmark against which to judge unusual transactions. This information will need to be updated, where appropriate, over the life of the account. High risk customers There is a certain basic amount of checking that must be done for all customers. But some may pose a higher than average risk of money laundering to the institution and thus require enhanced due diligence. AIs should therefore adopt a risk-based approach, with policies and procedures for identifying higher risk customers. We shall try to offer AIs guidance on the type of risk factors that they should be looking out for. But basically these factors can be summed up in terms of: who the customer is; what he does; where he comes from and where he does business; and how the account is operated. Judged against these benchmarks, possible examples of high-risk customers that AIs should be on the look-out for, include the following: • politically exposed persons - these are individuals holding important public positions and those related to them. Banks that deal with corrupt PEPs expose themselves to risk of bad publicity, legal action and possible financial loss; • other types of private banking customer - particularly from those jurisdictions where the risk of money laundering is severe or whose business makes them more susceptible to money laundering; • correspondent banks - particularly those from NCCTs or other high-risk jurisdictions where there are doubts about compliance with FATF standards. Specifically, AIs should beware of 
 4 BIS Review 47/2002 so-called “shell banks”, which operate without a physical presence in their place of incorporation; and • corporate vehicles of various types - including offshore companies and trusts where the objective may be to disguise the beneficial ownership. Business introduced by intermediaries Even with a risk-based approach, the process of identification and verification is an onerous one. It is natural therefore that AIs may wish to rely on the due diligence procedures undertaken by intermediaries who introduce business to them. However, experience has shown that this can expose institutions to risk if the intermediaries do not do their job properly. In particular, in Hong Kong, there have been a number of cases where secretarial companies or company formation agents have opened bank accounts on behalf of shell companies without conducting proper verification of the underlying principals. There are cases of such companies being used as the vehicle for bogus investment schemes. We wrote to the industry on this last year, and the basic message bears repeating. While it is permissible for AIs to rely on intermediaries to carry out checks on the identity of potential customers and the source of their funds, the ultimate responsibility still rests with AIs to know their customers and their customers’ business. Intermediaries should therefore only be used if the AI is satisfied that they apply due diligence standards and procedures as rigorous as those of the AI itself and are “fit and proper”. It helps in this respect if the intermediary is itself regulated or is the member of a reputable professional body. The AI should monitor the track record of the intermediary and the performance of the accounts that it introduces. All relevant identification data used by the intermediary to verify the customer’s identity should be submitted for review by the AI. This latter requirement is not currently mandated for all intermediaries in our current guideline; and we will need to consider whether this exception is still appropriate. A further issue relates to the treatment of client accounts opened by solicitors or accountants. At present, we allow such intermediaries to rely on professional secrecy codes as a reason for not disclosing the identity of the underlying principals. Non-disclosure may be acceptable in the case of pooled accounts where the funds held by the intermediary are co-mingled at the bank. But where the account is opened on behalf of a single client, the justification is much less clear. Again, this is an area where change may be required. Existing customers As I have already mentioned, it is likely that AIs will have to upgrade their due diligence procedures in some respects to comply with changing international standards. Obviously, these enhanced procedures would be applied to new banking relationships. But this begs the question about what should be done in relation to existing customers. To what extent should institutions go back and undertake renewed verification of the identity of existing customers? Our current view is that we should not impose an across the board requirement in this respect, but it would certainly be sensible to review those existing customers who fall into higher risk categories. The six major banks in the UK have just announced that they will undertake a risk-based initiative of this type. I would encourage those AIs with a large customer base to do the same. Other triggers for review of existing records may arise when a customer undertakes a significant transaction and where there is a material change in account operation or customer documentation standards. The way forward These are some, but by no means all, of the current issues we are considering in the context of our revised guideline. We hope to have something ready for consultation with the industry later in the year. While this may impose new obligations on AIs, we will try to ensure that these are of a nature that well-managed institutions would adopt of their own accord. After all, in essence, they amount to no more than being sure that you really do know your customer. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s December report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 18 December 2002 *      *      * The Bank’s View2 Japan’s economy has stabilized as a whole, but there is still substantial uncertainty toward recovery. With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has almost come to a halt, private consumption continues to be weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is declining. While signs of recovery are still not observed in domestic demand, exports are virtually level.  The completion of the cutbacks in inventory stocks still underpins the increase in industrial production. But the production is losing its momentum with exports leveling off. Against this background, corporate profits continue to recover, but the pace is becoming moderate. While business sentiment on the current conditions is improving gradually, firms’ outlook is cautious. As for the employment situation, the overtime hours worked and new job offers are rising gradually. In addition, the number of employees, which widely covers various non-regular employees such as temporary workers, appears to have stopped declining gradually. However, as firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, household income continues to decrease noticeably due to, among other factors, an ongoing decline in wages. Thus, the employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared prospect for the overseas economy throughout next year is that it will follow a gradual recovery path. However, economic indicators in the United States and in some other regions are soft on the whole. Based on this development, the recovery in the overseas economy is likely to be anemic at least for the time being. Therefore, exports and industrial production are expected to be more or less unchanged for the immediate future.  With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income situation. Business fixed investment is expected to be supported by the improvement in corporate profits to date, but a noticeable recovery is unlikely for the time being due to, among other things, substantial uncertainty regarding the overseas economy.  Overall, assuming that the overseas economy recovers next year even at a moderate pace, the increase in exports and production will resume sooner or later, which in turn will gradually make the foundations of Japan’s economic recovery firmer. However, the economy is unlikely to show clear signs of recovery for some time, since exports and production are expected to be virtually unchanged for the time being while restraining forces such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, the downside risk on the outlook for the U.S. and other overseas economies continues to require attention, given that there are some uncertain factors including geopolitical developments and their economic implication. On the domestic side, stock prices remain unstable. Hence, the progress in the disposal of non-performing loans and its effects on stock prices, corporate finance, and the economy, should be carefully monitored.  On the price front, import prices are on the rise reflecting the earlier firmness in oil prices and depreciation of the yen. Domestic wholesale prices turned up slightly due to the increase in import prices and the improved supply-demand balances in the materials industries, although machinery                                                       1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 16 and 17, 2002. 2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 16 and 17 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 73/2002 prices and electricity charges are declining. However, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to decline.  Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are projected to be firm for the time being as the effects from the rise in oil prices and the depreciation of the yen still remains. However, the overall supply-demand condition is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently weak domestic demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in capacity utilization rates will support prices to some degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. Under these circumstances, domestic corporate goods prices, the new price indicator which will replace domestic wholesale prices from December, are expected to be virtually level for a while. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. While the growth in imports of consumer goods has stalled and thus is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices.  As for the financial environment, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is recently moving at around 20 trillion yen, as the Bank provides further ample liquidity. Under these circumstances, in the short-term money markets, the overnight call rate continues to hover at very close to zero percent. Moreover, longer-term interest rates such as TB and FB rates continue to be at low levels as a whole, although the markets remain nervous reflecting weak bank stock prices. Yields on long-term government bonds continue to move at around 1.0 percent. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds remain virtually unchanged. Stock prices turned up in late-November, but weakened again in December in line with a decline in U.S. and European stock prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average is recently moving at around 8,500 yen. In the foreign exchange market, the yen declined until the beginning of December reflecting the improvement in some U.S. economic indicators. Thereafter, the yen rebounded as the U.S. dollar weakened again on the whole due mainly to geopolitical factors. The yen is currently traded in the range of 120-122 yen to the U.S. dollar.  With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming more cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms have become slightly more severe. In the corporate bond and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with high credit ratings is accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms’ business fixed investment remains sluggish while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued is on a declining trend.  Meanwhile, according to business surveys, the financial position of firms, particularly that of small firms, remains severe. The monetary base exhibits a high year-on-year growth rate of around 20 percent. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock remains around 3.0-3.5 percent.  Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market conditions as a whole continues to be extremely easy. Long-term interest rates are low. The money stock and the monetary base maintain high growth rates relative to that of the economic activity as a whole. However, stock prices remain unstable. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment of firms with low credit risks is accommodative on the whole, but with regard to firms with high credit risks, the stance of investors is severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Hence, including the effects arising from government measures to accelerate the disposal of non-performing loans and to revitalize industries and firms, developments in the financial and capital 
 BIS Review 73/2002 3 markets, the behavior of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance continue to require close monitoring. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 1 Niklaus Blattner: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Prof Dr Niklaus Blattner, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002. *      *      * In conducting monetary policy, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) must be able to rely on a healthy banking system. We can consider only efficient and solvent banks as counterparties. Monetary policy can only be implemented effectively in a system made up of such banks. Furthermore, only efficient and solvent banks (including the non-bank Postfinance and the infrastructures for the settlement of payments and securities) can maintain efficient and secure payment transactions. The current bill for a comprehensive revision of the National Bank Law took this realisation into account. Overseeing the payment and securities settlement system is only one of the central bank functions spelled out in the Law. What is new, in particular, is the explicit requirement that the National Bank shall contribute to the stability of the financial system. By taking organisational measures, we already created better preconditions for fulfilling the expanded mandate in 2001. The Law and the organisation are moving in the direction taken by other central banks worldwide ever since they have increasingly identified the stability of the financial system as a necessary precondition for pursuing an effective monetary policy. In accordance with the revised Law, our close cooperation with the Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC) will be further expanded. The responsibilities will remain clearly delineated, however. The SFBC is mainly responsible for the supervision of banks and institutions, while the National Bank is entrusted with overseeing payment and securities settlement systems and promoting the stability of the financial system. Our activity in this area focuses on analysing the structures, the behaviour and the results in the Swiss banking system. Up until now, the National Bank was known primarily for its banking statistics. Furthermore, it frequently conducted and published banking surveys. We are now increasingly turning our attention to the analysis of topical issues, including a periodic analysis of the situation in the financial system. In so doing, we concentrate on those aspects which are relevant for assessing system stability. For this reason, banks are the main focus. Developments in the insurance world jeopardise system stability only indirectly at the most, e.g. in the case of a financial conglomerate. The situation in the Swiss banking sector The Swiss banking sector found itself in a hostile environment in the past few months. There was a slowdown in economic development. Hope for a prompt recovery was dampened. The number of corporate bankruptcies increased substantially compared with the previous year. Uncertainty surrounding company profits hit the stock markets with full force. As elsewhere, Swiss stock prices dropped significantly amid high volatility. While the Swiss market as a whole (SPI) lost 22% from the beginning of the year, the SPI banking index weakened by 30% and the share index of insurance companies plummeted by as much as 47% (as of 9 December 2002). What are the repercussions that banks are exposed to? The weak economy results in a deterioration in the quality of loan portfolios, and the collapse of stock prices has an adverse effect on profits. Banks not only suffer losses on their own securities portfolios. The stock market slump also has an impact on earnings from commissions and services. Lucrative services in investment banking, such as those in connection with IPOs or mergers, are less and less in demand, and the reluctance on the part of many investors – with the resultant lower turnover – cuts into the income from commission business. In the wake of falling stock prices, profits in asset management are declining as well. This is because a part of the fees and commissions levied on the assets under management is value- or performance-based. This year, the big banks recorded profit setbacks in most areas compared with year-earlier quarters, in some cases even considerable losses. This was especially due to the poorer results from trading for own account and to a decrease in investment banking business (new issues, mergers and acquisitions). Particularly insurance business accounted for these losses. In traditional banking business, notably in retail banking, the big banks recorded satisfactory results, however. The BIS equity ratios disclosed by the big banks clearly exceed the required minimum. 
 2 BIS Review 73/2002 Banks which concentrate on asset management are struggling especially with the repercussions of the poorer performance on the capital markets and costs, which have risen sharply just in the last few years. For banks primarily active in interest-earning business, economic development plays a pivotal role. As already mentioned, due to the slowdown in economic activity, a deterioration in loan quality and the resultant need for higher provisions is something this business segment must reckon with. Of some 250 banks which published their half-yearly results, two-thirds saw their profits decline vis-à-vis the first six months of the previous year. Thirteen banks even posted a loss; the remaining banks, however, recorded a rise in profits. The aggregate profit was down by 21% compared with the year-earlier period. Despite the regrettable case of Banque Cantonale Vaudoise, the overall situation is favourable as far as equity ratios are concerned: all banks continue to meet the capital adequacy requirements. The average capital ratios of all banks (excluding the big banks, September) exceeded the regulatory minimum by 79%. 98% of banks reported at least a 20% capital surplus. The overall picture can be characterised as follows: the Swiss banking sector suffers from uncertain economic prospects and the tense situation on the financial markets. Many financial institutions are forced to take corrective action. Measures taken range from cost cuts, streamlining the product line, decreasing risk exposure, continued tightening of risk and liquidity management to capital increases and mergers. For the most part, these measures are implemented without delay. Plans for cooperation on a logistical level and in connection with raising capital have become more attractive as well. It is to be hoped, however, that the reluctance to give up an often only presumed autonomy will be overcome sooner rather than later. The idea that a bank is only a «real bank» if it is itself involved in the entire value chain as much as possible is a thing of the past. Moreover, further development will depend heavily on the economic trend and the stabilisation on the financial markets. Two things merit particular mention: firstly, the capital ratio of Swiss banks is on a comfortable level overall, allowing them to act from a position of strength. Secondly, banks in Switzerland have mostly used the prosperous years since the end of the nineties to bring their lending business in line with the risks and to reform their liquidity and risk management. Under the current difficult circumstances, these efforts are now paying off. In other words, the problems facing the Swiss banking system will be solved. The banks in Switzerland have the necessary strength. Structural changes are taking place at a fast pace and are likely to progress even more quickly. The banking system may be undergoing radical changes, but is nevertheless stable. The role of the euro in payment transactions A little less than a year ago, the euro was introduced in the European Monetary Union in its physical form. In the summer of 2001, in the run-up to the launch of euro cash, the National Bank held talks with over 100 Swiss companies and associations querying them on their expectations in connection with euro coins and banknotes as well as their experiences so far with the euro as deposit money. Last summer, i.e. well over half a year after the introduction of euro cash, the National Bank conducted another similar survey. The purpose of this second survey was to gather information on the first experiences made with the new euro cash in Switzerland. The questions focused on the euro as a means of payment in tourism and in retail trade. In addition, export companies were again questioned as to their handling of the euro as deposit money. In this connection, the National Bank was particularly interested in the prevalence of the euro as a billing currency as well as the treatment of the foreign exchange risk. As had been expected, the introduction of euro cash did not lead to a sharp increase in payments made in foreign currencies. In the majority of the businesses we visited in the tourism sector and in retail trade, payments currently made in euros are approximately on a par with the ones formerly made in the original European currencies. Guests who stay for a very short period (overnight) pay in euros most frequently. The same applies to some tourists from the United States and Asia who make only a short visit to Switzerland during a tour of Europe. The traditional European holidaymakers, however, continue to change their money into Swiss francs. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 3 In practice, most businesses apply the current rate plus a margin of 2%-3% when payment is made in euros. The majority of businesses only accept euro banknotes and return change in Swiss francs; a minority also accept euro coins, giving the change in euros. The management of coins is made more difficult because most banks do not buy or sell coins. All businesses queried feel that the simplification brought about by the replacement of the former European currencies with the single currency is positive. With regard to the euro as deposit money, many export companies switched to billing in euros relatively soon after the introduction of the single currency. Consequently, this practice has not become significantly more prevalent in the most recent past. Invoicing in euros of exports destined for the euro zone is widespread. Producers of some niche and luxury products are an exception. They continue to bill in Swiss francs. Euro-denominated receipts are hedged in exceptional cases only; companies still consider hedging on the financial markets to be too expensive. What is widely practised, however, is so-called “natural hedging”, which means that receipts in euros are used to settle suppliers' invoices: primary products and raw materials from the euro zone are paid for in euros. Swiss suppliers have increasingly been requested to provide euro-denominated invoicing. It is unclear to what extent inter-company payments in Switzerland are effected in euros. There is agreement, however, that these payments have increased compared with last year's survey and that this trend is likely to continue in future. Wage and salary payments in euros are still not an issue. Employees would not accept wage and salary payments in euros. Furthermore, such a practice would result in substantial administrative complications (social security deductions and taxes in Swiss francs). The selective use of euros in place of the Swiss franc does not create any difficulty with regard to monetary policy. On the one hand, the bulk of payments in Switzerland will probably continue to be effected in Swiss francs also in future. On the other hand, under the current monetary policy strategy, a possible euro-induced decline in the demand for money will not lead to any problems either. Contrary to the previous policy of targeting the money supply, the steering of the interest rate the National Bank pursues today is not dependent on a stable demand for money. The National Bank realises, however, that, as invoicing in euros becomes more widespread, our export industry must bear higher exchange rate risks.  
 BIS Review 73/2002 1 Jean-Pierre Roth: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002. *      *      * The National Bank has decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.25%–1.25%. For the time being, the three-month Libor is to be kept in the middle of the target range. Owing to the low level of inflation, we have been able to ease monetary policy substantially since March 2001, having since then lowered the target range for the three-month Libor by a total of 2.75 percentage points. We took decisive steps in response to declining economic growth and the upward trend of the Swiss franc. Interest rates were last lowered on 26 July of this year. The imponderables with respect to the development of the global economy remain considerable, and a sustained economic upswing in Switzerland is not likely until some time in the second half of 2003. We are therefore maintaining our expansionary monetary policy and shall keep the attractiveness of Swiss franc investments low. This does not jeopardise price stability. Assuming that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 0.75%, average annual inflation is expected to lie between 0.7% and 1.6% in the next three years. For 2003, we are anticipating economic growth of just over 1%, while zero growth is to be expected in the current year. Economic activity In Switzerland, economic activity has stabilised somewhat in the last two quarters despite the delay in the global economic upswing. After having been on a decline during four quarters, GDP slightly exceeded the previous period's level in the second and third quarters 2002. Positive stimuli emanated from the development of exports and from consumption. Nevertheless, the economic situation in Switzerland remains tight. The deterioration on the labour market and the fall in stock market prices are depressing consumer sentiment and available income. Incoming orders and the order backlog in the export sector remain at an unsatisfactory level, a sign that the recovery in exports is still uncertain. Capacity utilisation in manufacturing and in construction continues to fall short of the desired level, while corporate investment activity is currently at a very low ebb. The present growth slump in Switzerland can only be overcome if both exports and equipment investment increase consistently. We expect exports to grow markedly in line with the international economic upswing in the second half of 2003. Equipment investment should follow with a slight time lag. Until the middle of next year, however, the Swiss economy is likely to grow only very moderately. Until then, unemployment could therefore continue to rise. Private consumption, which has long been the mainstay of economic activity, will pick up only slowly next year. Real economic activity should increase by just over 1% in 2003, while for this year we expect zero growth. Inflation forecast I shall now turn to the course of inflation and our new inflation forecast. Our inflation forecast of June 2002 (the green dash-dotted curve in the graph) shows that at that time we assumed, based on a stable three-month Libor rate of 1.25%, that inflation would gradually rise to 1.9% in the first quarter 2005. Year-on-year inflation, as measured by the national consumer price index, dropped to 0.3% in the third quarter 2002 from 0.7% in the second quarter. In October and November it rose to approximately 1%. These fluctuations are due mainly to changes in the exact points in time when data on clearance sales prices are collected. This is also the main reason why our forecast of June 2002 over-estimated the development of inflation in the third quarter 2002. Our new inflation forecast (red dashed curve) is based on the assumption that growth in the US will pick up again from the second quarter 2003 onward. The US economy is likely to achieve its growth potential stepwise until the beginning of 2004. In the EU, the upswing will take a little longer. We are not expecting a significant acceleration of growth before the end of 2003. We assume that the 
 2 BIS Review 73/2002 dollar/euro rate will remain at about the current level and that the oil price will be around $25 per barrel. On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain stable at 0.75% during the next three years, inflation should average 0.7% in 2003, move up to 0.9% in 2004 and reach 1.6% in 2005. Forecast inflation will remain below 1% until the end of 2004 except in the fourth quarter of 2002. In the course of 2005, however, a marked acceleration will set in, with forecast inflation reaching the 2% mark in the fourth quarter of 2005. The new forecast is consistently below that of June 2002. It reflects the delay in the economic upswing. In the new forecast, inflation will rise more markedly at the end of the forecasting horizon due to an even more expansionary monetary policy since June. Expansionary monetary policy to be continued At our last media conference, I pointed out that the National Bank must be prepared to react quickly to changes in the economic situation. When the delay in economic recovery became discernible in summer, we acted immediately by again lowering interest rates. Since then, nothing of basic significance has changed in our assessment of the situation. We shall adhere to our expansionary monetary policy in the foreseeable future. We will thus contribute to the economic rebound and continue to keep Swiss franc investments unattractive. The low interest rate level and the relatively strong growth of monetary aggregates currently do not represent a threat to price stability. Once a sustained economic recovery becomes discernible, we shall have to review our monetary policy and adjust it to the new circumstances. There is still no sign, however, that the time for this is approaching. On the contrary, the risks still point downward. Should the recovery in the US and in Europe be delayed or should the Swiss franc appreciate markedly, the expected upswing in Switzerland would be threatened. In such a case, the National Bank is ready to react by appropriate means. Under present conditions, however, our monetary policy is sufficiently expansionary. Currently, the risk of deflation is being widely discussed. As can be seen from our forecast, this risk is likely to be negligible in Switzerland in the medium term. Certainly, in the short term it is always possible for special effects, e.g. a marked reduction in the oil price, to lead to negative inflation rates in individual quarters. Nevertheless, we consider a continuously falling price level in conjunction with a strong decline in the demand for goods and in production improbable in the present circumstances. Our expansionary monetary policy and the flexibility of the Swiss economy would prevent such a development. In the present situation, however, other efforts are needed besides an expansionary monetary policy in order to maintain or to enhance the attractiveness of Switzerland as an industrial and business centre. The efforts aimed at a further liberalisation of the domestic economy may not be abandoned. Sectors suffering from structural problems must improve their competitiveness by means of consistent adjustments. Our experience with the monetary policy concept Let me briefly describe the experience gained with our monetary policy concept. We introduced this concept exactly three years ago. You are acquainted with the main elements: definition of price stability, inflation forecast as main indicator and target range for the three-month Libor rate as operational target. Overall, our experience with our monetary policy concept has been good. Recently, this experience was discussed at an internal conference. Since the new concept was adopted, we have widened the basis of our monetary policy decisions and further developed our analysis of indicators and models. The more extensive use of relevant information enabled us to react more swiftly and with more foresight than formerly to changes in the economic situation. Our monetary policy concept met with a positive public reception in Switzerland. The same applies to the financial markets and international organisations such as the IMF and the OECD. The concept has vastly improved transparency. By publishing studies on internal decision-making processes and the forecasting models used, we have made further relevant information accessible. The public is thus in a better position to understand the reasoning behind monetary policy decisions. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 3 So far, we have published our inflation forecasts regularly in June and December. We should like to take this a step further and will in future publish an updated inflation forecast after every quarterly assessment of the situation. This will further help to improve transparency. From 2003 onwards, we will also inform the public of our monetary policy by publishing new inflation forecasts in March and September. As in the past, we shall present our June and December inflation forecasts at our media conferences. In March and September, the inflation forecast will be published within the context of the press release on the quarterly assessment of the situation. Gold sales On 22 September this year, the Swiss people and the cantons rejected both the gold initiative and the counter-proposal. The National Bank, however, continues to implement its programme for the sale of half of its gold reserves. For the time being, the surplus gold reserves will still figure in our balance sheet. To date, approximately 660 tonnes of a total of 1,300 tonnes of gold have been sold. We see no reason to change our strategy: these assets are surplus reserves which are no longer needed for monetary policy and which may be put to another use. In order to use the reserves for other purposes, the gold is sold and the proceeds are invested in securities. We invest the proceeds from the gold sales in Swiss and foreign securities. The portfolio from the surplus reserves is thus less exposed to exchange rate fluctuations than the foreign exchange reserves. The earnings deriving from invested gold proceeds flow into the SNB's income statement and thus become available for profit distribution in favour of the Confederation and the cantons. As from 2003, annual profit distribution will amount to Sfr 2.5 billion. The profit distribution agreement concluded with the Confederation last April need not be revised. It already provides for an automatic revision of the situation in the event that the National Bank's earnings should permanently exceed the expected level.      Inflation Forecast December 2002 with Libor at 0.75% 2002 2003 2004 2005  Annual average inflation in % 0.7 0.7 0.9 1.6  
 BIS Review 102/2001 1 Bank of Japan’s December report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 20 December 2001. *      *      * The Bank’s View2 Japan’s economy is deteriorating broadly, as private consumption is weakening in addition to a decline in exports and business fixed investment. With regard to final demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) continue to decline and business fixed investment is also decreasing. Housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is on a downward trend. Moreover, private consumption is weakening recently. Industrial production continues to decline considerably, reflecting these developments in final demand and the still strong excessiveness in inventories mainly in materials. Corporate profits are falling and business sentiment keeps on worsening. The weakness in household income is becoming noticeable amid the decrease in the hours worked and the rise in unemployment, and consumer confidence is becoming cautious. Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, inventory adjustments in IT-related goods worldwide are showing steady progress, and this has strengthened the view that adjustments will be mostly completed by around next spring. However, as final demand of IT-related goods still remains stagnant, a distinct recovery in exports of the sector is unlikely for the time being. Moreover, the world economy has decelerated further since the terrorist attacks of September 11, and there is considerable uncertainty about future economic developments especially for the U.S. Therefore, such concern still exists that downward pressure may be exerted on Japan’s exports and production once again depending on the developments in overseas economies such as the U.S.  Meanwhile, with respect to domestic demand, business fixed investment is expected to follow a downward trend amid the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption will also continue to be weak along with deteriorating employment and income conditions and the more cautious consumer sentiment. Government spending is basically projected to follow a downward trend while domestic private demand generally weakens on top of the uncertainty about exporting conditions. Consequently, it may take quite a while for economic activity as a whole to stop declining, even though the decrease in industrial production may moderate somewhat in line with the progress in inventory adjustments such as of IT-related goods.  Overall, Japan’s economy will inevitably continue to deteriorate for a while. In this situation, continuous attention should be paid to the risk of a negative impact on the economy induced by developments in foreign and domestic financial markets. With regard to prices, import prices continue to decline reflecting the softening of international commodity prices. Domestic wholesale prices are declining faster from the effects of the fall in crude oil prices in addition to the continuous decreases in prices of electrical machinery and materials. Consumer prices are weakening owing mainly to the decline in prices of imported products and their substitutes. Corporate service prices continue to decrease. As for the conditions surrounding price developments, crude oil prices remain weak. Also, as the economy will continue to deteriorate, the balance between supply and demand in the domestic market will increasingly exert downward pressure on prices. Furthermore, in addition to the declining trend of machinery prices caused by technological innovations, the decreases in the prices of goods and services reflecting deregulation and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the                                                       1 This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 18 and 19, 2001. 2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 18 and 19 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 102/2001 possibility that weak demand will further intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring. In the financial market, the overnight call rate is moving around zero percent as the Bank of Japan provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the current account balances held at the Bank at above 6 trillion yen. Interest rates on term instruments basically continue to be level. The Japan premium remains negligible. Yields on long-term government bonds are virtually flat, and are mainly moving around 1.35 percent recently. As for the yield spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds, while spreads between bonds with relatively high credit ratings and government bonds remain mostly unchanged, those between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds continue to expand slightly. Stock prices are weakening recently. In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently being traded in the range of 127 -129 yen to the U.S. dollar, moving around the lowest level for this year. With regard to corporate finance, private banks appear to be more cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming more cautious. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the fund-raising conditions continue to be generally favorable particularly for firms with high credit ratings, although the issuing environment for those with low credit ratings is deteriorating. Credit demand in the private sector is declining faster mainly because firms are decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-on-year basis. As for the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued, the year-on-year growth rate has been slowing due to a decrease in the issuance of corporate bonds with low credit ratings. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued is declining recently, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  The growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) in November increased slightly from the previous month owing to a rise in demand deposits.  Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding costs for some firms are rising. Overall, the recent financial environment remains extremely easy in terms of money market conditions and interest rate levels. However, the fund-raising conditions of firms with high credit risks, especially of small firms, are becoming severe as private banks and investors are becoming more cautious in taking credit risks against the background of a growing number of corporate bankruptcies. Hence, the developments in the behavior of financial institutions and corporate financing need closer monitoring. 
 BIS Review 102/2001 1 Tanya Sirivedhin: The New Capital Accord and E-Banking Opening remarks by Mrs Tanya Sirivedhin, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the FSI Workshop for SEANZA's Forum for Banking Supervisors, Chiang Mai, Thailand, 3-7 December 2001.  *      *      * Distinguished Resource Persons and Participants,  Ladies and Gentlemen:  I would like to take this opportunity to personally extend a warm welcome to everyone here today, and to express our deepest appreciation to our distinguished speakers and panelists who have kindly agreed to share with us their knowledge and experience concerning the New Capital Accord and E-Banking. I would also like to thank the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements, for their efforts in co-hosting this workshop on frontier issues.  As is well known, the New Capital Accord is scheduled for implementation in 2005. Reflecting comments on the second consultative package, the draft third consultative package is scheduled for release early next year. Judging from the comments submitted in May, the new draft promises to be interesting and controversial. This is not surprising since it will mark what will be no less than the beginning of a worldwide revolution in the way financial institutions are managed, and especially how risks are supervised. The sophistication that comes with enhanced risk-sensitive capital charge should be an important incentive to drive financial institutions around the world to upgrade their expertise, organizational structure, database, IT system, and most of all their risk management process.  Speaking from Thailand's own experiences and limitations, we realize that both planned and unforeseen challenges will mark our path towards eventual compliance. As such, we have taken some initial steps to check the readiness of financial institutions to conform to the credit risk guidelines under the New Capital Accord. A full impact analysis will be conducted next year. Going some way to prepare for the more sophisticated methodology embodied in the New Capital Accord's treatment of credit and operational risk, we are requiring, as a first step in the same spirit, that financial institutions calculate market risk capital charge in 2002. Actual capital requirement will be made, tentatively, in 2003. Although the complexity of credit risk and internal rating approach will add new difficulties even after market risk is mastered, we believe this step will serve to focus the attention of top management of financial institutions and supervisors, ensuring they will stay alert to other complexities that follow.  In this connection, we would like to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Roland Raskopf and Mr. Jason George, who last October were kind enough to give Thailand's banking community excellent, and much appreciated, presentations on market risk, after which we received many calls from awakened private bankers for advice on how to plan the adoption in their banks.  I should also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to Mr. George, who spent three years at the Bank of Thailand as consultant to help us build up our supervisory capacity. Among other things, he helped to guide us and our banking industry through several hundreds of pages of New Accord documents. You should be proud that many of our people continue to refer to your advice and work standard which challenge us to tackle our own regulatory framework. Indeed, both of you have been an inspiration, and we expect you to do at least that in this coming week.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  Our common goal is to devise a comprehensible and methodical road map through a steep learning curve, in order to build up risk management expertise. This will place us on a sound footing, necessary for meeting the challenges of credit risk models in the Internal Ratings Based, or IRB, approach. Therefore expertise and database concerns remain formidable tasks toward IRB compliance.  Although there is no need for me to say this, given the credentials of this audience, the New Capital Accord is quite daunting for regulators. But fortunately, or rather unfortunately, depending on how one looks at it, globalization and technological development mean that none of us are alone in this journey. This seminar is an important testimonial to the case in point. It is with great hope and expectation that through cooperation, pitfalls will be avoided, and success only a few policy measures, studies, committees, and sub-committees away. This reflects the new emphasis on supervisory coordination. Once the system is up and running, supervisory coordination in terms of exchange of information, say 
 2 BIS Review 102/2001 on risk model validation, will also be crucial. For this reason, seminars such as this also serve to build useful networks.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  Let me turn now towards the second topic at hand, the issues surrounding new technological development, that is, E-Banking. Indeed the key driver of the financial landscape in the past decade has been technology. Innovations, both in finance and IT, have changed the boundaries of financial institutions' businesses, spurred vertical as well as horizontal integration in financial industry and related industries, increasing the numbers of mergers and acquisitions, and in turn, revolutionized the regulatory boundary conceptually and geographically. In short, the definition of what is a financial institution is being challenged.  Advancements in technology have ramifications for real applications in many Thai businesses, and the banking industry is no exception. Changes in consumer lifestyle are amongst major factors pushing financial institutions to implement technology-based services that will deliver traditional transactions in a more timely and convenient manner. Such a trend is evidenced by the fact that many Thai banks have invested a significant amount of resources modifying their technology systems to support new on-line services and to enhance efficiency and cost-effectiveness of their operations. A new dimension of competition has also emerged in the form of non-bank providers, begging the question of valid regulatory framework and forcing us to rethink our definition of financial institution and role of central banks  E-Banking represents a new challenge to the overall competitiveness of the banking industry. Notwithstanding the inherent risks of this cyber reality, potential benefits from such services are likely to outweigh its costs, and therefore we must resign ourselves to the role of supporting and nurturing this new tool. Such parental support will continue to include our duties toward systemic security, consumer protection, risk management, and privacy. Thus, E-Banking fits the a regulator's age-old conundrum of striking the right balance between regulatory oversight and innovation.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  I hope that I have presented to you an abbreviated version of the common challenge we all face. It is my hope that this seminar will provide us all with the opportunity to dip into the vast pool of knowledge possessed by our resource persons to provide us with new-found understandings, essential for strengthening our interconnected financial infrastructure, as well as close network.  Lastly, I hope you will have some time to see the beautiful Chiang Mai, orchid of the North.  It is with great pleasure that I declare the opening of this "SEANZA Workshop on the New Capital Accord and E-Banking."  Thank you.  
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 Hermann Remsperger: Monetary stability - institutions matter Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, at the first conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation, Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. *      *      * The first conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation is dealing with the role of institutions for monetary stability. This is certainly not a new topic. Economists have thought about this for centuries and have come up with a wide range of answers. While the questions remain the same, the answers change as the monetary and financial system evolves.  Rather than going into the details of each of the sessions, let me start the conference off by referring to two issues. The first concerns the involvement of central banks in safeguarding the stability of the financial system. The second is the relationship between fiscal and monetary policy in a monetary union.  In my view, a good opportunity to start thinking about price and financial stability is a paper by Friedrich A. Lutz on “The Basic Problem of the Monetary Constitution”, first published as early as 1936. Its starting point is the observation that money and credit are essentially two sides of the same coin as money results from bank lending.  On the credit side, competition between banks should ensure an optimal allocation of resources. On the money side, however, this competition could lead to an excessive creation of money and hence to inflation and instability of the financial system. As a consequence, money is best controlled by a monopolist, while credit is best granted by competing banks. The key idea of the Lutz paper is still interesting today, because it explicitly recognizes the link between price stability and financial stability. As Lutz himself emphasized, having two very different principles of order for each side of the balance sheet in the banking system does not appear to be a problem in normal times.  In periods of crisis, however, a problem appears. To quote Lutz once more: State guarantees for deposits and bailouts nationalize bank liabilities, while keeping the asset side in competition. To put it in today’s words: The result is a considerable moral hazard.  Lutz‘s insight may not be surprising given that he wrote in the aftermath of the severe banking crises in Germany and the US of the early 1930s. It is perhaps more of a surprise that his discussion seems to have been somewhat forgotten afterwards. As recently as in the early 1990s, conventional wisdom appears to have been “keep prices stable and you will minimize the danger of a financial crisis”.  After several financial crises, and in particular with the Japanese experience in mind, few would subscribe to this view. We have learned that it is not only movements in the general price level that matter, but also movements in a specific class of prices, namely asset prices.  The example of Japan shows that the price stability of the late 1980s was not sufficient to ensure financial stability in the decade that followed. Conversely, financial instability can lead to price instability, in particular deflation. Financial stability is therefore an essential condition for a successful monetary policy. Any central bank that wants to take its price stability mandate seriously also needs to have a direct interest in financial stability. We are therefore interested in developing tools that help us to ensure the stability of financial markets and financial institutions. Without financial stability, price stability cannot be guaranteed. Still focussing on banks’ balance sheets I would like to add that the money creation process through the asset side of the banks can be dampened or even endangered by a high volume of non-performing loans. That’s what we have learned from the Japanese experience.  And the experience in the Eurosystem has made clear that a strong expansion in monetary aggregates is not necessarily the result of a high increase in bank lending. A large increase in money supply may reflect a low monetary capital formation, which is heavily dependent on the expectations in the financial markets.  
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 Thus we have to take account of the fact that the financial system has become much more complex. In Germany, this has had essentially two effects. First, the role and size of financial markets have grown dramatically, providing both new sources of finance and investment opportunities. Although banks remain at the centre of the financial system, they are much more dependent on financial market conditions than in the past.  Second, our financial system is far more closely integrated with the rest of the world than it used to be. On the one hand, this provides both profit opportunities and permits a more ample diversification of risk. On the other hand, it makes us more sensitive to shocks from abroad.  Against this background, I believe it is worthwhile expanding the basic problem of the monetary constitution as described by Lutz. Whereas he concentrated on bank balance sheets we have to pay special regard to the ever increasing importance of financial markets. There might be a conflict between the interplay of market forces in the financial markets on the one hand, and financial stability on the other, just as there could be a clash between competition in bank lending and monetary stability.  The past has taught us that it is important to adopt a fairly broad approach when developing tools to protect the stability of the financial system. In particular, we cannot discuss this topic without looking at the institutional framework. Institutions matter. Any discussion that ignores this is of little use to the real world. Two issues are important. The first is, the design of the individual institution, and the second is the relationship between different institutions.  Let me focus on the second of these issues. The classical view of the relationship between institutions is to let each institution concentrate on its own task. For example, price stability would fall into the responsibility of the central bank, while the stability of the financial system would be the task of another government agency. Separating tasks, it is argued, makes institutions more accountable and helps to limit agency problems. While there is much merit in this view, we have become aware that tasks often cannot be separated so clearly.  Let us recall the example of the central bank and financial supervision. Under certain circumstances, there may be a short-term conflict of interest between price stability and financial stability. In some cases, low inflation may call for a cut in interest rates, while financial imbalances may warrant a rate hike. What should the central bank do?  If you take the idea of separating responsibilities to the extreme, the central bank should simply cut interest rates and forget about the impact on the financial system, the protection of which would be the regulator’s job. Few would consider such a policy optimal.  The reason for this is that a conflict between price stability and financial stability is not necessarily an agency problem. Instead, we may be faced with a short-term trade-off between price stability and financial stability. Strictly separating these two tasks could thus lead to worse outcomes than coordinating the tasks between institutions.  Most non-Europeans would stop here. In Europe, we have to consider an additional factor: the geographical dimension. Different institutions are subject to different jurisdictions. For example, prudential supervision is at the national level, monetary policy at the EMU-12 level, and the regulatory framework within which both supervision and monetary policy take place at the EU-15 level.  Let me turn now to the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy. It is not too long ago that interest rates in many countries were set by the finance ministry. One of the reasons behind combining monetary and fiscal policy decisions in a single institution was the idea that this would result in a better policy mix.  Today, in contrast, virtually all central banks in the developed world are independent, and it is hard to think of a country were the treasury decides on the level of interest rates. The last two decades have witnessed an enormous paradigm change on the role of central banks in monetary policy. What are the reasons behind this paradigm shift? A key insight was the expectation-augmented Phillips curve. It said that monetary authorities may have an incentive to trigger off a boom by relaxing monetary policy. However, you cannot surprise agents too often. They soon will learn to anticipate this expansionary bias and adjust their behaviour accordingly. The result is high inflation and no expansion. The way out of this time-inconsistency trap is to install a “conservative” central banker who sets interest rates independently.  
 BIS Review 72/2002 3 Central bank independence reduces the time-consistency problem, but it cannot prevent the possibility that monetary policy may be dominated by an unsustainable fiscal policy and thus be ineffective. This was first shown by the “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” of Sargent and Wallace in the 1970s and, more recently, by the “fiscal theory of the price level”.  At the EMU-level, the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy becomes even more complex. There is only one monetary policy for the whole euro area, yet there are as many fiscal policies as there are countries. As a consequence, in addition to the problem of a possible fiscal dominance, there is a free-rider problem as it is possible for countries to reap all of the benefits while bearing only some of the costs of an unsustainable fiscal expansion. This shows how quickly the geographical dimension turns into a political dimension, with important implications for sovereignty. The Stability and Growth Pact is the mechanism designed to mitigate this problem and thus an important part of our monetary constitution.  Let me conclude by saying that monetary stability consists of both price stability and financial stability. From this perspective the two-pillar approach of the ECB provides an excellent analytical framework. It does not only allow the ECB to integrate asset prices as an indicator of other variables in the second pillar. The ECB’s approach also allows it to analyse some aspects of financial stability within the broad framework of the first pillar.  As financial instability is very often created by a credit expansion that is too rapid, we have to pay particular attention to the counterparts of money supply. That is what Lutz told us many years ago. And that’s one of the reasons why I support the first pillar. In my view, the macro prudential element in the first pillar should be emphasized more than has been the case in the past.  
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent financial and economic developments in Denmark Speech by Mrs Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Annual Meeting of the Association of Danish Bankers’ Association, Copenhagen, 4 December 2002. *      *      * Virtually every report and article on the international economic development nowadays starts by describing the unusually high degree of uncertainty. Not only has the expected upswing been deferred once again for another year, but it has also become more common to hear expressions of concern for the economy's course in both the USA and Europe. The terms recession, depression and deflation make frequent appearances in the headlines, and are often used interchangeably to describe the fact that things are not going as well as we were accustomed to up to 2000. Economists apply these three terms to describe different concepts: • Recession is the least serious situation. A rule of thumb says that a drop in output for two quarters running is a “technical recession”. In the USA, the National Bureau for Economic Research operates with a more sophisticated definition of recession, based on the development in a number of macroeconomic time series. According to this definition, the Bureau noted a year ago that the USA went into a recession in March 2001. Whether this recession is persistent or has now ceased will not be revealed until the figures have been revised and closely analysed, with a timelag of many months, and perhaps more than one year.  • Depression is a prolonged period of abnormally low growth and high unemployment. So this is a far more serious situation than recession. The term depression is used in particular to describe the persistent economic crisis in the 1930s.  • Deflation signifies a drop in the general price level, i.e. the opposite of inflation. A situation with falling prices is dangerous, since it tends to have a self-reinforcing tendency. If sustained price drops are expected, purchases and investments will be postponed, and this in itself will deepen the crisis. The confusion regarding these terms is exacerbated by the fact that “deflationary” is sometimes used merely to describe a tendency for the economy to dampen. Lower growth is not necessarily a major problem, however. After strong growth and pressure on the labour market, a calmer period can be healthy. The challenge here is that not all countries have experienced strong growth with the related reduction of unemployment up to and around the millennium rollover. For many years, Japan's economic development has been alarmingly poor, and its state is close to depression. Moreover, Japan also experiences deflation, i.e. falling prices. Japan's economic problems appear very hard to solve by applying the traditional economic-policy instruments. In Europe, the German economic development in particular has given grounds for concern. Although remaining Europe's economic locomotive for many decades, since the mid-1990s Germany has experienced moderate growth and high unemployment. The international economic slowdown has further amplified these problems. At the same time, Germany faces a situation where a large budget deficit impedes an active fiscal policy to counter this development. Even the automatic budget reaction in the face of a further dampening will create problems for Germany's compliance with the budgetary requirements. What about Denmark? Do we have recession, depression or deflation? In fact we have none of them. Denmark did not reach very high growth rates at the end of the 1990s. We experienced moderate economic growth, but our employment situation was extremely favourable; in fact the labour market was under pressure. This situation has not changed significantly. 
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 The figures so far available indicate that Denmark's economic situation is robust, with some economic growth. The growth has been sufficient to stabilise unemployment at a level that is very low by European standards. Thus, so far the international economic slowdown has not presented noticeable problems for Denmark. The economic slowdown has generated debate within the EU with regard to the Stability and Growth Pact. It is criticised for inflexibility in view of the maximum permitted budget deficit of 3 per cent of GDP. However, this limit is just one element of the Pact. In order to stay on the right side of 3 per cent, the member states are committed to respect the medium-term budgetary objective of positions close to balance or in surplus. In the years of favourable cyclical development, there must be a sound budget surplus. This lends flexibility, i.e. “leeway”, when the business cycle weakens, and the automatic stabilisers come into play. However, if the deficit in the good years is already high, there is no margin to draw on when the economy weakens. In this situation, the limit of 3 per cent is reached quickly. The fundamental idea behind the Pact is therefore in the good years to create room for manoeuvre via a strong budgetary situation. In this case too, Denmark is actually a good example. For a number of years, Denmark's fiscal policy has contributed to creating a robust situation for government finances. Both the previous and the present government have maintained a sound fiscal policy with a satisfactory budget surplus. If Denmark's cyclical development also weakens, and unemployment rises, the budget will deteriorate when the automatic stabilisers set in. Lower fiscal revenues and higher expenditure on unemployment benefits are the classical examples of such budgetary reactions. Even if these effects are rather strong in Denmark, the underlying favourable budget situation will accommodate their impact. It is important to maintain this room for manoeuvre, and therefore there is no scope for any fiscal-policy relaxation. Danmarks Nationalbank has continuously emphasised the importance of a firm and consistent fiscal policy. This policy is vital to our credibility in maintaining the fixed-exchange-rate policy for which there is a broad consensus in Denmark. Over the years, many countries have been forced to abandon the fixed-exchange-rate policy due to speculation against the currency. But in virtually every case this speculation has arisen due to the country's lack of the will or the ability to adhere to the “rules of the game” for a fixed-exchange-rate policy. These rules impose requirements on the design of not only monetary policy, but also fiscal policy. For many years, Denmark's observation of these ground rules has been firmly agreed between the government and Danmarks Nationalbank. Today, the fixed-exchange-rate policy is so much embedded in our economic policy that it is actually no longer a basis for discussion. There is broad agreement that this policy has served us well, and after the rather chaotic foreign-exchange policy of the 1970s we have experienced many years of firm and stable economic development. Up to 1 January 1999, Denmark was part of the EMS, together with a large number of the EU member states. Our monetary and foreign-exchange policy adhered to the European standard, so to speak. However, all the other member states that were part of the old EMS have now introduced the euro, and we are the only one of the out-countries to participate in ERM II. Even though our policy is unchanged from the late 1990s, this is no longer an internationally well-known model. Therefore we have to do more ourselves to provide information on the goals and means of our monetary and foreign-exchange policy. We cannot just refer to the model. In principle, the fixed-exchange-rate policy is easy to explain. Currencies are traded twenty four hours a day, anybody can see at any time whether the exchange rate matches the target set, and no econometric models are needed to see whether things are on track. Danmarks Nationalbank's aim is to ensure that the krone's rate against the euro is stabilised close to the central rate within ERM II, and the exchange rate is the sole basis for our monetary-policy deliberations. Among market players there is a degree of uncertainty concerning the exact size of the decimals that Danmarks Nationalbank considers to be acceptable fluctuation. The banks often demand precise details. However, this is not something we are prepared to give. An exact description down to the final 
 BIS Review 72/2002 3 decimal place would eliminate the basis for the currency market in kroner against euro functioning as a real market, with the opportunity of profits and the risk of losses. In that case, Danmarks Nationalbank would quite simply take over the market's function. Our efforts are designed to ensure that the fluctuations are so moderate that for most ordinary business enterprises - in contrast to foreign-exchange dealers - they no longer even need to be considered. Our instruments are also well-known: intervention in the currency market and adjustments to Danmarks Nationalbank's interest rates. Although the market itself to a great extent stabilises the exchange rate Danmarks Nationalbank intervenes in the currency market when necessary, and on these occasions often for considerable amounts. Danmarks Nationalbank's interest-rate policy is fundamentally that we “shadow” the interest rate of the European Central Bank. This means that we raise or lower the discount and lending rates in line with the ECB. In addition, we adjust the interest-rate spread to the ECB in the light of the foreign-exchange situation. We take account of the krone's position vis-à-vis the euro, and whether there has been any sustained inflow or outflow of foreign exchange. These adjustments can take place concurrently with adjustments to the ECB's interest rate, or at other times. However, the actual decisions are taken on the basis of all of the information available concerning the currency market at that particular time. There is never an automatic reaction. During the past year, there has been great interest in placing funds in kroner, and we have mostly purchased currency. The foreign-exchange reserve has therefore increased by around kr. 50 billion. It has also been possible to reduce the interest-rate spread in relation to the euro interest rate, and this is now as low as 20 basis points. When capital flows are reversed at some point in the future, we are of course also prepared to sell currency. Those who are familiar with our operations will be in no doubt that Danmarks Nationalbank's currency defence will be extremely resolute in terms of both intervention and widening of the interest-rate differential. Danmarks Nationalbank must continually monitor the krone's position in the market, and the decision-making structure must be designed for decisions on intervention or adjustment of interest rates to be taken at any time. Danmarks Nationalbank has the flexibility required to be able to act immediately. In recent years, many central banks have introduced fixed published dates for monetary-policy decisions, but the fixed-exchange-rate policy is not compatible with such fixed decision-making dates. A central aspect is that measures can be taken immediately to halt any inappropriate exchange-rate movement in order to prevent a crisis from emerging. The situation in the currency market can quickly change. When conducting a fixed-exchange-rate policy, it is therefore not advisable to prepare the market for forthcoming changes in the interest-rate differential, as practised by many central banks with other monetary-policy objectives. Furthermore, we take the view that all parties in the market must have access to the same information, at the same time, from Danmarks Nationalbank. Danmarks Nationalbank's monetary-policy announcements are thus published with great precision via several channels simultaneously. No hints are given to certain groups capable of interpreting such messages. Danmarks Nationalbank therefore never comments on forthcoming changes, even though we frequently are asked questions in this respect. At the more technical level, we have ensured that the market participants receive information on the expected development in liquidity. On a monthly basis, Danmarks Nationalbank publishes estimates of expected day-to-day movements in the banks' overall liquidity, and at the same time releases information on the expected dates of Danmarks Nationalbank's sale or purchase of certificates of deposit. Additional information on the development in liquidity is published on a daily basis, giving market participants a good opportunity to prepare their positions, and to subsequently analyse developments. On this basis, there is normally no great uncertainty concerning the scale of Danmarks Nationalbank's interventions in the foreign-exchange market. Openness and transparency are generally given high priority in our modern society. For monetary policy these are also the means to achieve the credibility which is so essential for a central bank to 
 4 BIS Review 72/2002 implement the chosen policy. However, this must not be allowed to overshadow the fact that the safest path to credibility is over a long period to fulfil the promises one makes, or to put it bluntly: to practise what is preached. 
BIS Review 72/2002 1 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB.  We continued our in-depth assessment of monetary, financial and economic developments and the discussions we had in early November on the appropriate stance of monetary policy, taking account of the new information. Overall, since our last meeting, the arguments in favour of a cut in the key ECB interest rates have strengthened. The evidence that inflationary pressures are easing has increased, owing in particular to the sluggish economic expansion. Furthermore, downside risks to economic growth have not vanished.  As a result, the Governing Council has decided to lower the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points.  At today's meeting, we also reviewed the reference value for monetary growth, which has an important role under the first pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy. The Governing Council has decided to leave the current value unchanged at an annual growth rate of 4½% for the broad aggregate M3. This decision was taken on the grounds that the evidence continues to support the assumptions which have formed the basis of the derivation of the reference value since 1999, namely those relating to trend potential output growth of 2-2½% per annum and to a trend decline in M3 income velocity of ½-1% per annum in the euro area. We will issue a separate press release this afternoon explaining in greater detail the background to this decision. When comparing current developments with the reference value, it is important to remember that the reference value is a medium-term concept. Short-term movements of M3 do not necessarily have implications for future price developments. Moreover, deviations of M3 from the reference value must be analysed in conjunction with other real and financial indicators in order to understand their implications for price stability. Turning to the most recent data, in the period from August to October 2002 the three-month average of the annual growth rate of M3 was 7.1%, unchanged from the previous three-month average. M3 growth has been influenced considerably by portfolio re-allocations in an environment of general uncertainty and particularly by stress in financial markets. At the same time, it also reflects the low level of interest rates in the euro area which makes the holding of liquid assets relatively attractive.  There is ample liquidity in the euro area. However, in the light of the sluggish economic growth, it is unlikely that this excess liquidity will translate into inflationary pressures in the near future. The recent moderation of the growth in loans to the private sector, particularly to non-financial corporations, supports this assessment. Turning to the second pillar, recent information has strengthened the evidence of a decline in inflationary pressure. The sluggishness of real GDP growth in the euro area was confirmed yesterday by Eurostat's first estimate, which indicates that quarter-on-quarter growth was 0.3% in the third quarter. This was towards the lower end of expectations. Recent euro area-wide survey data suggest that overall sentiment in the economy remains lacklustre, with business confidence improving somewhat but consumer confidence falling further. It is expected, therefore, that economic growth will also remain subdued in the coming months.  This disappointing picture mainly reflects the persistently high degree of uncertainty. Geopolitical tensions with potential consequences for oil prices, developments in financial markets, the sluggish growth of the world economy and the persistence of global imbalances are all factors that weigh adversely on confidence. These factors also have negative effects on euro area consumption, investment and the labour markets. As it is hard to predict when this uncertainty will start to abate, it must be taken into account in the more medium-term outlook for growth. The subdued economic activity should limit potential upward risks to price stability and help to ease inflationary pressure. Let me elaborate on this. 
2 BIS Review 72/2002 First, when looking back, we recognise that inflation has been rather persistent despite the economic slowdown. This persistence has partly reflected a series of transitory developments, such as the indirect effect of previous oil and food price increases and a limited changeover effect. However, structural factors in the labour and product markets have also played a role, as mirrored, in particular, in the upward trend in wage developments observed until recently. This trend has only just shown signs of stabilisation. Services price inflation has also remained stubbornly high. Indeed, structural rigidities have impeded an appropriate adjustment of wages and prices. As a result, annual inflation rates have remained above 2% during most of 2002, including November, as has been confirmed by Eurostat's flash estimate, which indicates an annual HICP inflation rate of 2.2%.  Second, when looking forward from now until the early part of 2003, although recent developments in oil prices have lowered short-term price pressures, there are still some factors that could keep annual inflation rates above 2% for several months to come. Yet this short-term outlook is related both to base effects and to indirect taxes and administered prices, i.e. to temporary developments.  Third, when looking beyond the short term, we consider that both the overall economic environment and the euro exchange rate, which has strengthened since early this year, will contribute further towards reducing inflationary pressure. Moreover, we expect the indirect effects of previous increases in oil prices and other factors to further unwind. Although wage-related risks remain in place, they are judged less likely to materialise as long as the economic environment does not change substantially. The assessment which guided today's monetary policy decision was that, overall, the prospect has strengthened for inflation to fall below 2% in the course of 2003 and to remain in line with price stability thereafter. Our decision should also help to improve the outlook for the euro area economy by providing a counterweight to some of the existing downside risks to economic growth, thereby supporting confidence. The most likely scenario is that economic growth will gradually recover in the course of 2003 towards rates more in line with potential. Falling inflation should support real disposable income and, together with a reduction in the gap between perceived and actual inflation rates, should underpin private consumption. Moreover, we expect an improvement in world demand. This, and the low level of interest rates, should benefit investment.  Let me point out that, with today's decision, the key ECB interest rates have reached a very low level by historical standards. The Governing Council will continue to monitor closely all factors that may affect the prospects for inflation in the euro area.  The outlook for the euro area economy will also very much depend on visible progress in other policy areas. Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, I would like to reiterate that budgetary discipline strengthens the conditions for sustainable growth of GDP and employment. Therefore, sound fiscal positions, as enshrined in the Treaty and further developed in the Stability and Growth Pact, are in the interest of all the Member States. Given the disappointing fiscal developments in some countries and the challenges which have emerged to the EU fiscal framework, we welcome the moves to correct or prevent excessive deficits, i.e. the implementation of excessive deficit procedures in the case of Germany and Portugal and the early warning issued to France. Countries with remaining imbalances are urged to prepare sufficiently ambitious consolidation plans for their forthcoming stability programmes. Emphasis should be placed on a growth-oriented consolidation policy that strengthens the productive forces of the economy. The Governing Council considers the recent Commission communication to be a good starting point for rebuilding confidence in the budgetary framework. As already reflected in the Statement on the Stability and Growth Pact of 24 October 2002, we fully support the Commission's main objective, namely to improve the implementation of the Pact within the existing framework of rules.  Finally, I should like to stress again that there is still an urgent need to implement decisively the structural reform agenda. We note with some concern the slow progress in many euro area countries and call on governments to take determined action. The medium-term impact of these reforms on the economic growth potential of the euro area is likely to be substantial. A prompt implementation of structural reforms in the labour, product and financial markets is particularly important at this juncture since it would contribute to strengthening confidence in the euro area, thereby also supporting economic activity in the short term. We are now at your disposal for questions. 
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 The Rt Hon Sir Edward George: Changes in the financial services industry Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the 16th European Finance Convention, London, 6 December 2002. *      *      * Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen. May I begin by congratulating you, Claudio - and your colleagues - on organising such a remarkable 16th European Finance Convention here in London, spread over the past five days. I don't think I've ever seen such a distinguished and comprehensive list of speakers - ranging from politicians, central bankers and financial regulators and representatives of the international financial institutions, as well as representatives of private sectoral and specialist financial services trade associations and experts from commercial companies - all assembled on one program. I gather that the attendance has not been all that it might have been during the week. But perhaps that's not surprising: anyone with the stamina to attend even half of your proceedings is certainly a chronic insomniac. But those who have been here will have been rewarded by knowing everything there is to know about the recent development and current state of the financial services industry and how it might evolve. And they still have to listen to me! But don't despair - it's the last lap - and I'll try to keep it short! You have certainly had a great deal to discuss. The financial services industry - globally and not just regionally within Europe or nationally - has been going through a prolonged and continuing period of unprecedented change. There are to my mind two main drivers of that change - first, the progressive shift - within the industrial world but increasingly also over the past decade or so in emerging markets and transition economies - away from varying degrees of centralised economic administration towards an increasingly open, market-based approach; - and, secondly, the revolution in information and communications technology. The potential economic advantages of free market competition nationally, and its logical counterpart in free trade and the free movement of capital internationally are now pretty well taken for granted just about everywhere. While no-one would pretend it's a perfect guide, profitability is the best guide we have to allocating limited real and financial resources to wherever they can be most productively used. So it is - potentially - the most effective means we have of generating the wealth, and employment and rising living standards we all want to see. And liberalisation or deregulation - including liberalisation in the financial sector - needs to be seen in this context. Of course it cannot mean simply a free-for-all. Markets need to be fair as well as free if they are to function efficiently in practice - they need rules which minimise artificial or non-commercial distortions and the related resource misallocation that would otherwise arise. And they need rules that reflect public policy concerns, relating particularly in the case of financial markets to systemic stability, consumer protection and fair competition. I will come back to that. The second main driver of change in the financial services industry in particular is, as I say, the ICT revolution, which has made possible new financial instruments and investment strategies, new means of measuring, monitoring and managing risks and new - and cheaper - delivery, trading and settlement mechanisms and so on, all of which facilitate the greater competition and greater efficiency we need. These global influences are of course at work within Europe, like everywhere else. But change in Europe in particular is being driven also by two Europe-specific factors - the single European market program, which is essentially an advanced, regional, form of the broader international shift towards free trade and the freedom of capital movement; - and the introduction of the euro, which, by eliminating currency risk between the participating countries, is making a substantial further contribution to increasing the depth and liquidity of European financial markets, including the (small-E) euro markets here in London. These four key elements provide the context for the ongoing current debate on how best we can promote the single, integrated, European financial market - and I mean by “we” not just the authorities, 
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 who have an interest in the macro-economic efficiency of the market, but also market participants themselves, who stand to benefit at the micro-economic level from the new opportunities it will provide. But before I move on to that question perhaps I might go off at what may seem something of a tangent, and reflect briefly upon our own experience here in the UK as we moved - in fits and starts certainly but in the same general direction - from a heavily administered economic and financial system to one which is now very much market based. Even before I started at the Bank 40 years ago post-war controls had largely been dismantled. But the economic and financial system was still governed by all kinds of direct controls - exchange controls, credit ceilings - coupled with directional guidance, business restrictions - on the activities of building societies for example, the queuing of equity issuance, prices and incomes policies, public ownership of large parts of industry, and so on - all of which have now gone. It's true that plenty of regulation remains - reflecting public policy concerns relating essentially to competition, consumer protection and systemic stability. Indeed it has intensified in these areas. It's hard now to imagine that we had no formal banking supervision at all in this country until about twenty years ago. But for the most part such regulation today does not tell us what we can and cannot do, rather it sets the criteria that we must meet, and the behavioural standards we are expected to observe, in doing whatever it is that we choose to do. It leaves much more room for both consumer and producer choice, including producers from overseas, and much more room, and more incentive, therefore for competition and innovation. And, in that less prescriptive, more permissive, environment, the new technologies have brought about massive changes in traded instruments, in the way in which markets operate and are organised and in payments, settlements and delivery arrangements and so on, which, while not without occasional problems, have overwhelmingly on balance brought massive benefits in terms of market efficiency. In reflecting on this whole process in the UK, there are a number of characteristics of the general approach that I think have been important. The first relates to the extent to which it was market-driven. No attempt was made as far as I am aware - certainly not by the Bank - to tell market players what they should do individually or in organising themselves collectively. Of course we followed what they were getting up to very closely, and always stood ready to help when we were called upon by the markets to do so, as we occasionally were, intervening on our own initiative only to ensure that the public interest was properly respected. For the most part we took the view that market participants know better than we do what will work and what won't; it is after all their salaries if not their jobs that are on the line. Where public policy issues were involved, we established a tradition of extensive consultation right across the relevant sections of the market - a tradition which the FSA has certainly maintained. In the UK's relatively well-developed markets - particularly the wholesale markets - we recognised early on that where intervention was judged to be necessary - in the interest of market transparency or of prudential or behavioural conduct for example - it needed to be informed by those who properly understood the subtleties of the market if we were to reduce the risk of unforeseen consequences which could either frustrate the purpose of the intervention or unnecessarily obstruct market innovation. In some instances this approach, which I suppose might be described as market-sensitive, involved encouraging the market itself to address the particular issue in question as a preferable alternative to official action. I think of the Takeover Panel, for example, or the work of people like Adrian Cadbury - under the auspices of the Stock Exchange - in developing corporate governance standards, or of the professional organisations which set and police accountancy rules. A similar approach was followed in relation to many commercial banking issues - through approved codes of conduct in relation to their dealings with customers accompanied by an ombudsman scheme. We were in this country sensitive to the need to distinguish between different aspects of financial market activity - very obviously in the case of the distinction between wholesale and retail activity - in trying to find the most appropriate ways of reflecting legitimate public concerns. Where there has been official intervention, it has, again by now well-established tradition, sought to avoid discrimination - whether between different types of financial institution or in the form of protective nationalism in favour of British-owned businesses, provided everyone undertaking a particular activity played by the same rules. That approach has not necessarily always been popular, I have to say, with some of those who might have benefited from such discrimination! But it is certainly one of the reasons for London's attraction as an international financial centre including its attraction to so many financial companies from elsewhere in Europe. And that international presence in turn contributes enormously to the efficiency of the London market - and indeed the European market of which we are very much a part. 
 BIS Review 72/2002 3 Chairman, I could go on reflecting on our own experience of all this - but I'm conscious that the weekend beckons - and the relevant question is how it all relates to the development of the single financial market across Europe. The potential benefits of integration I take for granted. The continuing debate is about how - given that we all start from different positions and with different traditions and with different public policy priorities, we get from here to there. It may well be that continuous public pressure for higher and higher standards in financial markets everywhere are leading to greater official intervention any way. But integration was itself always bound to involve more intervention as the EU member states moved towards some degree of harmonisation of standards, requiring legal agreement at the European level and then reflected in national legislation. And a great deal of progress has, of course, already been made in that direction through the Financial Services Action Plan which is due in principle to be completed in 2005. But everyone accepts that a great deal remains to be done - in the context of the integration agenda - and in fact it is bound to be an ongoing process as markets evolve and new issues arise. In that context the recent agreement on Alexandre Lamfalussy's proposals for a faster track procedure in securities markets has been generally welcomed. But the on-going debate extends beyond that to where more precisely we want to get to. At one extreme - and I exaggerate to make the point - some appear to have a vision of maximum harmonisation across the EU, with uniform regulation and centralised oversight at some point in the future, whereas others lean more towards harmonisation only to the extent to which it is demonstrably necessary, with mutual recognition, and an EU-wide passport based primarily on the removal of barriers to cross-border activity. Of course that approach leaves plenty of room for debate about what exactly “demonstrably necessary” means. Underlying the debate at that level are legitimate differences in priorities as between the different public policy concerns - how much weight to put upon consumer protection as against systemic stability or freer competition, for example, which are not necessarily easy to resolve even at the national level. And there may - just possibly - also be, less legitimate, differing perceptions of national self interest. The truth is that there are no easy answers, and I think myself that we are bound to move forward in a pragmatic, incremental, way - recognising the different considerations that apply in different areas of the markets rather than on the basis of a grand design. In this context, I am actually rather encouraged by the recent discussion papers put out by Eurofi and the Wicks group, which stand back a little from the more immediate issues and look at the way forward in a broader - and longer-term - perspective. They seem to me to have quite a lot in common in terms of immediate priorities, although there are important differences in terms of where we may ultimately end up. I welcome in particular their shared emphasis on involving practitioners in consultation on the way forward at every stage - indeed we might have made more progress if that procedure had been more generally adopted hitherto. I welcome also the emphasis in the Eurofi paper on evolution - which is implicit too in Wicks - but I am less sure about the Eurofi presumption at this point of necessary and inevitable progression towards eventual centralisation. But, whatever one's views about the particular suggestions and proposals in the two papers the really important thing is that the issues they raise should be debated and discussed - by market participants as well as by the relevant authorities. And that's why I think that conferences of this kind are important, Chairman. I very much hope that following on from your Convention the important issues that have been raised will continue to be explored in the various trade associations and professional organisations that have been represented here, and that they will make their voice heard in the councils of Europe on the way forward, as indeed they traditionally have in the context of developing our own markets here in the UK. I will have every confidence that they will. I'm grateful to you for giving me the opportunity to join you this afternoon and I wish you and the European single market in financial services every success. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 1 Hermann Remsperger: Germany at the crossroads Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Nomura Annual Euro Conference, Tokyo, 26 November 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen News and the tone of comments on the economic situation in Germany have been getting considerably worse over the past few weeks. Take, for example, the weekend edition of a well respected newspaper of 16 November. One of the views expressed there was that – and I quote, “In Germany, nothing is going right. The government is boxed in by an inability to use monetary, fiscal or exchange rate policies to boost demand. Fear is growing that Germany will go the way of Japan, which has suffered 10 years of stagnation. The danger is that, like Japan, it would prefer to muddle through than take tough policy decisions. Germany is seen as a stricken giant, the sick man of Europe.” Such comments soon give rise to the notion that Germany is on the edge of deflation. To say it straight out: that is not a view which I share. I do recognise the large number of problems that exist in Germany, but I do not perceive any deflation. In other words, I do not expect the general price level in Germany to decline on a long-term basis and GDP to shrink over an extended period. We at the Bundesbank are forecasting a continuing low rate of inflation and a moderate increase in GDP in Germany for the coming year. While the price outlook is gratifying, the prospects for growth are rather disappointing. I shall return to that outlook and the subject of deflation in a few minutes’ time. My simple proposition is that the outlook for Germany depends first and foremost on coping with the existing challenges to economic policy. In order to gain a better understanding of this, however, we should first take a look back. A look back Taking that look back reveals that, since the reunification boom petered out, Germany has been one of a group of countries with weak growth. While the GDP of the present EMU countries has risen by a total of 15% since 1995, the corresponding figure for Germany is no more than 10%.  In line with this, the annual average rate of growth in Germany, at 1½%, has been lagging ¾ percentage point behind. Comparing Germany with the euro area as a whole excluding Germany, the German shortfall in growth increases to over 1 percentage point. In 2001, taken on its own, the figure was as much as 1½ percentage points. In my view, both temporary and long-term factors have contributed to Germany's relatively poor performance in the euro area. As far as the temporary factors are concerned, it should be remembered that, already in the run-up to Stage Three of European monetary union, interest rates had fallen sharply in a number of EU countries with previously fairly high short and long-term rates of interest.  For example, interest rates for long-term government bonds in Italy and Spain, even in 1995, were 5 to 6 percentage points higher than the rates for German Federal Bonds. As the home of the former anchor currency in the ERM, Germany did not benefit directly from this process of interest rate convergence. Another cause of relatively weak growth in Germany is the crisis in the construction industry, especially in eastern Germany. In this sector, the capacity built up immediately after reunification exceeded the longer-term ability of the real estate market to absorb it.  Reduced construction activity depressed German economic growth. Without the decline in investment in construction since the mid-1990s, the shortfall in German growth compared with the euro area as a whole would therefore not have been as great. By contrast, construction activity in other European countries has remained an important mainstay of economic growth. 
 2 BIS Review 71/2002 Consideration also has to be given to the fact that living standards in the monetary union are still very disparate. Since the poorer countries are supposed to catch up with the EMU average, they have to go on growing more strongly than those countries which have already achieved a high level of income. One very important – if not the most important and continuing – reason for the inadequate pace of economic growth in Germany is the heavy burden of taxes and social security contributions. Added to this are strict regulations in some parts of the economy. Above all, there is too little labour market flexibility in Germany.  In periods of a cyclical downswing, the rise in unemployment in Germany was far sharper than the fall during periods when there was an upturn. For instance, the number of people out of work in western Germany rose from its cyclical low point between 1991 and 1997 by some 1.3 million to around 2.5 million. By 2001, the number of unemployed had been reduced by no more than just over half a million. In Germany, the incentives to take up employment are restricted by the high-level marginal burden imposed by taxes and other public levies. Most types of household in Germany have a marginal burden of taxes and levies of 50% or more. In other words, from every additional euro that is earned, around 50 cents are deducted. Moreover, social benefits which are at a high level by international standards act as a reservation wage. Many experts agree that the demand for labour in Germany also suffers from the very complex legal arrangements relating to work contracts. Companies are so cautious in recruiting labour because it is so difficult to make redundancies.  As you may know, the German Parliament adopted a labour market reform only a few days ago. Its main focus is on a more efficient placement of unemployed persons in jobs and an increase in temporary employment through personnel service agencies. These initial steps towards a reform of the labour market are, generally, to be welcomed. However, there is a danger of regular jobs being replaced by subsidised ones. If labour is not involved to a greater extent in the production process, it will be difficult in Germany to achieve a sustained high level of growth again. An environment that is conducive to growth, however, also has to include a fiscal policy which leads to a lower tax burden. Budgetary and consolidation policy In the current year, Germany will considerably exceed both the 3% limit for the deficit ratio and the 60% debt ratio. Now, the Federal government has promised a package of measures which are designed to reverse the rapid deficit increase and to go back down below the 3% limit in the coming year. The volume of the package amounts to around ¾% of GDP in the coming year. In the years after that, it is envisaged that the volume will go up well above 1% of GDP. Making a final judgement on the structure of the consolidation package is difficult. The proposed measures could still undergo changes in the course of the legislative process. I therefore wish to make only a somewhat more general assessment at this point. The measures in the package include reductions in the labour-market-related spending and tax changes. In my view, the initiatives on the expenditure side are heading in the right direction. Through lowering the government spending, they are designed to reduce the burden of levies impeding growth in Germany. Cuts in subsidies and in labour-market-induced spending are especially conducive to improving the conditions for growth in the medium term. While the spending cuts and the measures to increase revenues are intended to balance each other in the coming year, a distinctly greater role for the initiatives to increase revenue is envisaged for the years that follow. In principle, it is true that broadening the tax basis and abolishing tax exemptions can indeed be a part of a successful consolidation policy. However, in the sense of a fundamental simplification of taxation – which is called for in Germany – a thoroughgoing reform would be desirable. This could then also be embedded in a marked lowering of the tax rates. What is more: the tax initiatives by the German government are not just a matter of abolishing exemptions. They also include interference in regulations that are quite justified from a taxation point 
 BIS Review 71/2002 3 of view. For example: restricting the possibilities of offsetting losses would end the correct symmetrical treatment of profits and losses under the tax system. This would make investment projects less attractive – especially those associated with higher risk or with strongly fluctuating earnings expectations. As I see it, when setting out the specific details of the individual tax measures, particular attention should be paid to their impact on corporate investment – something which is especially important for medium-term growth. Another point to consider is that the policy of enhancing the attractiveness of private old-age provision and of Germany as a financial centre – should not be disrupted by a rise in the tax burden. Besides a reduction in the deficit ratio, it is also important not to lose sight of a lower overall burden of taxes and social security contributions. Above all, the high and rising social security contributions represent a significant obstacle to employment and growth. The comprehensive review of government activity and of state benefits which is needed has to include the social security sector too. In this context, the tax reform that was adopted two years ago has brought some relief. The tax on retained profits was lowered from 40% to 30%. The top income tax rate will come down to 42% by 2005. And there has been some progress in Germany in the field of old-age pension provisions. The pension reform, which was adopted last year, pursues two objectives simultaneously. First, payments under the state pay-as-you-go scheme are being cut back and, second, private pension provision is being strengthened. Pension increases over the next few years will remain below the level of increases in wages and salaries. Macroeconomic assessment and outlook Ladies and Gentlemen, the cyclical worries in the global economy as well as in Germany have undoubtedly increased once more in the course of this year. Since the spring, the economic climate in Germany has become cooler again.  The slump in stock market prices and the rise in the cost of oil have played a major part in that. That development has been reinforced by the too high wage settlements in this year’s pay round. We in Germany are thus clearly in a very difficult economic situation. The current slight improvement is still very fragile. That improvement is due primarily to external stimuli and influences from inventories. The “cyclical breakthrough” has therefore not been achieved yet. In cyclical terms, we are still in the initial phase of an improvement that could quickly be put at risk again. Even so, the economy did grow somewhat in the first three quarters of this year. Thanks to orders from abroad, exports have once again made a major contribution to growth. Owing to an increased number of car sales, private consumption has assisted growth.  In contrast to this, fixed capital formation is still putting a firm brake on growth. That applies not only to buildings but also to machinery and equipment. Although capacity utilization has picked up somewhat from its low at the start of this year, it continues to be significantly down on the normal level of capacity utilisation. Added to the problems in the corporate sector are financing conditions which, on the whole, have become more difficult.  In the corporate sector there is great uncertainty about future profits. If one looks – by way of an example – at enterprises listed on the stock market, analysts have now made a considerable downward revision of their medium-term growth forecasts for corporate profits. But even the down-revised assessments remain based on the expectation of a distinct recovery in profits. The labour market has come even more heavily under pressure since the summer. It has been less and less the case that redundancies in manufacturing and the construction sector have been offset by a positive development in services. Economic activity is still too weak to relieve the labour market. Taking together all the data that are currently available, the economy as a whole cannot be expected to improve in the immediate future. The rate of GDP growth for 2002 will be below ½%. As things appear at present, the outlook for 2003 is, in fact, somewhat better overall. But many forecasts point to downside risks. 
 4 BIS Review 71/2002 There might be cause for some optimism in a return to greater stability on the stock markets and if oil prices were to settle down at their present level. That would mean that risk premia on the financial markets could go back to normal again. That would then allow the favourable underlying monetary conditions to come into operation.  Finally, there might be some hope in the passing of the phenomenon of “perceived” inflation. Admittedly, not a great deal of momentum can be expected from all of the cited factors. The underlying pace of economic growth will remain subdued in the first half of next year. When exports gain momentum and the negative confidence effects on investment and consumption peter out, the upturn from the second half of 2003 onwards will be somewhat stronger and more broadly based. However, given the high degree of uncertainty and unused capacity, we expect no improvement in investment activity in the near future. We believe that investment activity will not take a turn for the better until the second half of next year. Experience of investment behaviour in the past may be a further indication that the pick-up of investment in machinery and equipment will be modest. As regards investment in construction, leading indicators show that the downward adjustment process has not come to an end and is likely to continue in the near future. As I said at the very beginning, the outlook for inflation is much better than the outlook for growth. But before I turn to the price-side of the German economy, I would like to conclude my remarks on the real side of the economy with a few sentences on Germany’s export performance.  Real world market shares of Germany Recently, there have been repeated references to a sharp decline in German world market shares since the beginning of the 1990s, and this has been regarded as indicating Germany’s lack of competitiveness. Indeed, the development of world market shares may be misleading – if conventionally calculated on the basis of nominal foreign trade values in national currencies, which have been converted by current exchange rates into US dollars - whenever there are significant exchange rate movements of the dollar.  Thus, a depreciation of the euro against the US dollar, if considered in isolation, necessarily results in a fall in Germany's world market shares, even if its real market shares actually remain constant. To avoid these distortions it seems reasonable to calculate real world market shares, which are by definition adjusted for changes in inflation differentials and exchange rates. In contrast to the nominal world market shares, Germany’s real shares have shown a significant increase since the mid-1990s. Germany’s share of global exports rose from 9 % in 1995 to 10 % at the end of 2001 and thereby regained the position held in the early 1990s. This upturn reflects, in particular, the improved price competitiveness of Germany’s industry.  Germany's retrieval of its former position on the world market since the mid-1990s becomes even clearer if the country's export performance is considered in relation to the other industrial countries and therefore account is taken of the fact that the industrial countries as a whole have been losing market shares to the emerging markets.  If viewed in this context, the German share of the real exports of the industrial countries has increased by 2½ percentage points since 1995. At just under 16%, Germany's share exceeded recently even its old record levels from the late 80s. The debate on deflation In all probability, the German inflation rate will remain at a low level next year too. Germany is among the countries with the lowest inflation rate in the euro area. Such a development in German consumer prices is often interpreted, in itself, as signifying a risk of deflation. Some analysts are already detecting conditions in Germany similar to those in Japan. In contrast to that, I can see the low inflation rate as having advantages for a cyclical recovery. Price stability is bolstering households’ disposable income. That is all the more important since the burden of taxes and social security contributions on households is set to increase noticeably next year. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 5 Furthermore, the labour market will be overshadowed by slow economic growth for some time to come yet. So far, in Germany there are no signs of any price-expectation-induced restraint in private consumption. Exactly in view of Germany’s long-standing stability culture, the idea that the expectation of higher inflation rates should have a growth-enhancing effect seems to me to be unrealistic anyway. In terms of labour costs as well, there are no grounds in Germany for a deflationary spiral – in other words, a general and long lasting price slump combined with self-perpetuating recessionary pressure. This year’s pay round has more than exhausted the real scope for income distribution. Finally, it should be borne in mind that the ECB, in quantifying price stability, has factored in not only price measurement problems but also a safety margin from the deflationary zone. What is making the deflation theory so popular in Germany at the moment is, I believe, weak potential growth. If potential growth is weak, even small disturbances can lead to very low growth rates or, in fact, to absolute declines in overall output. Looked at in that way, recessionary periods become more likely if potential growth is low. At the same time, the pressure on economic policymakers increases. When deflationary risks are under discussion in Germany, attention is soon focused on monetary policy. Some economists claim that the ECB’s policy is not expansionary enough for Germany. It is argued that real interest rates are higher in Germany than in many other euro area countries because of our low rate of inflation. I believe, however, that it is not sufficient to look at real interest rates in isolation. We have to take into consideration at least two other factors. First of all, it has to be pointed out that the relatively low inflation rate in Germany results in a real depreciation within the euro area. By itself, this leads to increased competitiveness on the part of the German economy. Second, with regard to wage rate policy, we repeatedly have to make clear that the rate of inflation in Germany is lower than the euro-area average. The more that fact is taken into account in collective wage negotiations, the lower will be the risk of deflationary tendencies. Financial markets In the discussions on deflationary risks in Germany, the question of the stability of the German financial system is always raised as well. It is argued that while, in the US, households are bearing the brunt of declining asset prices, in Germany a wide range of financial institutions are being affected by the deterioration in asset prices and credit quality. Allow me to make four comments on that. My first remark concerns households. According to our own estimate, a 30% decline in equity prices dampens GDP by between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point as a result of a fall in private consumption. This is much lower than estimates for the US. The difference is mainly due to the fact that, in Germany, only 20% to 25% of equities are held by households. The volume of total shares outstanding in relation to GDP is well below the US figure. Second, I would like to point to the fact that a decline in equity prices also has an effect on corporate finance. In Germany, however, only 5% to 7% of the financial needs of the corporate sector are covered by the equity market. Nevertheless, access to the bond market has also become more difficult for some enterprises owing to the fact that their credit rating has declined. For some firms, the high risk premium on corporate bonds has pushed up financing costs. Since German non-financial enterprises obtain no more than about 2% of their funds through bonds, however, no severe problems are to be expected on that front either. German companies rely mainly on bank loans. And bank loans to the domestic private sector have shown hardly any further increase during the past few months. In September, they were only 1% up year over year. In actual fact, there are some indications that banks are showing a certain amount of restraint in their lending.  In addition to narrow margins in lending business, the very high number of business insolvencies and the fact that many enterprises have a low level of capital is likely to have played a part in this. The quality of banks’ loan portfolios has deteriorated. However, our empirical studies have also clearly revealed that the cause of the weak credit growth in Germany lies not so much in the banks’ behaviour as in the situation of the economy as a whole. This 
 6 BIS Review 71/2002 means that the marked slowdown in credit expansion is mainly the outcome of a cyclically induced subdued demand for credit. In my view, the currently weak development of credit cannot therefore be cited as evidence of a general credit crunch in Germany. Allow me now to come to my third point and make a few remarks on the insurance companies. The insurance sector in Germany is one of the most important institutional investors. In June 2002, the financial assets of the entire sector amounted to almost 1000 billion € at book values. More than one-third of that amount was invested in the capital markets.  By far the largest part of that figure was invested by life insurance companies, which – at the end of the first half of 2002 – had equities (excluding participating interests) and mutual fund shares to the amount of €160 billion. Life insurance companies have invested 20% of their financial assets in equities. The fact that share prices have now fallen by around 60% from their peak in March 2000 has led to a significant fall in insurance companies’ overall earnings and thus also to a reduction in capital bonuses for policyholders. So far, however, this has not generated any destabilising effects on the capital market. Even in 2002, insurance companies have still been making new investments of around €12 billion net in equities and mutual fund shares.  Moreover, the insurance companies have a major self-interest in protecting the entitlements of their clients. They have has therefore established a rescue company for failing institutions, although – up to now – this company has not had to take any action. The extensive depreciation requirements due to the significant shares losses have been mitigated by legislation providing tax accounting relief. Fourth, I would now like to take a look at the German banks. The decline in the equity market has led to a reduction in the amount of hidden reserves.  The growth weakness of the German economy is reflected, above all, in a high risk provision requirement for domestic lending business. Added to this are low earnings from commission business and own-account trading.  All of this has hit a banking system where, for structural reasons, margins are comparatively narrow anyway. By international standards, the German banking sector is characterised by a low degree of concentration as well as very strong competition. In my view, it is not justified to say there is a banking crisis in Germany. There is no liquidity crisis. German banks are not facing a massive non-performing loan problem as are banks in Japan. And there is no real-estate bubble in Germany. Above all we have to take into account that the German banks are currently taking comprehensive measures to improve their profitability. These measures concern, first of all, the cost side. The planned staffing adjustments will bring a significant easing of the situation. In addition to that, the process of consolidation which has been under way for some time among smaller banks will gain in momentum. And, finally, the German banking industry is showing a heightened risk awareness at present. All of these factors together are likely to give a renewed boost to earning power and thus reinforce the stability of the German banking system. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 1 Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in 2003 Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Forum Institut für Management, Frankfurt, 2 December 2002. *      *      * Introduction Ladies and Gentlemen, It is for me great pleasure to participate in this “International Forum on interest rates” and to exchange views with an audience of prominent players on financial markets. I welcome the initiative of the Forum Institut für Management. In promoting discussions on challenging issues between market practitioners and economists, this contributes to the attractiveness and spirit of financial markets in the euro area. I would like to open these discussions with some remarks on structural issues that one should keep in mind when examining the prospects for financial markets in Europe.  Indeed, by achieving its primary objective of pursuing price stability in a medium-term perspective, the monetary policy defined by the Governing Council of the ECB lays the foundations of the success of euro. But these foundations are also embedded in a far-reaching structural dynamic involving notably three components:  • financial integration, • financial stability, • and the prospects of European Union enlargement. I would like to make a few remarks on the challenges and opportunities arising from these three –interrelated– topics.  1 Financial integration 1.1 As regards financial integration, the European monetary union has in many respects modified the way in which financial institutions organise their daily business in the euro area. This has influenced the integration pattern on the various segments of the financial market.  European Union has modified the way in which financial institutions organise their daily business in the euro area: It is true that financial integration in Europe started before January 1999, as banks and non-financial companies included, in their strategies, the setting up of the Single European Market, which occurred ten years ago. The expansion of their operations abroad has been notably the driving force. To illustrate that point, we can look at the stock of foreign assets held by companies. In the case of France, this stock has more than tripled between 1992 and 2000, from EUR bios 131 to EUR bios 465. As a result, non-financial companies gradually introduced more competition into the banking system, as they funded their expansion through non-domestic bond or commercial paper issues, or by centralizing their financing. As an example 40% of the external financial resources borrowed by French medium and large companies are being redistributed to their own subsidiaries, and 10 to 15% consists of commercial paper and bond issuance (figure as at end 2001)1.                                                       1  Source : Banque de France – Central balance sheet data - 
 2 BIS Review 71/2002 1.2  These changes, and on top of them the introduction of the euro, have influenced the integration pattern on the money market, on the bond markets, on the derivatives markets and on the equity markets.  Integration is certainly –and naturally– most developed on the money market. Interest rate differentials across regional deposit markets have vanished and the “law of one price” applies to all transactions within a deep and highly liquid pan-European market. Cross-border transactions –for unsecured inter-bank deposits and repos– now account for over 50% of all money-market cash transactions. EONIA and EURIBOR have within a very short time become the undisputed benchmarks for short-term interest rates. This is reflected for instance in the impressive development of the euro interest-rate swap market, where all but a few transactions are indexed on these benchmarks. This deep integration of the money market has prompted new organisational patterns in the banking sector, with a concentration of euro cash management activities making it possible to take advantage of higher liquidity levels on the secondary market. For instance, according to a survey by the International Securities Market Association in June 2002, the top ten banks in a panel of 77 accounted for 55% of the total reported business on the European repo market. As a result the price discovery mechanism on the money market is smoothened because trade decisions are based on information systems that capture the relevant parameters at euro-area level. The integration of euro-area financial markets has also deepened on the bond market: • Rapid internationalisation has taken place. Between 1998 and 2001, the relative share of corporate bonds issued by corporate borrowers in the euro area as a percentage of GDP has more than doubled, while it increased by one third in the United States2. • Competition between all issuers, corporate or sovereign, has intensified. For sovereign issuers, the disappearance of currency risk and the convergence process driven by the Maastricht Treaty have transformed government bonds into directly competing risk free assets. As a consequence, sovereign issuers have implemented strategies aimed both at differentiating their issuance profiles –in order to diversify the opportunities offered to investors– and at establishing benchmarks on a selection of maturities. This is reflected by the building up of an outstanding amount of at least 5 bios euros on the internationally important 10 years segment, in each euro area country, while issuance strategies on other segments –2, 5, 30 years– differ, some countries building up relatively larger outstanding amounts on 30 years maturities (Italy), some on 5 years maturities (Netherlands) 3. Only a few large countries (Germany, France for instance) are able to provide a high level of liquidity on all the spectrum of maturities. This competition has provided market participants with a wider range of products that are also more standardised, which allowed for the development of electronic trading and enhanced the liquidity of the euro bond market. • Internationalisation and competition between private issuers have been accompanied by an impressive surge in the amounts issued. Issuance of Euro denominated non-government bonds has more than tripled between 1998 and 2002 4. It is quite difficult to isolate the specific impact of European Monetary Union, due to the fact that large issuances during the 1999-2001 period were also linked to the refinancing needs arising from intense merger and acquisition activity. Looking ahead over the medium-term, growth in the bond market is likely to be driven by such elements as the development of pension fund assets, while retail savers may move away from bank deposits to invest in other savings products. In turn, the design of savings products will benefit from the standardisation and diversification of fixed income issuance5. The integration of interest rate markets in the euro area has been accompanied by a new phase in the development of derivative markets. The proportion of worldwide open interest contracts traded on                                                       2  BIS and IMF statistics – quoted in RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002. 3 OECD – Debt management and Government securities in the 21st century – 2002. 4  from about EUR 100 bios in 1998 to about 300 bios in 2000, 2001 and 2002 – source Bondware. 5  RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002 – Second ECB international banking conference. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 3 European derivative exchanges went from less than 1% to more than 15% in 15 years6. As derivative markets enhance the ability to manage and trade risk, they are at the heart of modern finance and the backbone of financial innovation. Their development has enabled market participants to hedge risk, develop arbitrage, and, therefore, enhance the efficiency of price setting in financial markets. Of course, the other side of the coin is that derivatives are sometimes criticised as they may be regarded under some circumstances as a potential threat to financial stability. I will come back to this point later on. The elimination of currency risk within the euro area has also had far-reaching effects on the equity markets. This is crystal clear when observing volatility patterns and portfolio allocation methods. As regards volatility patterns, recent developments seem consistent with the predictions of economic theory, where stock prices should reflect expectations of future dividends, interest rates and risk premia. It follows that the introduction of the euro should be associated with a reduction in differences in volatility across markets. Indeed, a recent empirical study 7 demonstrates that those countries whose stock exchanges had a structural high or medium volatility regime, converged towards those with a low volatility regime. From the point of view of the European stock market as a whole, this shows an improvement in global efficiency. As regards investment patterns, sector-diversification strategies have been defined as an alternative to country diversification. Before EMU, it was common practice for institutional investors to make geographical diversification their first priority, and, secondly, to select securities in accordance with a sectoral diversification pattern. There is some evidence that the “home bias” has weakened since the introduction of the euro. For instance, assets held by pan-European investment funds represented 25% of total assets at the end of 2000, up from 12% in 19988. The development of a genuine pan-European approach is also illustrated by the introduction of various European stock indexes. The turnover on options based on these indexes –for instance, the volume of options traded on the Eurostoxx50 contract– now matches the turnover of options based on well-established domestic indexes such as the CAC in France. This provides evidence that large investors are looking for – and actually have recourse to– hedging products that are suited to a cross-border oriented strategy. However, this evidence of a strong impetus towards integration does not necessarily support the argument that a brand new asset allocation is overwhelmingly dominant. Let me emphasise two aspects.  First, pan-European sectoral strategies have also embraced non-euro area stocks in order to reach an appropriate level of diversification. This is the case in sectors such as pharmaceuticals, or telecom equipment, with stocks listed in non-euro area countries such as Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Sweden. This is in line with some theoretical assumptions, which are stating that currency risk is outweighed by the risk-return parameters, as far as investing in equities is concerned.  This leads me to the second aspect: the sensitivity of stock market to general macroeconomic events suggests that domestic macroeconomic variables still influence stock prices. Therefore investors may still prefer to avoid being heavily weighted in a country with structural rigidities, or high public debt levels, and will on the contrary overweight their asset allocation in countries with well-designed fiscal and structural policies. In the same vein, this should suggest that the level of connection between stock exchanges in Europe and the US could be time varying, considering that the underlying factors are also driven by policies that are implemented independently. As a matter of fact, and not surprinsingly, correlations of yields between European stock indexes appear to be higher than those between European and US indexes, and these correlations have increased since 1999. These results seem valid even taking into account the increase in correlations due to the increase in absolute volatility levels9.                                                       6  RAJAN and ZINGALES – 2002 – Second ECB international banking conference . 7  MORANA, BELTRATTI – 2002 – The effects of the introduction of the euro on the volatility of European stock markets – Journal of Banking and Finance. 8  Source: FEFSI – Fédération Européenne des Fonds et Sociétés d’Investissement – in THE EURO EQUITY MARKET – ECB 2001. 9  Banque de France Research department calculations – . Correlations calculated as monthly averages. The impact of market shocks is neutralized by taking into account changes in long term interest rates. The correlation between Eurostoxx 50 and  
 4 BIS Review 71/2002 2 Financial stability 2.1 Like every modern and independent central bank, the Eurosystem and its individual components, the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area, have to fulfil two main functions: firstly, ensuring price stability, and secondly, preserving financial stability. Discussions about the role that central banks should play in circumstances of illiquidity or financial distress are as old as central banks themselves.  The involvement of central banks in financial stability issues stems from the superiority of central bank money in the final settlement of transactions on financial markets. Central bank money enables market participants to have risk-free and low-cost working balances – risk-free because the counterpart risk on a central bank is assumed to be zero, low-cost because, in the TARGET system, the cost of intraday credit is limited to the opportunity cost of depositing the appropriate level of collateral. Therefore, central banks are concerned with the robustness of payment systems and the financial positions of banks participating in the money market, in order to prevent systemic risk that could stem, for instance, from the potential “domino effect” if a participant fails to meet its settlement obligations. Central banks are concerned also by financial stability from a monetary policy point of view. I would say that price stability can be regarded as the bedrock of financial stability, while financial stability is critical to the efficiency of monetary policy. Let me elaborate further on these two points. First, why is price stability the backbone of financial stability? Financial stability can be achieved on a sustainable basis if financial resources are not misallocated. Past experience, as well as a large number of economic studies provide evidence that inflation brings about distortions in the allocation of resources. For instance, the calculation of returns is biased, due to the fact that the replacement cost of fixed assets is structurally underestimated. This may result in sub-optimal investment decisions, and over-optimistic credit risk assessment. Conversely, in the case of deflation, the solvency of indebted companies may be jeopardized, as the value of cash flows decreases over time, while the face value of debt remains stable. Second, why does financial stability matter for the efficiency of monetary policy? The efficiency of monetary policy relies on the effectiveness of the transmission channels of monetary policy. Central banks have direct control over short-term interest rates only. The impact of monetary policy decisions on prices goes through various channels – acting directly on the anticipations of economic agents, influencing banking credit conditions, the exchange rate and other asset prices. Uncertainty may arise when these channels do not act in a predictable way nor with relatively stable time lags. In this respect, financial instability may affect the transmission channels of monetary policy. For instance, large fluctuations in asset prices may modify the behaviour of agents by decreasing the level of confidence. Such fluctuations can also expose bank portfolios to a higher risk of losses, inducing banks to compensate for these risks by restricting credit.  Let me stress that, although a price stability oriented monetary policy is conducive to financial stability over the long term, episodes of financial instability have been known to take place during periods of low inflation. Price stability must be therefore regarded as a necessary but not sufficient condition. Other parameters influence financial stability, among which financial integration is of particular interest from the point of view of a central bank in the Euro area. 2.2  The relationship between financial integration and financial stability is twofold:  • First, the liquidity redistribution function has taken on a new dimension as participants in the market are dealing with a wider range of counterparties, and actually trade larger unit amounts. Some bank treasurers in Paris mention that the average face value in euro of single transaction today is equivalent to the face value of a transaction in French franc in 1998, that is, more than six times higher. • Second, financial market integration is related to the trend towards the greater share of markets in the allocation of assets. At the end of 2000 financial assets in the euro area were                                                                                                                                                                       Dow Jones is 70% over the period January 1999- October 2002 (70% when the measure is based on SP500), and 100% between CAC and Eurostoxx50 (97% between DAX and Eurostoxx 50). 
 BIS Review 71/2002 5 split almost equally between intermediated and non-intermediated assets10. Although credit still plays a prominent role in the allocation of financial resources, credit institutions themselves are relying on the financial markets to manage their balance sheets. These two points suggest that the benefits of enhanced liquidity entail the management of a new range of risks. This should not lead us to conclude that financial integration has necessarily negative side effects from the point of view of financial stability. Financial integration may help to foster financial instability. I would like to put forward three reasons for this: • First, the setting up of a large currency area eliminates disruptions arising from currency risk that would otherwise prevail between the participating countries. Domestic economies are immune to currency misalignment episodes that disturb regional trade. Currency risk premia are eliminated from interest rates. • Secondly, the setting up of a large currency area implies an overhaul of market infrastructure. In this respect both public bodies, such as national central banks and market participants, have a unique opportunity to pool best practices. Indeed, this has been the case in the euro area where, for example– the TARGET system, interlinking domestic real-time gross settlement systems, has demonstrated its ability to absorb large volumes of cross-border flows, and to perform well even in critical circumstances such as September 2001. The TARGET system processes today around EUR 1500 billion per day, 50% more than the average in 1999 and an estimated three times the amount that all the large-value payment systems in the 12 euro area countries processed together in 1990 11. • Thirdly, a large currency area means deeper and more liquid financial markets. This allows market participants to diversify their risks on a wider basis; moreover, as currency risk is eliminated, they can focus on the analysis of credit risk. A large currency area also provides more scope for specialised institutions to develop. All in all, market efficiency and liquidity help to cushion external shocks 12. 2.3 Taking into account these benefits, one could question why financial stability issues are still important in the euro area.  In my view financial stability issues need to be re-visited today against the backdrop of the far-reaching changes observed on the financial markets in the last decade, and taking into account the succession of market instability episodes. Just to name a few, the Asian crisis, the Russian/LTCM crisis in 1998, the “Tech-bubble” as of 2000. These episodes were characterised by situations of liquidity stress, market volatility, and the late discovery of risks that had spread widely through complex hedging and financial innovation devices.  In this respect the complex relationship between volatility, financial innovation and financial stability deserves attention. Clearly, volatility levels primarily reflects the degree of uncertainty of market participants. From a general point of view, volatility is a kind of genetic signature of the price setting mechanism in a competitive market. Prices hover around the equilibrium through successive adjustments. When market participants express widely different views on this equilibrium price, or when the volume of transaction shrinks, volatility usually increases. In this respect, there is a close correlation between the occurrence of crises –such as the revealed insolvency of an emerging country, supply shocks on commodity prices, bursting of equity bubbles– and excessive volatility. Volatility is not an indicator of market inefficiency. However, excessively high volatility has adverse effects on the behaviour of market participants and the real economy. From a corporate management point of view, volatility on capital markets lowers the predictability of the cost of capital. When reviewing investment                                                       10  Source : Report on financial structures – ECB - 2002 11  estimation in « Central banks and financial stability – exploring an intermediate land » – Second ECB central banking conference - 2002 12  BRI – Economic aspects of regional currency areas and the use of foreign currencies – 2002 – document non publié. 
 6 BIS Review 71/2002 opportunities, managers may want to avoid relying too heavily on external finance because of the uncertainties surrounding the cost, or even the sheer availability, of financing. This may lead companies to postpone or downsize investment projects. From a financial management point of view, large investors may give priority to companies with a low risk profile, in order to bring back their own asset portfolios to levels of volatility matching their requirements. Therefore listed companies will have an incentive to adjust their risk profile and avoid more hazardous –which may also be more innovative– investment projects. Therefore, “entrepeneurship” may be curbed and the growth potential may be influenced adversely.  Another impact of volatility on financial management is related to recourse to hedging, namely derivative products. As I mentioned earlier, derivatives are a driving force behind mature financial markets, and their strong development in the last two decades is merely consequence of the benefits they have generated.  More precisely, derivatives and related financial innovations have enabled companies to transfer the impact of interest rate and currency fluctuations to financial institutions or investors that were ready to manage it, whereby facilitating international trade or project financing.  Meanwhile, the pricing of derivatives is closely linked to volatility. As volatility is indeed difficult to predict, market practitioners have developed models, which are constantly being refined. Over time, market participants, –especially banks,– have become more competent in managing risk, while being left that residual risks which are more complex and harder to control.  These consequences would not be a major concern, if the episodes of excessive volatility were only accidental. Peaks of volatility clearly reflect macroeconomic imbalances, as soon as market participants take into account the relevant information. This has been evidenced in studies reviewing factors behind currency crises in emerging countries. Macro data –such as balance of payment or fiscal policy indicators– prove to be discriminant-leading indicators from this point of view13.  However, I cannot affirm that the resolution of market imbalances would result in a reduction of volatility to levels that prevailed before these imbalances were taken into account by market participants. In my view one should not underestimate the part played by technical factors in the persistence of volatility peaks. This persistence in volatility is fuelled by technical features that facilitate the build up of mimetic behaviours (amplifying effects), or that reinforce the links between the various market segments (diffusion effects). Mimetic behaviour is of course by no means a new phenomenon on financial markets. However benchmarking, index management, and risk management techniques may have gradually reinforced this type of behaviour, as participants are under increasing pressure to follow their peers through matching the performance of a benchmark.  There is no doubt that the spread of benchmarking allows fund managers and clients to better assess their performance against that of other funds. But, in a context of growing competition within the sector, it may well have increased mimetic behaviour. Some market participants (whose own compensation is closely linked to the relative, rather than absolute, profit and losses they generate) may indeed have come to the conclusion that it would be better to be wrong along with everybody else, rather than to run the risk of being right alone. A striking example of rational mimetic behaviour is the influence that hedge funds posess as “opinion leaders” and trend setters. By its nature, trend following amplifies the imbalance that may at some point affect a market, potentially leading to vicious circles of price adjustment and liquidation of positions. Moreover, increasing numbers of participants are able to access financial markets directly, while the expertise to deal with a wide range of technical information is not evenly distributed. This may also reinforce the role of “gurus”. Index management, as a fund management technique, has proven very popular on equity markets and may have contributed to exacerbating fluctuations in financial asset prices. Because their goal is to mimic the performance of indices, “passive managers” constantly strive to match the composition of their benchmark. They thus help to amplify market trends, buying more as the market rises and increasingly liquidating as the market drops. It can be argued that index funds distort the prices of the targeted indices and that, as a result, the indices end up creating rather than measuring performance.                                                       13 Leading indicators of currency crisis in emerging countries – BURKART, COUDERT – Notes d’Etude et de Recherche – Banque de France – 2000. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 7 The impact of risk management techniques on market dynamics is particularly enlightening with regard to the question of asset price overshooting. Value-at-risk calculations have become a crucial element of the standard approach used by market participants to evaluate the risk inherent in their market activities and to set up exposure limits. Of course, central banks and financial institutions should continue to encourage the use of these instruments. But, in times of financial turmoil, the growing use of sophisticated risk management techniques by financial intermediaries might have the paradoxical effect of amplifying the initial shock, exhausting liquidity and contributing to contagion phenomena. Regardless of the intrinsic qualities of these risk management tools, we see that their growing use in the same fashion by all market participants may have produced pernicious effects. When market players rely on converging risk evaluations, they tend to take the same decisions at the same time, thus amplifying initial shock to prices and trading volumes. Financial techniques can also reinforce the links between the various market segments. A striking feature of recent developments on financial markets is the quick spreading of disryptions from one market segment to another, especially between equity and credit markets.  For example, the short selling of equities is sometimes used to hedge credit risk. The underlying reasoning is that if there is a credit default, the value of the equity will decrease symmetrically, and an equity gain will compensate the lender for the credit loss. As a result, the fall in the equity value, which is triggered by the credit default, is amplified by the short selling operation.  Credit risk derivatives constitute another financial innovation which has played an increasingly important role in the last years. It has contributed to avoiding credit institutions to be heavily impacted by the large credit defaults that have occured recently. Credit risk derivatives have also enabled banks to fine-tune the risk-return profile of their loan portfolios. From a macro point of view, credit risk derivatives are helping diversify and spread risk, under the assumption that buyers of risk will deliberately alter their own risk-return profile. But the ultimate risk remain and as a result, some sectors, such as insurance companies or pensions funds, which hitherto did not feel the direct pressure of a worsening in credit quality, may now find themselves directly impacted, had they sold such derivatives at an earlier stage.  Against this background, and beyond the primary objective of achieving price stability over the medium-term, which part should central banks play to improve the functioning of financial markets and promote financial stability?  Apart from their operational tasks –such as the management of money market liquidity and the monitoring of large value payment systems– central banks must endeavour unremittingly to create the conditions for the international economy to minimize misalignments in asset prices, excessive volatility, purely speculative phenomena and dangerous herding behaviour. This is the underlying message in central banks' repeated calls for prudence and caution. I would like now to address my third point, that is, the prospects of the European Union enlargement.  3 European Union enlargement At first glance, the link between this topic and the two issues I have been dealing with up to now appears quite tenuous. Yet, while the issues arising from market integration and financial stability are of concern for many Central Banks, managing the EU enlargement is a distinctive concern of the Eurosystem. I would like to share views on how the Eurosystem will act to address this concern, while performing their task regarding price and financial stability. Ten countries from Central, Eastern and Southern Europe –comprising 75 million inhabitants – are to join the EU, thus completing European reunification. Although their combined GDP is rather small (equivalent to that of the Netherlands for instance), in terms of population' size they will propel the EU (450 millions inhabitants) largely ahead of the combined population of both the US (population: 275 millions) and Russia (population: 145 millions). This testifies again, if need be, to the attractiveness of the European Union framework, which has provided us with economic prosperity and political stability for almost half a century.  Accession countries have accomplished important progress in stabilizing and strengthening their economies and their institutions. Observing the accession countries, recent history shows the major improvements those countries have made, in hardly 10 years, on the road towards convergence with the EU. Let us keep in mind, the sometimes rather slow pace the current Member States took, regarding for example trade openness, price liberalisation, or macro economic discipline. 
 8 BIS Review 71/2002 Nevertheless, there is also general agreement on the fact that the gap, in terms of average GDP per capita, between the accession countries and the euro area, although diminishing, remains still quite significant. The size of the gap, combined recently with a rather limited growth differential between the two groups of countries, suggests that the process of real convergence will be very gradual and will have to continue much beyond the tentative dates for EU accession.  Although differences in income levels are not incompatible with EU and even EMU membership, it is extremely important for accession countries to increase real convergence. Indeed, real convergence is essential to create economic cohesion within EMU and promote integration between Members States, thereby helping to minimize the risk and the effects of asymmetric shocks, in the best interest of accession countries themselves. Let me stress seven points of particular relevance for the Eurosystem, and for accession countries themselves on the road towards achieving catching-up and convergence with the EU. • Firstly, we should never forget that nominal convergence must be sustainable and therefore not only constitutes an objective that must be met at a given point of time but rather a goal that must be achieved continuously. Strict compliance with the Maastricht criteria will be key for joining the euro area. Indeed, the EU Treaty calls, as a prerequisite for adopting the euro, for a high degree of sustainable convergence in the fields of price stability, government fiscal position, stability of the exchange rate, and long-term interest-rate levels. The sustainability of nominal convergence itself presumes that sufficient preliminary progress has been made towards real and structural convergence (and namely having set a fully-fledged market economy, catching-up in income and productivity levels, as well as economic and social infrastructures, upgrading of the legal system…). Conversely, a sustainable catching-up process requires macroeconomic stability. Therefore, nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel, and are not antagonistic.  • Secondly, I noted that several accession countries have already expressed their intention to join ERM II rapidly after EU entry. This intention is to be welcomed, although it should be clear that ERM II membership needs neither to happen immediately after EU accession in all cases, nor to be limited to only two years, which is the minimum before adopting the euro. It would be totally misleading to consider ERM II as a mere “waiting room” before the euro. On the very contrary, ERM II membership allows countries to retain some limited exchange rate flexibility during the catching-up process and offers a meaningful, flexible and credible framework for increasing nominal and real convergence with the euro area, and for helping determine the appropriate level for the eventual irrevocable fixation of parities, in the best interest of candidate countries themselves. To enter the Eurozone is a very important, very grave and irrevocable act. Neither the accession country concerned nor the Eurozone could afford the risks associated with a mistaken decision.  • Thirdly, accession countries must strengthen their fiscal and external positions. Given the aim of attaining real convergence over time, accession countries will have to devote significant public resources to funding investment. However, candidate countries’ weighted average public deficit amount to 3.6% of GDP in 2001. The fiscal consolidation currently planned by some accession countries is welcome and likely to require sizeable expenditure cuts or tax increases. Looking ahead, accession countries will have to implement fiscal consolidation very credibly with a view to avoiding the risks associated with the existence of high “twin deficits”, i.e. fiscal and external. • Fourthly, a sound and efficient banking and financial system is key. Significant progress has been made over the past few years in rehabilitating the banking sector and encouraging foreign ownership. The latter has also contributed to greater integration into the EU financial system. Nevertheless, adapting the legal and regulatory framework is a process entirely in the hands of the accessing countries. The intermediation role of the banking sector remains fundamental for the efficient use of capital and sustained growth. Progress in corporate governance, the enhancement of the legal and supervisory frameworks that support the banking sector, and an efficient fight against money laundering, are also crucial. These improvements are conducive to achieving the macroeconomic objectives of the accession countries. • Fifthly, central bank independence is of the essence. It is an integral part of the acquis communautaire, which is laid down not only in national legislation but above all in the 
 BIS Review 71/2002 9 Maastricht Treaty. The effective implementation of the acquis communautaire is not only a legal prerequisite for accession to the EU. It also implies the effective transformation of accession countries’ economic framework, which should facilitate their integration into the EU and, later, the euro area. In this context, it should be ensured that there is no discrepancy between the central banks’ formal status in the legislation and the implementation of that legislation. It is of utmost importance that all present and future Member States respect this economic and institutional ground rule of the European framework. • Sixthly, let us not forget the present and future contribution of Central and Eastern European countries to the economic prosperity of Europe at large.  It seems that this contribution might be sometimes underestimated, while the relative influence of the US economy, for instance, might be sometimes overestimated. In fact, transition economies, as a whole, are as important as the US in terms of external demand addressed to the euro area: they both enjoy the same share, i.e. 13% of our exports. And, during the last two years, transition economies contributed for two-thirds to the overall growth of our total external demand, while the US contributed for less than 0.1%.  More generally speaking, Central and Eastern Europe countries are already major contributors to the overall growth on the European continent. In 2001, despite the international context, they remained at quite high a level of growth, around 2.8%. This contribution is bound to further increase given these countries’ considerable potential for growth.  I thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 70/2002 1 Tony Latter: Preserving monetary stability in the face of budget deficits Speech by Mr Tony Latter, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Insight Investment conference in Hong Kong, 20 November 2002. *      *      * Introduction There has been much talk recently in Hong Kong about the possible threat to exchange rate stability from the burgeoning budget deficit, which is predicted by many to reach about 6% of GDP for the current financial year as a whole. Evidence of this concern is apparent when any media report suggesting a deterioration in the fiscal position is invariably accompanied by a weakening, even if shortlived, in the forward exchange rate of the HK dollar. This phenomenon is not confined to Hong Kong. In Europe, news of widening budget deficits, threatening to breach the terms of the stability and growth pact, and allegations of lack of commitment among officials to the degree of fiscal discipline necessary to conform to that pact, have tended to weaken the euro's exchange rate, at least temporarily. But there is another story which can be told. This is of an economy where the budget deficit rose from about 1½% of GDP to 4½% in the space of 4-5 years. What happened to its exchange rate? It strengthened over the same period by some 70% in trade-weighted terms. The authorities reined in the deficit somewhat over the next couple of years, but then it began to expand again. On this occasion, the deficit doubled within three years, while the exchange rate appreciated once again. That country was the United States and the references are to episodes when the deficit grew rapidly in the early 1980s and again at the turn of the 1990s. And some observers detect signs today of a similar replay beginning. To be fair, however, it should be noted that the dollar tended to remain as firm during the years of deficit reduction in the late 1990s as it had when the deficit was rising in the early 1980s, and that, on balance, there may not be a very clear long-term relationship in either direction between the US deficit and the dollar exchange rate. But at least the US experience warns us against presuming there to be an automatic negative causation flowing from the one to the other. The relationship between fiscal and monetary policies It may be worthwhile examining more generally certain aspects of the relationship between fiscal policy and monetary policy. The economy can be characterised as comprising any number of different sectors. At the highest level of aggregation the classification is usually the public sector, the corporate sector, the household sector and the overseas sector (the counterpart to the external balance of payments). Each sector may be in financial surplus or deficit, but the surpluses and deficits must, in accounting terms, sum to zero (although in terms of available statistics they may not, because of errors and omissions); every piece of deficit is necessarily matched by a piece of surplus. Typically, one might envisage the savings surplus of the household sector being channelled through the banks and financial markets to fund a deficit in the corporate sector, arising from its capital investment and working capital needs. In this context the deficit in the corporate sector seems perfectly acceptable. Why, then, should a deficit in the public sector raise particular anxiety? Isn't the situation where the public sector has a funding need analogous to that where private sector corporate entities have such needs? Not necessarily so. A number of factors may differentiate the two situations. What are these factors and what are the special considerations which may apply in the case of the public sector deficit? • First, when assessing the impact of different deficits one may need to look behind them, to associated developments in the real economy. For example, a financial deficit may reflect, at one extreme, spending on current consumption, and particularly on imports with no resulting benefit to domestic employment; or it may reflect, at the other extreme, investment which generates jobs and greater efficiency within the domestic economy. If there is a suspicion – whether or not well founded – that a public sector deficit is inclined to the former category, it will be judged less helpful to the long-term health of the economy and thus tend to weaken 
 2 BIS Review 70/2002 financial confidence. A sizeable underlying public sector deficit may anyway be regarded as a sign of fundamental weakness in an economy, if it signifies too heavy an involvement of government in the running of the economy.  It is these types of consideration which have led to the emergence of various recommendations and rules about fiscal deficits. There is, for example, the "golden rule" of the UK finance minister, Gordon Brown, which he first espoused in 1997, stating that, over the cycle, spending of a current (as opposed to capital) nature should be balanced by revenues, and borrowing should only be countenanced to cover capital expenditure. In Europe there is the supposedly sacrosanct cap on the fiscal deficit of each of the member countries of the euro-zone, at 3% of GDP. And in Hong Kong there is the Basic Law (Article 107), stating that Hong Kong should strive to achieve a fiscal balance and avoid deficits. • Second, the financing of private sector deficits is subject to market discipline, in that those who provide finance do so on the calculated expectation that the investment will generate sufficient internal returns to repay them in due course. By contrast, in the case of a public sector deficit, the investor's confidence is based not so much on any knowledge about the rate of return, if any, from the expenditure to which the funds are destined, as on faith in the government's ultimate ability to raise money through taxation, if necessary, at some future date in order to service its borrowings. Such a prospect of higher taxation might, among other things, serve as a dampener on financial confidence.  • Third, there may be a fear that public sector borrowing will crowd out worthy corporate sector borrowing from the financial markets, to the detriment of the economy as a whole, although to the extent that a public sector deficit has its counterpart in a corporate sector surplus (or reduced deficit), the corporate sector’s borrowing requirement will anyway have been reduced.  • Fourth, in some cases a public sector deficit may be financed by a reduction in net foreign currency assets. For instance, the government may resort to foreign borrowing because the local financial market is not mature enough to supply the funding. Or, exceptionally, as in the case of Hong Kong, the government may raise the funds by running down accumulated foreign currency investments. The respective build-up of foreign currency liabilities or reduction in foreign reserves may raise concerns in the context of net national wealth, national economic security, credit ratings, and so on. Moreover, foreign currency borrowing exposes the government to financial loss in local currency terms should the currency depreciate.  • Fifth, there may be a lurking fear that the government will be tempted to acquiesce to inflation and currency depreciation as the means both to repair its current finances (if it believes that revenue may be affected more quickly and positively than expenditure) and to reduce the real value of its outstanding indebtedness.  • Sixth, there may be a consequential fear that, as a means to that end, the government will seek to monetise its debt – "printing money" to fund the deficit. This would, however, require the cooperation of the central bank, and in most jurisdictions nowadays there is some form of prohibition on the central bank abetting such a strategy. More specifically, governments tend to be prevented – by force of law or moral pressure – from obtaining finance direct from the central bank (eg as might occur if the bank was forced to take up issues of government securities in the primary market), although the central bank is invariably permitted to buy (or sell) government paper in the secondary market as part of its discretionary monetary policy operations.  Practical experience What of experience in the real world? Reference has already been made to the case of the United States. The US government is regarded as just about the best credit risk in the world and there is a huge global appetite for US treasury securities. The Federal Reserve has an equally strong track record in avoiding inflation. For these reasons, markets have seldom, during living memory, considered a large fiscal deficit in the US as presaging monetary laxity or signalling a weaker dollar. Indeed, the contrary often seems to have been the case: with the fiscal deficit providing some circumstantial evidence of a deficiency of domestic 
 BIS Review 70/2002 3 savings, the prospect that interest rates might need to rise to bring savings and investment into equilibrium – or the reality of such a rise – may actually have contributed to the strength of the dollar on occasions, as noted already. A similar trait was apparent with the deutschemark in the early 1990s in the wake of German reunification: the prospect – and subsequent emergence – of a substantial budget deficit, and hence higher interest rates than otherwise, was accompanied by a strengthening of the exchange rate. By contrast, however, and as discussed below, the more recent deterioration in the fiscal outlook in Germany has not been a positive factor for the euro. At the other extreme lie examples of countries where budgetary indiscipline has plainly been a factor behind the collapse of the currency. It would be invidious to mention names, but the story can be caricatured as follows. The government is running a deficit which it is unable or unwilling to correct. Domestic savings are in short supply and savers do not have abundant faith in the government from the credit-risk perspective. The government finds itself having to pay ever higher interest rates, so that the interest burden itself becomes a significant component of the continuing deficit. Meanwhile the government may have been meeting some of its funding needs through foreign currency borrowing – initiated at a time when international sentiment was favourable and the interest rate seemed attractive, at least on an uncovered basis. The situation then begins to unravel acutely. Foreigners take fright and don't wish to roll forward their lending, or will only do so at a much higher margin. The country can’t afford higher foreign currency interest payments, still less to make net repayments of principal on foreign borrowing. Domestically the only means left by which to cover the deficit is for the central bank to fund it. This means that the central bank lends to the government virtually on demand by, effectively, crediting the government’s bank account – resort to the printing press in all but name. Whether this lending carries an interest rate or not is largely immaterial, since the central bank can continue at the stroke of a pen to create the money to pay the interest. This procedure will inevitably be inflationary, but a wayward government may welcome this as a means of reducing the real value of its outstanding domestic debt. It may even feel that inflation will aid its current financial position, if its revenues inflate faster than its outgoings. All of this is a clear recipe for disaster, including, probably, an exchange rate crisis. Between these two extremes – the US and the no-hoper – there are of course many cases where the situation is less clear-cut or less predictable. Euroland provides an interesting example. Given the careful steps which were taken before the advent of the euro to ensure the insulation of monetary from fiscal policy and to outlaw monetary financing of budget deficits, we might wonder why the news of impending budget overruns should cause the euro to weaken. It seems that not only do credit spreads faced by individual deficit countries widen (presumably for fear, however slim, of sovereign default), but also the currency weakens for fear of governments conspiring with the central bank to abandon its mandate against inflation or to break the rules against monetary financing. A rather different interpretation could be that foreign exchange markets are merely exhibiting a pavlovian reaction: having been brainwashed to the effect that a deficit is inherently bad if it surpasses certain pre-announced limits, the reaction when such a breach does occur is bound to be negative, even if analysis of the substance underlying the breach provides little or no justification for such a reaction. In the context of trying to identify a relationship between the fiscal position and the exchange rate, these examples demonstrate that there is no simple, pre-ordained relationship. The outcome depends on a wealth of factors, including the nature of the disturbances affecting public finances, the policy regime and policy responses, and the state of sentiment in financial markets. Hong Kong How does the present situation in Hong Kong match up against these various considerations? Hong Kong is in several respects exceptional, if not unique. It has no specific central bank law of the type common in other jurisdictions (although a number of laws, such as the Exchange Fund Ordinance and the Banking Ordinance, govern particular aspects of the Monetary Authority’s functions). It has no mainstream government debt. It operates a currency board rather than a discretionary monetary policy. And it has only quite recently become familiar with the idea of a budget deficit persisting for longer than an isolated year or two. Although the absence of a law to explicitly prohibit monetary financing of the budget deficit – of the sort which has been adopted in many economies, both new and old, in the course of the past couple 
 4 BIS Review 70/2002 of decades – may be thought a weakness, it need not be so in reality. Whether or not it has a formal legal basis, the proscription of monetary financing has nowadays become so firmly established as part of the policy landscape in the developed financial economies, that any of them which dared breach it would be immediately crucified by the markets, the world media, the IMF and so on. One could class this as a sort of de facto law of nature, which is likely to be at least as effective and durable as any law passed by a legislature, if not more so. Hong Kong can be regarded as being subject to this law of nature. In any event, Hong Kong’s currency board system rules out the creation of money except in exchange for foreign currency, and therefore serves as an operational safeguard against monetary financing of the budget. In order to fund its deficit, the government has a choice between running down its assets (the fiscal reserve) and borrowing, from banks or the markets,. It has chosen for the time being the former route. The monetary impact would in either case be neutral. It may be worth explaining the process. If the fiscal reserve is drawn from the Exchange Fund and the Fund consequently needs to realise foreign currency assets, the foreign exchange is sold in the market. The counterparty surrenders HK dollars. These accrue temporarily to the Exchange Fund and are then transferred to the government, which will in turn pass them to some other party, as the counterpart of the budget deficit. The net result is a change in the ownership of HK dollar money but not in the quantity outstanding. Similarly, borrowing HK dollars to fund the deficit would involve a shift in ownership of those dollars around the economy, but no net increase in quantity. The mechanics of financing the deficit ought not therefore raise any concerns in Hong Kong in the context of monetary stability. Nevertheless, in practice the markets do appear to exhibit a degree of negative reaction to the deficit. Why? A number of possible explanations come to mind. • First, and rather obviously, there is Hong Kong’s Basic Law, which indicates that deficits should be avoided. It’s understandable for markets to become nervous if they suspect that the law might be infringed.  • Second, many people, whether in Hong Kong or elsewhere, anyway have a gut feeling that getting into debt is imprudent. This does not stop them individually from borrowing money, or from being tolerant of their government being in debt, but they may nevertheless be uncomfortable about it. The underlying rationale for holding this view may not be well articulated, but it does not need to be – if the view exists, that is enough for it to have an impact. And the impact may be reinforced if the government’s record appears to run counter to what it has itself been preaching.  • This leads to the third point, which is that Hong Kong has boasted since long ago about its budget surpluses and the absence of government debt. This makes it intellectually difficult to deny the significance of the deficit. Not that anyone is trying to downplay it – the expressions of concern from government officials have been numerous, sincere and unambiguous. But in some ways this serves to highlight the difference. The present position is seen to represent a sea-change in the financial circumstances of Hong Kong, whereas other economies more familiar with deficits might be able to take a deterioration in public finances more easily into their stride.  • Fourth, there is the more specific concern, that either of the two available means for financing the deficit - by, as now, realising foreign currency investments or by government borrowing – would impact adversely on Hong Kong's financial standing in the eyes of rating agencies and others. Of course, it is by no means obvious that these financing activities would necessarily endanger monetary stability or weaken the exchange rate. Indeed, there are plenty of examples of economies with low foreign reserves or high government borrowing having enjoyed firm currencies and strong credit standings, and it's hard to see why, for example, the act of the Hong Kong government borrowing modest amounts on the capital markets in its own currency should have any substantive adverse impact on sentiment. But perceptions are typically coloured as much by unusual or sudden changes in circumstances as by continuity of particular circumstances, and analysts and markets tend to respond accordingly.  
 BIS Review 70/2002 5 • Fifth, observers may – not unreasonably – regard the deficit not so much as a problem in its own right as a symptom of other things, such as sharp cyclical recession or perhaps more serious underlying problems in the economy which affect future prospects. It would be natural for these considerations to unsettle general confidence, independently of the budgetary arithmetic.  • Sixth is fear of the unknown. The current run of fiscal deficits is taking Hong Kong into uncharted waters. It has been acknowledged that at least part of the deficit may be structural rather than cyclical in nature. Although official projections suggest that the combination of cyclical recovery and disciplined containment of government spending should restore fiscal balance in due course, scepticism is understandable; this is an extraordinarily difficult field for forecasters, since the balance is the difference between two very large numbers, each comprised of many varied components. The air of uncertainty gives rise to rumours – of sweeping expenditure cuts, of asset sales, of new taxes, of higher tax rates or whatever – and to fears that Hong Kong may not be able to preserve its distinctive edge as a place with an uncomplicated tax system and low rates of tax.  Concerns which arise under any of the above headings may find expression through the financial markets. Conclusions What can one conclude from all of this? • First, a number of reasons have been enumerated as to why fiscal deficits may be a worry, both for economies generally and for Hong Kong in particular. There can be no doubt that Hong Kong's fiscal position is a matter for concern, but monetary factors should not necessarily be paramount to that concern.  • Secondly, and in the same broad context, one should beware of simplistic assertions or hypotheses about the monetary implications or, more specifically, the exchange rate implications of fiscal deficits.  • Finally, the infrastructure of monetary discipline which is in place across the financially developed world, and the peer pressure that exists to conform to such discipline, provide a very strong safeguard against any monetary financing of fiscal deficits or any associated compromising of sound monetary principles. This applies in Hong Kong as forcefully as anywhere else.  
 BIS Review 70/2002 1 Michael C Bonello: The institutional, economic and monetary policy implications of EMU on countries applying for accession to the EU Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at a workshop organised by the University of Malta, Gozo Centre, Gozo, 16 November 2002. *      *      * I guess we are by now all too familiar with the fact that a country’s eligibility to join the European Union (EU) rests on satisfying the Copenhagen criteria, including the obligation to achieve compliance with the EU acquis and to show a commitment to the aims of the Union, including those relating to EMU. Indeed, unlike Denmark and the United Kingdom, the current wave of accession countries are all expected to join EMU eventually. This implies that they will also have to join the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II). Participation in ERM II is in fact one of the Maastricht criteria which must be met before admission to the euro area. This requires the national currency to remain within the fluctuation margins of this mechanism for at least two years without resorting to a devaluation against the euro.  What makes ERM II more important than the other Maastricht criteria?  Participation in ERM II is not the only criterion which the accession countries will have to meet before being able to join EMU. Prospective members of the euro area are in fact also required to satisfy the other four Maastricht criteria, which relate to inflation, the interest rate, the fiscal deficit and the public debt. I propose to focus on the ERM II criterion for two reasons. First, the timing of EMU membership is conditioned by the two-year period embedded in the exchange rate criterion. In Malta’s case, if it is part of the next enlargement in May 2004 and even if it fulfils the other Maastricht criteria, the earliest that it will be technically able to participate in EMU is mid-2006. Earlier adherence to the other criteria, therefore, becomes almost irrelevant. Second, the obligation to participate in ERM II has implications in terms of the preparations which a national central bank has to make in view of its eventual entry into EMU. This is because it impinges directly on some of the central bank’s main functions – such as the formulation of monetary and exchange rate policy and the management of external reserves – something which is not true, for example, of the fiscal criteria. ERM II is thus of particular interest to central bankers. Against this background, I will now review some issues which eventual participation in ERM II, and later in EMU, raises for policy makers in Malta. No significant change in the parameters governing monetary and exchange rate policy EMU entails the adoption of the euro and the surrender of autonomy in the area of monetary policy to the European Central Bank (ECB). At this point, however, it is relevant to mention that the additional loss of independence which EMU would represent for the formulation of monetary policy in Malta is minimal. This is so because the Central Bank of Malta already has limited freedom of action since it operates a fixed exchange rate regime and exchange controls have been almost entirely removed. This means that the Bank must adjust domestic interest rates in response to movements in capital flows in a way which is consistent with the peg. Too low an interest rate would encourage investors to move out of domestic assets, creating downward pressures on the currency, whereas too high a rate could attract interest-sensitive capital flows which could create upward pressures on the exchange rate. To a large extent, these conditions already govern monetary policy and reserves management in Malta. While the Monetary Policy Advisory Council does take domestic economic conditions into account, decisions on official interest rates are, in fact, primarily conditioned by trends in the official reserves and in the interest rates on the currencies which make up the basket to which the Maltese lira is pegged. Malta’s eventual participation in EMU, therefore, would not involve any significant departure from the current situation in terms of the degree of autonomy enjoyed by the Central Bank of Malta in setting interest rates. In view of the incompatibility of monetary policy autonomy, full capital account liberalisation and a fixed exchange rate, EMU participants have given up independent national monetary polices in favour of the 
 2 BIS Review 70/2002 free movement of capital and the adoption of a single currency. The main driving force behind this decision was the desire to overcome the obstacles to the completion of the Single Market and to progress towards monetary and, eventually, economic union. A single currency was a logical step in this regard.  Given the constraints which the adoption of the single currency entails, the emphasis which the Treaty puts on containing fiscal deficits and on labour mobility is understandable. In this set-up, in fact, the adjustment to asymmetric shocks has to take place through fiscal policy and the labour market. Since labour mobility within the Union is still weak, however, in practice this means that the onus of adjustment falls on fiscal policy. Fiscal consolidation thus remains a necessary precondition for the success of EMU. Indeed, whereas it could be argued that the Stability and Growth Pact precludes fiscal policy from responding to short-term domestic needs, it is equally true that the constraints arising from that Pact are meant to ensure that governments in the euro area have the necessary room for manoeuvre over the medium-term. The presumption here is that by achieving close to balance or surplus positions, governments would be in a better position to deal with normal cyclical fluctuations. In addition, the commitment to refrain from excessive deficits is also a necessary condition for the success of EMU itself. This is the case because if such a deficit occurs in one of the larger euro area members, the inflationary pressures resulting from that deficit could instil an upward bias in ECB interest rates. For accession countries, contained public spending and flexible labour markets are also necessary from the point of view of achieving nominal and real economic convergence. Excessive deficits would not only accentuate inflation differentials, undermining the ability of these countries to fulfil the Maastricht criteria, but could also crowd out private sector investments, delaying progress in structural reforms and convergence in income levels. Given that large deficits and labour market rigidities tend to weaken a country’s ability to achieve both nominal and real economic convergence, policies to address these issues are an integral part of the preparations which accession countries are making in advance of EMU. The rationale behind ERM II ERM II is a fixed exchange rate regime, involving the adoption of a central exchange rate against the euro in agreement with the ECB. This rate is then allowed to fluctuate within specified margins, normally +/- 15%, but narrower bands may be adopted subject to mutual agreement.  The rationale behind ERM II is that, if a country succeeds in maintaining the value of its currency against the euro within the fluctuation bands for a period of two years, then it would be reasonable to assume that the country would be able to deal with the binding constraints of EMU. During this phase, accession countries will have to prove that they are able to put up with the disciplines inherent in a fixed exchange rate without imbalances arising in other sectors of the economy. That is why accession to EMU is conditional on prior participation in ERM II. Furthermore, it would be unfair on the twelve euro area countries if the EU were to demand less stringent conditions of the present wave of accession countries. Upon EU accession and during the ERM II phase, Malta, like the other accession countries, would have the status of a “country with a derogation”. Since ERM II neither entails the formal transfer of monetary policy responsibilities to the ECB nor the replacement of the domestic currency by the euro, it will not, as I have already indicated, involve any significant departure from current practice, although it offers more flexibility than our current fixed exchange rate regime, which does not involve any fluctuation band. Another difference is that the obligation to defend the central exchange rate under ERM II would be binding on both the ECB and the Central Bank of Malta. Both institutions would be expected to intervene to preserve that value. This in turn explains why both the central rate and the fluctuation bands will have to be fixed by mutual agreement.  The current regime also differs from the conditions governing ERM II in terms of the anchor currency. Strategies based on free floats, pegs to currencies other than the euro and crawling pegs are not compatible with ERM II. Consequently, Malta’s exchange rate, which apart from the euro is also linked to the US dollar and Sterling as anchor currencies, will have to be revised. The question we then have to answer is, “What exchange rate strategy should Malta pursue in the run-up to ERM II?” 
 BIS Review 70/2002 3 Experience suggests a move to more flexible regimes prior to ERM II Whereas the strategy to be pursued during EMU is prescribed in the Treaty, and while the institutional framework governing ERM II limits the strategies which would be compatible with that arrangement, in principle any exchange rate regime is permitted during the phase preceding ERM II. What matters is that the selected regime should contribute to real economic convergence with the economies of EU member countries, macroeconomic stabilisation and the transition to a functioning market economy capable of dealing with the competitive pressures within the EU.  Indeed, accession countries are currently pursuing very different strategies. This diversity of exchange rate regimes can be explained in terms of the progress made thus far by these countries in disinflating their economies; their degree of openness; the extent of capital account liberalisation; and the adequacy of their reserves. Generally speaking, during the early phase of transition when many accession countries were faced with the task of disinflating their economies and restoring the credibility of monetary policy, fixed exchange rate regimes were the norm. Then, a credible anchor in the form of the currency of a low-inflation trading partner was viewed as the best strategy for meeting these objectives. The rationale is not difficult to understand. The persistence of inflation differentials under a fixed exchange rate regime would lead to an appreciation of the real exchange rate, undermining a country’s external competitiveness. The mere adoption of a fixed exchange rate indeed signals the intention to subordinate monetary policy to exchange rate policy, adding to the credibility of anti-inflationary monetary decisions.  As these countries progressed with disinflation and as the emphasis shifted towards integration with the EU, the continuation of structural reforms and attracting sufficient capital flows to enhance real convergence, a gradual move to more flexible regimes become feasible.  At first sight, such a shift would also seem to be indicated for Malta, particularly as the capital liberalisation programme approaches full implementation. Moreover, a flexible regime has the additional benefit of yielding exchange rates that reflect market forces and economic fundamentals, enabling the authorities to gauge the proper level of the equilibrium exchange rate as the date of entry of ERM II draws closer. A more thorough examination of the facts, however, suggests otherwise. Malta likely to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime Whereas the liberalisation of capital flows could indeed lead to upward pressures on the exchange rate in some countries, such pressures are unlikely to be overwhelming in the case of Malta, not least because a functioning market economy already exists. Econometric evidence in fact suggests that because of its openness, the Maltese economy has already been exposed to significant capital flows, such that the impact of full capital account liberalisation is likely to be significantly smaller than that in some other accession countries . To some extent, the Bank’s external reserves, which have always remained well above 60 per cent of its liabilities as required by law, can also act as a cushion against external shocks. In addition, the structure of the Maltese economy is already very similar to that of its main trading partner, the EU, which makes a fixed peg arrangement more appropriate in the event of a symmetric shock. Empirical evidence also shows that the fixed exchange rate has been a valuable nominal anchor in restraining price and wage increases. Inflation has in fact remained below 3% during the past five years. This has been confirmed in an ECB assessment of Malta’s monetary and exchange rate policy in connection with the Pre-Accession Economic Programme Report for 2002, where it is noted that the current regime has served Malta well in promoting real and nominal convergence. In view of these considerations, and given the importance which exchange rate stability has for trade and investment, the current regime remains the preferred arrangement for Malta.  Taken together, therefore, the institutional arrangements governing ERM II and the successful experience with the current fixed exchange rate regime suggest that the way forward will consist of a gradual reduction in the weight of the US dollar and sterling in the currency basket, such that by the time Malta will be ready to join ERM II the euro will be the sole reference currency. If the United Kingdom were to join EMU in the meantime, this would automatically raise the proportion of the euro in the currency basket, making the approach to ERM II that much easier. Consistently with this objective, the weight of the euro in the basket was increased from 56.8% to 70% last August. 
 4 BIS Review 70/2002 Given that Malta’s optimal exchange rate strategy in the run-up to ERM II has been identified, the next question concerns the choice of the central exchange rate and the fluctuation bands. The choice of the central exchange rate and fluctuation bands Some might argue that the choice of the central rate is not vitally important. After all, the central rate can be re-aligned if necessary, although such a move would require the agreement of the ECB and the other national central banks participating in the euro area. In practice, however, the initial central rate chosen is important because it conveys a signal to the market about what the ECB and the national authorities consider to be the equilibrium exchange rate. The determination of the central rate is also crucial because if the selected rate turns out to be incompatible with economic fundamentals, market intervention by the ECB and the Central Bank of Malta could become too frequent in relation to the resources available.  Determining the appropriate central rate, however, is not an easy task. Nevertheless, though the available evidence suggests that in the current economic climate the Maltese lira exchange rate is sustainable at prevailing levels, work is being undertaken in order to estimate an equilibrium rate. The second choice concerns the fluctuation band. It is a matter of choosing between the lower degree of uncertainty and volatility associated with a narrow fluctuation band and the flexibility inherent in a wider fluctuation band. On the one hand, the flexibility necessitated by the absence of capital controls would strengthen the case for a wider band. On the other hand, Malta’s dependence on foreign trade and investment, the country’s track record with a fixed peg as well as the Central Bank’s commitment to price stability would seem to justify the adoption of a narrow band. As real convergence is progressively achieved and as structural reforms proceed, the case for a narrow band would also become stronger. Should this latter path be followed, the burden of adjustment to external shocks would, of course, have to be borne by the real economy. In the first instance, this means pursuing a prudent fiscal policy. The current aim of fiscal policy is indeed to reduce the deficit to GDP ratio to around 2.5% by 2004, from 5.3% last year and over 10% in the late 1990s. By restraining domestic absorption, tighter fiscal policy should enhance the credibility of the exchange rate peg. Moreover, a smaller borrowing requirement also frees up resources for the private sector and helps to contain upward pressure on interest rates, thereby stimulating economic growth. Finally, bringing the budget deficit closer to balance will then give fiscal policy the leeway to respond in the event of adverse shocks or cyclical downturns.  The response to shocks will also depend on the degree of flexibility in the economy as a whole. Unlike most accession countries, Malta has a long experience of a functioning market economy, driven by private ownership of productive assets and with much of it exposed to international competition. In general, therefore, the private sector has already proved that it can cope with adverse shocks. In this regard, the flexibility of the labour market has been especially important. This flexibility must, however, be enhanced in order to safeguard competitiveness. As is the case with any exchange rate strategy, the sustainability of the central rate and, with that, the fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria, will hinge on whether that rate is compatible with economic fundamentals. Fulfilling this criterion requires an unconditional willingness to defend the external value of the currency. For policy makers that means a commitment to abstain from practices that could be in conflict with the objectives of exchange rate policy. For participants in foreign exchange markets, including the central bank, it implies the need to intervene in the market without hesitation.  Within this context, the importance which the acquis assigns to the independence of central banks is understandable. Whereas the Central Bank of Malta has been formulating monetary policy independently since 1994, there is no doubt that the recent amendments to the Central Bank of Malta Act have put the Bank in a better position to defend the peg. The amended Act, in fact, not only establishes price stability as the primary objective of the Bank, but it also protects the Bank from any external interference and provides it with the operating flexibility necessary for effective and prompt intervention in foreign exchange markets. With the coming into force of these amendments, Malta has achieved a high degree of compliance with Chapter 11 of the acquis on EMU.  Another crucial precondition for maintaining the exchange rate peg and ensuring a smooth transition to the single currency is financial sector stability. In this respect, a regulatory and supervisory framework based on high international standards is already in place. Maltese legislation in this area in fact incorporates almost all the features of the corresponding EU directives, and the legislative 
 BIS Review 70/2002 5 amendments I have just referred to have brought about almost total harmonisation. Institutional responsibilities are divided between the Malta Financial Services Authority, which is responsible for the regulation and supervision of banking, insurance and investment services; and the Central Bank, which is charged with ensuring the stability of the system as a whole. The Bank is also responsible for the domestic payments system, which is being upgraded in line with developments in the euro area. According to a recent background paper prepared by the ECB , Malta already has a financial intermediation mechanism that broadly mirrors the composition of different market segments in the euro area member states. Despite the growth of non-bank financial intermediaries and the development of money and capital markets, the banks remain the key financial institutions. Total bank assets amount to more than double GDP, whereas the ratio of domestic credit to GDP is broadly in line with the EU average. More importantly, the banking system is generally healthy, enjoying ample liquidity and a broad capital base, with the ratio between own funds and risk-weighted assets standing close to 14%.  Some institutional aspects of EMU preparations I shall conclude with some remarks on preparations of a more operational nature for eventual integration within the ESCB. An important area in which central banks will have obligations towards the ECB is that of statistics. This is because the formulation of monetary policy in the euro area rests on the timely availability of standardised economic, monetary and financial data from participating national central banks. In recognition of this future obligation, the Central Bank of Malta established a Technical Committee on Financial Statistics in 2000 to identify the changes required to the way statistics are classified and reported by the Central Bank and other financial sector reporting agents in order to comply with ECB and Eurostat requirements. This committee, which includes representatives of all the interested institutions, has already agreed on the necessary changes to the reporting forms through which credit and financial institutions submit data to the Central Bank and the Malta Financial Services Authority. Monetary and financial data are in fact already being reported to the ECB and Eurostat. In the meantime, significant progress has also been made with respect to the establishment of a common direct reporting database between the Central Bank and the National Statistics Office for the dissemination to the ECB and Eurostat of balance of payments data and data relating to Malta’s investment position.  In the area of payments, a new settlement system has been established for the handling of large inter-bank payments in line with EU and other international standards. This system, called the Malta Real-time Inter-Bank Settlement System (MARIS), provides for the immediate delivery and settlement of wholesale financial payments in line with the principle of finality adopted in the acquis and will eventually be integrated with the EU’s TARGET system.  In the meantime, the Central Bank has already set up two committees to identify the changes which need to be made to the instruments, contracts and control procedures which the Bank uses for monetary and foreign exchange operations. In both cases the necessary changes have been identified and are in the course of implementation. With the cooperation of the Malta Police, the Central Bank is also strengthening its capacity to detect cases involving counterfeit notes and to report such cases to the ECB and Europol. Finally, the Bank is analysing ways in which the composition of its official reserves could be revised as Malta progresses towards EMU membership. As noted above, a key aspect of the smooth operation of EMU is fiscal discipline. Earlier on, I made reference to the Stability and Growth Pact. This, however, is but one element in the framework which applies to the co-ordination of economic policy and fiscal surveillance in the euro area. In particular, euro area members are also required to submit reports outlining their policy intentions over the medium-term. As part of the preparations for their eventual participation in EU surveillance efforts in this area, accession countries have already started to submit Pre-Accession Economic Programmes (PEP). The Central Bank of Malta has been collaborating with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economic Services in the preparation of the necessary documentation. To date, like all other accession countries, Malta has submitted two PEPs. Conclusion The road to EMU is clearly not an easy one as the tasks involved are both numerous and difficult. For a small central bank with limited resources they represent a formidable challenge. On a policy level, 
 6 BIS Review 70/2002 there are reasons to believe that the current fixed exchange arrangement should ideally be maintained until Malta adopts the euro. It should also be clear, however, that the Government’s commitment to contain the fiscal deficit and to pursue structural reforms is a vital prerequisite for the sustainability of the fixed exchange rate regime. The importance of fiscal discipline and of product and factor market flexibility will indeed increase as Malta progresses towards EMU. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 1 Michael C Bonello: Regional economic integration - the options for Malta Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, St. Julian’s, 7 November 2002. *      *      * In previous years I used this occasion to focus on issues related to the country’s perennial challenge, which is to converge to the economic standards of its more developed trading partners. Among the appropriate responses to this challenge I emphasised the importance of price and financial stability, fiscal restraint, market-based reforms and a viable exchange rate strategy. These are indeed necessary elements of a strong macroeconomic policy framework conducive to export-led growth. The issue I shall address today is the need to complement these policies with a more secure access to international markets. The reason is simple. Without such access, a small open economy like ours cannot hope to achieve sustained, quality growth in today’s globalized world.  A structured, regional approach to building competitiveness In a world economy driven by cross-border flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) seeking the most profitable locations, the challenge of sustaining economic growth must be faced head on by endeavouring to maintain cost competitiveness and gaining access to larger markets. Studies have shown that countries which are more open to trade tend to achieve higher growth rates compared to less open economies at comparable stages of development.1 Of course, openness also brings with it greater exposure to external shocks, particularly for small economies that cannot aspire to any degree of self-sufficiency. Experience, however, suggests that such exposure does not necessarily translate into vulnerability for small economies if they are closely integrated with larger ones. For example, the greater resilience of countries in Central and Eastern Europe over that of a number of other transition economies has been attributed to the relatively stronger trade links which the former have with rich, neighbouring countries.2 In addition, the latest IMF World Economic Outlook shows that over the past 25 years less integrated economies exhibited a higher degree of susceptibility to financial crises than economies with strong trade linkages, and that financially integrated economies in turn experienced a lower degree of output volatility than those with closed financial markets.3 This suggests that trade and financial integration with major trading partners remains a preferred option.  This conclusion is borne out by the experiences of small states such as Luxembourg and Singapore. The fundamental characteristics of these countries resemble Malta’s in that they too are small open economies which lack natural resources. Both, however, have achieved far higher levels of prosperity.4 Luxembourg, for example, with a population only slightly larger than that of Malta has a per capita income three times higher. This success is attributed to Luxembourg’s ability to reap economies of scale by integrating with larger, prosperous territories in a way that has permitted high-value, export-oriented firms to flourish alongside domestically-oriented ones. In addition, by pooling resources with those available in neighbouring countries, Luxembourg has managed to address resource limitations and other problems that it could not deal with in an effective way on its                                                       1 Excluding OECD member states and a number of countries that are well known for their pro-trade orientation, Dollar and Kray (2001) find that developing countries who had the largest trade to GDP ratios also experienced the highest per capita growth rates since the 1960s. They note, for example, that these countries - which they term the “post-1980 globalizers” - have seen their average annual growth rates jump from 2.9% in the 1970s and 3.5% in the 1980s to 5.0% in the 1990s. By contrast, the non-globalizers have seen their growth rates fall from 3.3% in the 1970s to 1.4% during the 1990s. Dollar., E. & A. Kray. (2001) Trade, Growth and Poverty. World Bank, Policy Research Department, Working Paper No. 2615. USA, Washington. 2 "The Challenge to Small, Landlocked Transition Economies - Trends and Policies in the World Economy”, in World Economic and Social Survey 2001, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations. 3  "Consequences of Trade and Financial Integration for Macroeconomic Volatility”, in IMF, World Economic Outlook 2002. 4  While Malta ranks 50th in terms of income per capita, these countries are among the 20 richest economies of the world. World Development Indicators 2002. World Bank. 
 2 BIS Review 69/2002 own. Similarly, Singapore has developed into a regional hub by supplying manufacturers and service providers in booming Southeast Asian economies. And not only does it participate in the Association of South East Asian Nations, but it also has a far reaching trade agreement with New Zealand, which is expected to develop into a closer economic partnership that will in time also include Hong Kong and Japan.5 These countries are not unique in this regard. Recognising that success in world markets requires a critical mass in order to foster competition and competitiveness and to acquire a measure of bargaining power, countries the world over are turning to regional arrangements as a stepping stone to gaining a foothold in the global economy.6 They know that belonging to a regional grouping also makes it easier to attract FDI and to absorb the necessary technology and management expertise that can be applied elsewhere in the economy. Such arrangements also provide members with a first-hand experience of the negotiation process. The World Trade Organisation estimates that 243 regional trade agreements are in force today,7 covering at least 129 countries.8 Regional groupings moreover are not only increasing in number, but they are also becoming deeper in scope, encompassing areas of policy other than trade and investment.9 This brings me to the first point I wish to make today. The experience of other countries shows that the capacity necessary to deal with the competitive forces of globalisation can be optimally built in stages through participation in regional arrangements. The implication is that in order to reap the full benefits of the policy reforms currently under way, Malta does not only need to integrate further internationally, but has to do so through a structured approach that seeks to exploit potential synergies with other economies. The question then arises, “What kind of regional arrangement and with whom?”. Malta’s potential partners for regional integration Traditionally, partners to regional integration arrangements exhibit strong trade ties based on complementarity in terms of resource endowments and geographical proximity, as well as a common historical and cultural background. These criteria limit the scope for integration between Malta and a number of outlying European countries such as the transition economies of Eastern Europe and the EFTA countries. In fact, Malta’s commercial links with these countries are weak, with only a few economic sectors that could be of potential interest to both parties. In 2001 Malta’s exports to EFTA countries represented less than 0.5% of its exports to the European Union (EU). It follows that the EU and the countries of North Africa, many of which are participating in the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership known as the Barcelona process, are more likely to be potentially viable regional partners for Malta.  As far as the latter countries are concerned, there is no doubt that they have made considerable progress in recent years. Most of them, however, require more time to be able to take full advantage of their potential. A strategy based solely on closer ties with these countries, therefore, would tend to condition Malta’s development to proceed at a slower pace than its own potential would justify. Furthermore, although efforts are being made to create a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area (FTA) by 2010, this date appears rather optimistic. This was confirmed by the Spanish Presidency last March, which noted that a critical mass of implemented FTAs between the partners themselves has yet to be                                                       5  Singapore has recently also initialled a bilateral agreement with Japan. 6 Indeed, these are the precise reasons put forward by the Minister of Industry and Trade of the Republic of Tanzania during the 47th session of UNCTAD’s Trade and Development Board where he noted that:  “We do not believe that we can enter into the international arena under today’s rules if we do not go through these steps at regional level”. 7 Of these arrangements only 141 have been notified to the WTO. “Regional Trade Integration Under Transformation”, WTO Secretariat, 2002, preliminary draft prepared for the Seminar on Regionalism and the WTO on 26 April 2002 8  These include members of AFTA, the Andean Community, CARICOM, COMESA, ECOWAS, the EU, MERCOSUR, NAFTA, SADC, CACM, LAIA, ECO, GCC and the Bangkok Agreement. This does not include countries which have stand-alone FTAs/Association Agreements with another country or regional grouping. 9  The ANDEAN Pact, for example, also deals with biodiversity, electronic commerce and the protection of indigenous knowledge. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 3 reached.10 Finally, it is also to be noted that an essential aspect of an eventual Euro-Mediterranean FTA is expected to be an obligation to achieve equivalence in standards. At this stage, therefore, a growth strategy that relies on closer links with these countries appears neither plausible nor likely to provide adequate opportunities in terms of market access. The only viable alternative thus seems to be to forge stronger ties with the EU, with whom Malta is already closely integrated through trade and investment. The EU accounts for more than half of Malta’s trade in goods and for around 80% of incoming tourists.11 The EU is equally important as a source of FDI, accounting for some 43% of the total in 2000.12 This suggests that strengthening the existing relationship with the EU is more likely to produce early results than attempting to develop ties with other regions starting from a very small base. Malta’s relationship with the EU - alternative scenarios Malta could, for example, retain, or attempt to upgrade, the existing Association Agreement. As it stands, this agreement is very narrow in scope, focusing on industrial goods to the exclusion of most agricultural products. In addition, it is severely limited by a set of rules of origin whereby local exports only benefit from preferential access to the EU market if the percentage of the value of the product that originates in Malta exceeds a minimum threshold. If this agreement is to be upgraded, however, Malta would have to make commitments over and above those it has today. Indeed, many of the countries with whom the EU has a comparable agreement have managed to obtain a better deal than Malta not only because they are much larger in terms of market size, but also because they have entered into additional commitments. EEA countries, for example, do indeed participate in EU programmes, but they have also offered substantial rebates on loan-related interest payments and committed nearly ECU 500 million in direct grants for projects in specific EU regions. In other words, EEA countries contributed to the EU’s financial resources, and specifically to the EU’s regional policy, without being members of the EU. In addition, it is well known that membership of the EEA implies taking on a large part of the EU acquis, whether past, present or future, without having any say in the decision-making process.  Nor is the obligation to come into line with the acquis unique to the EEA. As is the case with Switzerland, which is an EFTA but not an EEA country, the EU’s trading partners are increasingly being required to approximate their national laws with those of the EU as a precondition for access to its market13.  The second conclusion to emerge from this analysis, therefore, is that if Malta seeks to negotiate a more advantageous form of association agreement, our exporters will only be able to secure improved access to the EU and its partners if the Maltese Government makes commitments in areas other than those covered by the present agreement, including a commitment to achieve legal equivalence with the EU Acquis. Pressures to liberalise, the costs of restructuring and the obligation of legal equivalence will arise irrespective of EU membership It could be argued that as a non-member the pace with which this legal equivalence would have to be achieved would be slower than that implied by the current enlargement calendar. In practice, however, the difference in timing is subtle. It must not be forgotten that nine other countries are also about to                                                       10 In addition, a recent study by the World Trade Organisation shows that this is one of the regions with the lowest concentration of regional trade arrangements, a situation which is not expected to change much in the medium-term. See footnote 7 for source. 11 NSO, News Release 103/2002. 12  NSO, unpublished estimates 13  During the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference on Trade held in March 2002, participating Ministers noted that the dismantling of tariffs will not be enough:   “Businesses have to benefit from an economic environment where trade is facilitated by an adaptation and a harmonisation of regulatory provisions concerning the free movement of goods, standards, right of establishment, property rights.” 
 4 BIS Review 69/2002 join, which means that they will shortly have complete access not only to an enlarged EU market, but also to the reciprocal trade agreements which the EU has with third countries. If local businesses are not to lose out to competition from this new source, therefore, the administrative burdens and financial outlays associated with the achievement of legal equivalence and the adoption of EU technical standards will have to be borne within the same time frame available to the other candidate countries, irrespective of whether Malta joins the EU or not.  Yet even if such compliance is achieved on schedule, under any arrangement other than membership Malta would only be able to tap the markets covered by EU reciprocal agreements by negotiating individual bilateral agreements with most of the countries in question. Given Malta’s limited negotiating capacity, combined with the slow pace with which the conclusion of such agreements tends to proceed and also the high degree of protection in many developing countries, this seems to be an unrealistic objective.  This at a time when Malta has already started to graduate from the General System of Preferences (GSP) through which some developed countries grant non-reciprocal preferential trade access to less developing countries. For example, Malta graduated from the GSP scheme of the USA at the end of last year. In addition, pressures are mounting on developed countries in the WTO to extend any preferential treatment accorded to a subset of WTO members to all other members, such that any preferential treatment given to Malta by any country over and above that accorded to other WTO members will be lost in any case. In a non-membership scenario, moreover, the EU-Malta income gap would tend to widen because the other new members will continue with reforms that are conducive to attracting FDI. Indeed a recent study shows that the EU decision to open negotiations with the first-wave of accession countries had by itself reinforced FDI flows into these countries. This has implications for the catching-up process, because countries that absorb the highest amounts of FDI normally continue to attract the bulk of new investment in later years.14 So that if the scale of FDI flows into Malta fails to keep up with that going to the other candidate countries, Malta could easily fall behind these countries in terms of GDP growth and living standards. This at a time when the CEECs already absorb around 33% of all FDI flows from the EU to emerging markets, and when this region is increasingly becoming the dominant sphere of EU investors.15 It is, therefore, of paramount importance that the pace of reform be accelerated, irrespectively of whether Malta joins the EU or not.16 Against this background, it appears that securing access to the EU market will become increasingly difficult as a non-member. Membership, on the other hand, promises immediate benefits for local exporters, because any product made in Malta would not only have complete access to the EU, but would also benefit from any preferential treatment which the EU receives under the various reciprocal trade agreements it has with third countries, without the need for Malta to negotiate separate agreements and without being subject to country of origin limitations. The extent of this benefit could be substantial because the EU does not merely have reciprocal trade agreements with Northern and Eastern European countries and with its Southern Mediterranean partners, but has also finalised, or is close to finalising, similar agreements with more distant countries and regional blocs, including Mexico, South Africa, Chile, Mercosur17 and the Gulf Co-operation Council18. For many local firms EU membership would also translate into an opportunity to outsource inputs more cheaply, and for consumers a wider choice and cheaper products.                                                        14  This follows from the fact that transnational corporations often react to the prospect of a larger market arising from regional arrangements by establishing integrated production and distribution networks within the region in question. 15  Eurostat, European Union Foreign Direct Investment Yearbook 2000. Moreover, according to UNCTAD’s latest World Investment Report, Poland, the Czech Republic, the Russian Federation, Hungary and Slovakia absorbed around seventy-five per cent of world FDI flows to Eastern Europe in 2001. 16  Staying out of the EU is also likely to have negative implications for Malta’s credit rating. In a recent report, for example, FITCH credit rating agency notes that:  “staying out would damage Malta’s creditworthiness unless a new government were clearly determined to retain and develop the parts of the EU Acquis that are starting to enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of the Maltese economy.” 17  Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. 18  Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates 
 BIS Review 69/2002 5 EU membership would also pose some challenges. For example, because membership implies more than a free trade agreement, Malta would have to apply the EU’s common external tariff (CET) to imports from third countries. Upon closer examination, however, it seems that this is unlikely to be a major problem. For a start, Malta’s customs duties on non-EU imports are already roughly in line with the CET, so that not much change would be necessary. Furthermore, the CET is foregone in the case of all those non-EU countries which benefit from preferential access of the EU market, especially in the case of raw materials. This means that imports can be purchased from alternative sources, possibly from the enlarged EU market, or from non-EU countries which enjoy access to the EU market. Finally, the CET is also suspended when the imported raw material is re-exported outside the EU as a finished product19. So while the costs of production for some sectors of the economy may increase, and this in turn could have implications for inflation, at least in the short-run, this impact is likely to be minimal in practice. As a member Malta would also assume the EU’s commitments under the non-reciprocal agreements with developing countries. Whereas this could have negative implications for specific sectors, for the economy as a whole these effects are unlikely to be significant or enduring. This is because the proportion of imports from these countries in Malta’s import bill is marginal. Second, the Cotonou Agreement, which is the EU’s most relevant agreement in this regard, will expire in 2008, by which time it is expected to be superseded by Economic Partnership Agreements based on reciprocity.20 If anything, therefore, the EU network of reciprocal trade agreements will increase. Within a few years importers and consumers should thus have more and not less access to duty-free imports, and any short-run increases in inflation should be more than neutralised. Third, the opportunity cost of staying out of the EU will increase for export-oriented firms.21 And finally, since the ACP (African, Caribbean and Pacific) countries that are parties to the Cotonou Agreement are an important source of raw materials for the EU itself, the duty-free access of their raw materials should actually benefit Malta which imports all its raw material needs. In the process local firms would, of course, also become subject to competition from countries covered by reciprocal trade agreements with the EU, and inefficient and high-cost producers in Malta could well be driven out of the market. To a great extent, however, this adjustment is already taking place, not least because the removal of import levies is well underway. Thus, while there could be some increased costs, the effects on unemployment should be limited. In any case, both the Government and the EU have mechanisms designed to assist uncompetitive firms. It could also be argued that some job losses are inevitable if we really want to give consumers a better deal while promoting the competitiveness of domestic firms. A short-term increase in unemployment, moreover, could well be reversed. This is not an unrealistic expectation. Investors from non-EU countries will find that they would be in a better position to tap the enlarged EU market by consolidating their activities in the new members than by accessing these markets separately. The opportunities which enlargement would provide for investors should not be underestimated given that Europe is the region having the greatest concentration of regional trade agreements with third countries, and that it is also the region with the highest proportion of imports that is outsourced from partners covered by such agreements. The resultant increase in employment opportunities should compensate for any jobs lost through restructuring. The prospect of access to a large market will not, of course, alone guarantee larger inflows of FDI. Investment decisions are not based solely on considerations of market size. Unfortunately, Malta is at a disadvantage in terms of other relevant criteria such as resource endowments and transport costs. Such deficiencies, therefore, have to be made up for through other factors, including a sound                                                       19 It could also be argued that the additional tax revenue from the application of the CET to imports from non-EU countries would make up at least partly for any losses arising from the removal of duties on intra-EU trade and trade with EU partners covered by reciprocal agreements. 20  The Cotonou Agreement additionally foresees that the number of developing countries that will continue to receive non-reciprocal access to EU markets under other agreements of this type is expected to decline, although there could remain a certain degree of asymmetry in timing to take into account the specific needs of developing countries. 21 It is also relevant to mention that although Malta does not benefit directly from the pre-accession funds which are available to the other accession countries of Eastern Europe, Maltese companies may already bid for contracts awarded to projects financed under one of the funds in question. (Instrument for Structural Policy for Pre-accession) The benefit would probably be lost under a looser form of agreement with the EU. 
 6 BIS Review 69/2002 macroeconomic framework, political stability, high productivity levels, a transparent and simplified regulatory framework, and an assurance that business and productive activities are conducted in line with internationally accepted standards. This would, of course, hold true whether Malta joins the EU or not.  Costs of participation in international fora obviated by EU membership While EU membership also entails the administrative burdens associated with participation in EU institutions, it should at the same time help to strengthen Malta’s presence in international fora. As Malta does not have the capacity to be present in every forum, it would be in a stronger position as a member of a large block. One could, of course, argue that this would also be achieved in other scenarios. Experience suggests otherwise however. For example, despite the efforts made to create a coalition of small states in the decision-making bodies of organisations such as the World Trade Organisation, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and despite the fact that the specific problems of small states are universally recognised, these efforts have proved largely futile. The situation is not expected to change in the near future in view of the differences among small states themselves.22 As an EU member, moreover, since Malta’s representation in EU decision-making bodies would be more than proportionate to its population, its voice would stand a better chance of being heard, not least because most of the other acceding countries are also small and could be potential allies on issues of common concern.  Indeed as Malta’s recent experience with the OECD and developments relating to the proposed EU savings tax directive have shown, Malta is likely to obtain a better deal as an EU member. Four years ago the OECD was planning to take action against non-co-operative countries on its list of “harmful tax havens”. Malta was not on the list because the Maltese Government undertook to eliminate any offending practices and to exchange information with foreign tax authorities once a level playing field was achieved. But the relevant aspect of this episode is that small jurisdictions are being compelled to revisit their strategies and diversify their economies in a manner which does not harm the interests of stronger, high-tax economies, and that standards and codes of good practice will increasingly serve as another dimension of competition.  In these circumstances it cannot but be perceived as an advantage by prospective members that the EU not only has the capacity to resist threats to the competitiveness of its members, but also has enough bargaining power to persuade its competitors to reach a compromise acceptable to its members. The EU, for example, is putting pressure on Switzerland and the United States to adopt equivalent measures to those contained in the proposed EU directive on savings taxation. It has gone as far as to suggest that it could impose sanctions and even hold up negotiations in other areas if Switzerland remains opposed to a deal on the exchange of information on the savings of EU citizens with Swiss banks. This stance is quite credible given that Austria, Belgium and Luxembourg have a vested interest in this matter and have declared that they will only support the new package if Switzerland, the United States and other third countries23 agree to apply equivalent measures. As a matter of fact, since this package is a tax-related measure it can only be adopted on the basis of unanimity, which means that it cannot be approved without the support of countries such as Luxembourg. From the perspective of the current debate in Malta, the ongoing negotiations between the EU Commission and Switzerland do more than raise questions about the durability of bank secrecy regimes. More relevantly they cast doubt on the assumption that third countries are able to protect their immunity from EU decisions simply by virtue of their status as non-members. The savings tax example also shows that even a small country like Luxembourg can, through its membership in the                                                       22  Guinea-Bissau, for example, has a GNP per capita of only $160, whereas countries such as Brunei, Cyprus, Malta and Qatar have a GNP per capita of more than $9,000. 23  These include Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco and San Marino. The US is trying to resist the move. In July 2002 the Treasury Department in fact withdrew a draft law which would have made it compulsory for American financial bodies to provide extensive information on savings income invested in the United States by non-residents and replaced it with a less onerous law that limits the extent of information and the number of countries to which it would apply. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 7 EU, succeed in getting a larger country to give up some of the competitive edge it enjoys in a particular sector.  It is to be expected that similar manoeuvres will become more frequent in an enlarged EU. Having a voice in setting the rules would then assume paramount importance, especially since the other new members, who are Malta’s competitors in several areas, would themselves be seeking to advance their own interests. This, in turn, also casts doubt on whether Malta would be able to obtain transitional arrangements and derogations comparable to those it has obtained thus far if it had to negotiate with the EU when Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey have become members. This leads to my third conclusion. If, irrespective of whether and when Malta joins the EU, local producers and service providers will continue to be influenced by decisions taken by the EU, and given that the other channels through which Malta could possibly gain a better representation in international fora are not well-developed, Malta would probably be in a stronger bargaining position as an EU member.  The macroeconomic discipline aspect of EU membership As in any other club, EU membership and access to the privileges associated with it entails an obligation to contribute to the common budget. Now the debate on whether to join the EU has so far focused almost exclusively on whether Malta would be a net contributor or recipient of EU funding.24 A decision having such momentous implications cannot, however, be based only on issues relating to post-accession funding, which is a time-bound mechanism designed to help lagging EU regions catch up with the more affluent ones. For apart from broader geo-political and social considerations, EU membership represents a concrete, long-term response to the challenge of developing a modern economy with the capacity to generate wealth in a sustainable manner. In the case of Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Greece, the EU has indeed proved to be a most effective mechanism for this purpose.  This is so because the EU is unique among other regional arrangements in that it goes beyond market liberalisation and the harmonisation of standards, and encompasses more fundamental aspects of integration. For this audience of bankers and financiers, it would be appropriate to illustrate this point by reference to the institutional framework governing macroeconomic policy in the euro area.  Although new members cannot join the euro area immediately upon accession, they are expected to participate in EMU eventually and, therefore, to show a commitment to a stable macroeconomic framework even before accession. Whatever the outcome of the current debate about the Stability and Growth Pact, fiscal discipline will continue to be an important policy ingredient of such a framework as it is a necessary condition for the success of any monetary union. In addition, the obligation to fulfil the Maastricht criteria provides members of the euro area with the impetus to safeguard the sustainability of their economies, not least because deficiencies in the real sector of the economy would ultimately weaken the ability of a Member State to fulfil the Maastricht criteria on an ongoing basis. The euro adds an important dimension to these disciplines. First, through its effects on price transparency it will increasingly compel dominant players in the market place to reconsider their behaviour. This also applies to the financial sector, because a growing number of savers and borrowers will be offered a larger selection of euro-denominated financial instruments that will in time be tradable without limitation across the EU. This will have the added advantage of causing interest rates to converge to low levels. In addition, although the EU has not yet reached all the objectives of the 1999 Financial Services Action Plan, there is evidence that they will be met on schedule, not least because the euro will provide the market with the necessary impetus to identify the remaining obstacles to the completion of the single market. A clear example of this is provided by the regulation on cross-border payments in euro which seeks to eliminate unjustifiable differences between charges on cross-border transfers and                                                       24  On the same reasoning Malta should withdraw from international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development since it is no longer entitled to financing from these institutions. This, however, has not occurred because it is recognised that membership in these institutions yields more than monetary benefits. 
 8 BIS Review 69/2002 those on transfers within Member States. Another consists of the initiatives underway to extend the single passport beyond the banking sector to investment services, insurance intermediaries and securities markets. This will have at least two implications. First, a financial product licensed in one Member State would automatically be recognised in all others without the need for the service provider to go through licensing and listing procedures afresh. For financial service providers this is an opportunity to by-pass the regulatory and other barriers that would otherwise render them uncompetitive. For the individual Member State, this is an opportunity to attract financial service providers from third countries who want to take advantage of the opportunity to establish themselves and market their products anywhere in the EU. Second, the single passport will also reduce the cost of doing business. It is in fact estimated that the Action Plan would reduce the cost of capital for 18 million businesses in the EU and drive down the cost of financial services for consumers.  Conclusion Against this background it is not surprising that studies on the effects of enlargement show that growth rates would be higher under EU membership than under any other scenario. A European Commission study shows, for example, that during the first five years following accession, growth rates in the acceding countries would be between 1.7% and 3.2% above those that would be achieved if these countries were to proceed with current reforms without joining the EU.25 A comparable finding also emerges for Malta: the annual growth rate would be between 1.7% and 1.9% higher in the short-run than it would be under the non-membership scenario. The difference would be even larger in subsequent years – Malta’s growth rates could then be between 4.4% and 6.1% higher under EU membership. Such findings and related considerations have led governments, political parties, trade unions and academics from twelve European countries, large and small, islands and continental ones, to conclude that membership of the EU is on balance the best available response to the challenges posed by globalization. Those who perceive EU membership as a unique opportunity are equally aware that catching up with some of the most economically and socially advanced countries on earth is a major task for countries whose average income is still only some 40 per cent of the EU average. This challenge can only be overcome if the candidate countries seriously question the way they have organized and managed their economies in the past, and resolve to raise their performance. The magnitude of the task is not to be underestimated because the necessary changes are pervasive – affecting both institutions and mindsets, policies and work practices – and they also entail costs, financial and otherwise. There is clearly, however, also a widespread conviction in the other candidate countries that this would be change with a purpose. Apart from the highly desirable prospect of convergence with EU income levels and living standards, a process itself facilitated by EU financial and technical assistance, the pay-off would include anchoring the future prospects of each new member country to those of an economic superpower, unfettered access to a large and rich market with a single currency, the adoption across the board of international best practices and standards and, not least, a place at the table where decisions are taken which would affect these countries even as non-members.  The dynamics of regional economic integration are such that the choices available to our policymakers will be inevitably conditioned in future by the policies of an enlarged and stronger EU. It should, therefore, be clear that if it is to prosper, Malta will have to seek an accommodation with the EU. The prevailing view among countries on the periphery of the existing EU-15 is that the prospective long-term benefits of membership outweigh the costs. That is why they are anxious to become members.                                                       25  European Commission, Directorate General for Economic and Financial Affairs. (2001) “The Economic Impact of Enlargement.” Enlargement Papers No 4. June. http://europa.eu.int/economy_finance. The report notes that between 2005 and 2009 the average growth rate in 8 of the accession countries (the first wave of exceeding countries excluding Malta and Cyprus) will be 2.9%, 4.6% and 6.1%, respectively under the baseline scenario, a central scenario and an optimistic scenario. In a similar vein, a recent report by the National Bank of Hungary concludes that the adoption of the euro could boost economic growth in Hungary by between 0.6 to 0.9 percentage points annually for 20 years. Most of the growth will come from increased international trade. See National Bank of Hungary, Occasional Paper 24, “Adopting the Euro in Hungary: expected costs, benefits and timing”, by Attila Csajbok and Agnes Csermely. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 9 Until such time as an equally well-documented argument is made which seriously questions this view, the case for membership remains a compelling one. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 1 David Dodge: Staying the course Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, during a panel discussion at the Banco de México, Mexico City, 12 November 2002.  *      *      * The dramatic events of the last two years and growing concern about the near-term prospects for the global economy have created a climate in which policy-makers focus only on current economic developments and lose sight of longer-term goals.  There's a natural tendency to focus on the here and now, and to use any tools that are readily at hand to deal with today's problems, without proper regard for their long-term consequences.  It's easy to forget the hard-learned lessons of the past and overlook the longer-term fundamentals that are necessary to support a strong recovery and sustained positive economic performance over time.  What are those fundamentals?  Mr. Greenspan, in his opening remarks to this conference, talked about the importance of the fundamentals, going all the way back to Adam Smith. What's interesting is that things have not changed that much. But we don't have to reach that far in history for guiding principles. We can look at the four key principles that emerged as part of the OECD consensus during the 1980s.  The first principle relates to monetary policy. It basically recognized price stability as the appropriate goal for monetary policy over the medium term. Policy-makers were advised to respond symmetrically, and in a forward-looking manner, to excess demand and supply so as to keep the economy on an even keel, thus achieving price stability and maximizing output over the medium term.  The second principle applied to fiscal policy and the need for a more disciplined approach to managing the public purse. Rising debt levels and an aging population made it clear that concrete action was necessary to eliminate deficits and put the debt-to-GDP ratio firmly on a declining path. Automatic stabilizers should still be allowed to work during economic downturns. But in good times, surpluses would be generated that would help preserve the budget balance and keep the debt-to-GDP ratio on a downward trend.  The third principle focused on the need for wide-ranging structural reform to reduce rigidities and inefficiencies. This meant removing burdensome regulations and legislative restrictions and eliminating wasteful government expenditures and distortionary tax and subsidy systems.  The fourth, and final, principle called for trade liberalization. It was based on the premise that only through freer international trade can countries fully exploit the gains from increased specialization, enhanced productivity, and greater competitiveness.  These four principles can be likened to the four legs of a chair. The chair is steadier when all four legs are the same length. Similarly, an economy is more stable when progress is made on all four policy fronts.  But what should we be doing during periods of unexpected, pronounced economic turbulence?  The latest worldwide economic slowdown has increased pressures on policy-makers to take action on a number of fronts. Some of them are being encouraged to erect trade barriers in order to protect favoured national sectors from foreign competition. But experience shows that such beggar-thy-neighbour policies not only impose costs on the rest of the domestic economy, they also undermine global economic welfare.  Other policy-makers are being advised to forget about structural reforms in the short term, for fear of exacerbating economic weakness. Unfortunately, this approach virtually guarantees suboptimal performance in the future and maximizes the long-term costs of dealing with the structural problems – in many cases, sowing the seeds of future crises.  In many countries, weak economic growth, coupled with rising government expenditures, has recently led to a deteriorating fiscal position, reversing the hard-won gains made over the past decade. To the extent this result is driven by the automatic stabilizers in place, it is unavoidable and desirable in the short run. But policy-makers should be very careful about calls for more extensive, discretionary fiscal measures taken for stabilization purposes. Such measures typically take effect long after the need for 
 2 BIS Review 69/2002 additional stimulus has passed, and they are often difficult to reverse. In the end, they often simply weaken a country's structural budget position.  Without a doubt, the most suitable tool for dealing with any short-term cyclical problems in the economy is monetary policy. It is flexible, easily reversible, and general in scope. If monetary policy is allowed to perform this function, then there will not be inordinate pressure on other, less appropriate, instruments and policies. But let me be clear: this is not to say that we should use monetary policy to allow us to avoid taking the necessary steps on the other three fronts. For example, it is inappropriate to erect trade barriers and then say we need more monetary stimulus. It is inappropriate to allow rigidities to build in the economy and then call on central banks to provide stimulus. The right thing to do is to continue working on steadying the other three legs of the chair and to use monetary policy appropriately. Central bankers must guard against turning monetary policy itself into a source of instability. So here too, the bottom line is to never lose sight of our longer-term objective of low and stable inflation.  The prevailing worldwide economic weakness, together with geopolitical uncertainty and financial market volatility, has led to significant monetary easing in most countries. This easing has been broadly appropriate and, in some cases, indeed even more may be needed. But it is extremely important that the monetary authorities keep their eyes firmly on the economic horizon. By concentrating on developments 18 to 24 months ahead, not only will they ensure that the critical medium-term objectives are met, but the short-term needs of the economy are also addressed.  Monetary policy-makers should also be wary of taking on too many additional responsibilities, such as trying to stabilize selective market assets.  This is not to say that we should not pay attention to what is happening in financial markets. We certainly should. These markets can convey important information about future developments. And they exert direct and indirect influences on the real economy.  But monetary authorities must resist the siren calls for active management of financial markets and the pleas for regular intervention to help stabilize asset prices. It would be unfortunate if we were to repeat costly past mistakes for the sake of near-term expediency.  Canada, like most other countries, has committed itself to the four principles of sound economic performance: low and stable inflation, fiscal prudence, structural reform, and trade liberalization. As a country, we have made great progress on all four fronts in recent years. Of course, pressures have emerged which threaten to undermine those commitments. These pressures have been resisted vigorously. While particular interest groups are unhappy with this resistance, the Canadian public as a whole supports sound policies. Canadians remain convinced that the authorities will follow these policies; and that is why both household consumption and investment by SMEs continue to be strong. Even in the face of geopolitical and international economic uncertainties, sound medium-term policies are helping to maintain strong domestic demand.  To conclude, the current uncertainties will dissipate, and stronger growth will resume, provided we continue to pursue sound macro, trade, and structural policies. What is important is to anticipate the institutions, structures, and policies that we want to have in place once this latest turbulence subsides, and not to focus too narrowly on the present. Although the near-term challenges that we face may seem daunting, it would be unfortunate if, in attempting to deal with them, we impaired the prospects for future growth and improved economic performance.  Canada is committed to staying the course. The same is true, I hope, of all other countries gathered here today. We all have an important responsibility to make sure that the lessons we have learned, and our continuing strong commitments to prudent policies, are understood more broadly.  
 BIS Review 69/2002 1 Nout Wellink: Current issues in European monetary policy Address by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Euro Seminar: “A test of faith” in Tokyo, Japan, 26 November 2002. *      *      * It is always satisfying for those of us who have been closely involved in the birth of the euro to see how widespread the interest in the new currency is. Actually, the birth of a new currency is in some respects similar to the birth of a child. You can prepare for both, but you soon have to learn that you cannot fully control how it develops. Both children and currencies develop a life of their own – and you are frequently faced with unexpected challenges. Similarly, you are pleased when others take an interest in your child. I think that I can safely say that we are now through most of the birth pains of the new currency and can now concentrate on the ‘normal’ challenges of monetary policy. My colleagues at the Bank of Japan are certainly well aware of the fact that challenges continue to develop. In that respect we have much to learn from each other. Consistent with this observation, my comments today will not be on the immediate outlook for euro area monetary policy. Instead I will dwell on some issues that are – to a large extent – topical in discussions on central banking around the world. They include the risk of deflation, risks to financial stability, how to cope with oil price hikes, fiscal policy developments and the enlargement of the monetary union. I hope that my comments will provide insights into the way we approach these issues within the Eurosystem. Is there a risk of deflation? Let me begin by responding to the question of potential deflation in the euro area. A number of countries around the world are currently experiencing falling prices. In contrast, Alan Greenspan has noted that he considers that the US is not close to the deflation cliff. Before discussing the euro area situation, let me first note that persistent deflation is damaging – at least as damaging as persistent inflation, and the risks are non-linear. A small fall in prices need not be damaging, but an ongoing fall certainly is. There is no need to dwell on that here – you know that better than I do. This aversion for deflation is captured in the ECB’s definition of price stability. We define price stability as a year on year increase in consumer prices of less than 2% and seek to maintain that over the medium term. In practice, we have a preference for inflation lying within a range between around 1 and 2%. This reflects potential measurement error in price indices as well as our desire to avoid deflation. Having flagged our aversion to persistent deflation, let me turn to the substance of the question. My answer is clear – in the present situation I see no immediate risks of deflation in the euro area, albeit for the wrong reasons. Service price inflation accounts for around 40% of the HICP index and competition in this sector is rather low. In addition, the sizeable government sector has a role in price setting in many areas. Both factors tend to put a floor under price increases. Our wage and price setting mechanisms are simply not flexible enough to allow widespread or persistent deflation in the absence of a severe or prolonged recession. Although formal wage indexation in Europe is considerably lower than in earlier decades, we are not at the point where nominal wage cuts are likely to be broadly accepted. Similarly, nominal price declines are also rather rare. Deflationary risks generally arise from one or more of the following factors – the bursting of an asset price bubble, difficulties in the financial sector or ongoing losses by businesses. Clearly these triggers are generally interconnected, and can reinforce each other. These interdependencies make deflation such a difficult problem and its impact widespread and corrosive. Turning to a discussion of these triggers, a prolonged or severe recession is not what we are currently experiencing. In fact, we are in a situation where the relatively quick recovery we observed in early 2002 seems to have stalled. Part of the reason why we continue to feel that we are in a difficult situation is that we had hoped that the recovery would be rapid. At the beginning of this year we expected that economic growth would be close to trend by the end of this year. In fact, growth will remain substantially below potential this year and the recovery is unlikely to gain much momentum until next year. I do not want to go into the reasons behind that now. My point is simply that the current downturn is not sufficiently severe to 
 2 BIS Review 69/2002 generate deflationary pressures. And as I will argue below, the same conclusion holds as regards the other possible triggers for deflation – asset price declines or financial sector fragility. Overall, therefore, I am confident that Europe will not experience a period of persistent deflation – and the associated problems that this could cause. I can also assure you that we are aware of the risk. In particular, we are aware that it is difficult to put the deflation genie back in the bottle once it has come out. If signs of widespread problems emerge, we will act swiftly to counter them. An advantage of our measured monetary policy response to date is that we have plenty of policy room available to react if necessary. Is there a risk to financial stability Closely related to the question of deflation is the issue of financial stability. A period of deflation could be caused by, or contribute to, financial stability problems as real debt burdens rise and borrowers struggle to service their debt commitments. Again, I expect that you know more about this than I do. However, let me give you my interpretation of recent developments in Europe and their implications for financial stability. Asset price declines One concern has been that recent stock price declines could trigger financial instability by weakening balance sheets across the economy. Clearly there has been a significant adjustment in stock prices around the world over the past year or so. Europe has also been affected. European stock prices are now back around the levels seen in 1998 and have fallen by around 30% since the beginning of this year. Nevertheless, to put this fall in perspective, stock prices remain well above 1996 levels, which was when Chairman Greenspan made his comments on irrational exuberance. This holds true even when you adjust for inflation. Regardless of whether or not stock prices are too high, a decline of the magnitude we have seen is bound to have some impact on the macroeconomy. At the Dutch central bank we have estimated that a sustained decline of 30% would have a cumulative negative impact of just over ½ % on European growth over three years. Our model implies that there will be an insignificant impact on prices. However, these estimates are for the direct influence of lower stock prices only and abstract from confidence effects. As an aside, it is interesting to note that the wealth effects from changing share prices are considerably stronger in the United States. For example, a fall of 30% in US share prices results in a cumulative negative impact of over 3½ percent of GDP over the same three year period. There would also be a negative impact on consumer prices of a little over ½% over three years. The different impacts stem largely from the lower extent of share ownership in Europe than in the US. Although direct share ownership is gradually spreading in Europe, it remains considerably less widespread than in the United States. In addition, market capitalisation as a percentage of GDP is around 70% higher in the United States than in Europe. House prices are the other major component of household wealth. Any widespread and significant decline in house prices would have a more substantial effect than stock price declines. This is particularly true for the euro area, where homeownership is more widespread than direct share holdings. Estimates suggest that a 30% fall in house prices would have a cumulative negative impact on GDP of over 1% in the euro area. For the US the comparable figure is over 3%, although I should note that these house price estimates are very imprecise. There are signs that the rapid house price increases some of the smaller euro area countries have experienced are coming to an end – that is certainly the case in the Netherlands. However, actual declines in house prices seem to be concentrated in only a few segments of the housing market in some euro area countries. In particular, they are concentrated in the more expensive end of the market, where there is likely to be an interdependence with the adverse demand effects stemming from capital losses in the stock market. I do not expect substantial declines in house prices to be widespread across the euro area. Banking system concerns The banking system in some parts of the world is being tested as a result of the current economic slowdown and the associated credit losses. Still, the European banking sector shows, broadly speaking, no sign of any widespread distress of the sort that might lead to financial stability concerns. In fact, the banking system has come through the recent decline in share prices, crises in Latin 
 BIS Review 69/2002 3 America, and the economic slowdown, rather well. European banks generally have smaller shareholdings than Japanese banks, so their exposure to falling share prices is lower. Some consider that the German banking system is vulnerable, although I think that it remains fundamentally sound. There are signs of increasing risk aversion, as lenders distinguish more carefully between rating classes. This is showing up in wider credit spreads and in some cases in limits on lending volumes. Supervisors are alert to these trends. In the Netherlands we continue to conduct a range of stress tests to assess the vulnerability of the financial system to further shocks. We closely monitor exposure in particular markets, including in real estate, which have been a cause of problems in some countries in the past. Stress tests and monitoring have the further advantage of making the management of financial institutions more aware of the risks they face. Discussions at Basel on the new capital accord also place more attention on stress testing. My conclusions on financial stability are therefore clear. There are no signs of financial instability in the euro area. I hope, and central banks throughout the Eurosystem are committed to ensuring, that this will remain the case. Problems that may be experienced at a few banks are not indicative of problems across the euro area as a whole. In any event, central bankers, including myself, are continuously assessing financial stability risks. I will not pretend that we will always be able to prevent instability occurring. The world and financial markets change rapidly and the lessons that we can learn from earlier experiences need to be updated. However, I do hope that we can reduce the chance of instability.  Oil prices, conflict in the Middle East and the impact on monetary policy Let me now turn to a risk that points to higher, rather than to lower, inflation. Oil prices have been one of the most significant influences on inflation over the past three years and they remain volatile. Given the impact that even relatively moderate oil price changes can have on inflation, this volatility poses an ongoing challenge for monetary policymakers. The possible consequences of any conflict in the Middle East only increase the uncertainty as we look ahead. Oil prices currently incorporate a risk premium, to an unknown extent, regarding a possible Middle East conflict. Therefore, the additional impact on prices from a conflict is unknown. It is also possible that oil prices could decline within a short period of time. Any conflict might also result in an exchange rate reaction, although the direction and size of this is unknown. It is possible to develop plausible arguments both for and against a strengthening of the US dollar. Given these uncertainties, I am not going to try to forecast the exchange rate. If I could do that with any degree of accuracy, I would probably be sitting on your side of the room as an analyst or trader, rather than standing here as a central banker. Whichever way the exchange rate moves, its impact could be critical in determining monetary policy reactions – not only in Europe, but also in other countries. Policy makers with appreciating currencies will have less need to tighten policy – or more room to ease – than those confronted by depreciating currencies. So, instead of trying to achieve the impossible task of describing the precise policy response to any conflict, I will say something briefly about the framework we use in assessing the issue. An obvious but sometimes overlooked point is that ECB monetary policy is based on an comprehensive assessment of the outlook for price stability. This is affected, but not solely determined, by movements in oil prices. To the extent that oil prices do alter the outlook for price stability, we try to look through the so-called first round impact, but try to counter any second-round impact. In the oil crises of the 1970s, we learned that we need to prevent an upward wage-price spiral developing. Luckily this is nowadays easier to achieve for two reasons. Firstly, there is less wage indexation so such a spiral is slower to develop. Having inflation expectations anchored at low levels also helps. The second key factor is that our dependence on oil is now lower. Fiscal policy developments and the Stability and Growth Pact Let me now turn from issues closely connected to monetary policy decisions, to two that form part of the environment within which we operate. The first is fiscal policy. While all central bankers sometimes face challenges from fiscal policy makers, I think that those in the euro area are rather unique – and stem from the fact that we are a monetary union of sovereign states. Within Europe there is clarity and consensus about the institutional framework covering the relationship between fiscal and monetary 
 4 BIS Review 69/2002 policy. Despite this consensus, discussions continue about the detailed implementation of the framework. As you know, a number of countries have made insufficient progress towards fiscal consolidation in recent years. Some countries are not going to reach a balanced-budget position by 2004, as intended. More seriously, several have, or are likely to, post deficits exceeding 3% of GDP. The lacklustre economic climate obviously plays a part in explaining this fiscal slippage. Equally obviously, several countries failed to make sufficient consolidation efforts during the earlier period of robust economic growth. Instead, they took advantage of the growth years to lower taxes and raise spending in the mistaken belief that the good years would never end. Sadly, one of life’s lessons is that all good things eventually come to an end. Countries that did not follow the rules are now suffering the consequences. Again, the analogy with children comes to mind. As any parent knows, children need clear rules – and these rules need to be enforced. Both parents and monetary policy makers understand the need to be consistent if credibility is to be maintained. We’ve learned that the hard way. The same rules of life apply to fiscal policy. Credibility suffers if you do not do what you promised to do. Moreover, if these rules are not adhered to, problems could also develop in other areas of common European policy. Enforcement mechanisms will lack credibility. In a sense, it is this risk of the loss of credibility that is most concerning about current developments in euro area fiscal policy. Everyone agrees that there can be no return to the large fiscal deficits of the 1970s. That simply crowded out private sector investment. The importance of reaching a sound fiscal position is reinforced by the need to plan ahead for the fiscal consequences of population ageing. Postponing the adjustment will not make it any easier – and nor will the problem disappear. Had countries undertaken the necessary fiscal consolidation in the good years and reached a position of fiscal balance, the 3% deficit limit imposed by the Treaty would have been sufficient to deal with the slowdown. However, we should keep the current events in perspective. The budget deficit for the euro area as a whole is expected to just over 2% of GDP in 2002 and 2003. By way of comparison, the US deficit is expected to be over 3% in both years. Enlargement of the European Union and the European Monetary Union The last issue that I want to discuss today concerns European enlargement. As you know, up to 10 countries are likely to join the European Union in 2004. Two years later, at the earliest, these countries could be eligible to join the monetary union and to participate in the decision making processes within the ECB. Some commentators have argued that enlargement could prove damaging for the expanded monetary union. Two main arguments seem to be given. The first is that decision making will prove impossible within such a large group. The second is that if economic conditions in accession countries are different from those in the rest of the euro area, and their governors vote on the basis of national economic circumstances rather than euro area developments, monetary policy settings will be incorrect. Let me first cover the discussion about the number of decision makers. In comparison with other central banks, the current size of the ECB’s Governing Council is large. We have 18 members. That has not been a problem in taking interest rate decisions to date. In fact, my experience is that we are able to efficiently discuss the key issues and reach our decisions. Nevertheless, we cannot continue to expand the Council without limit. However, the problem is, in my view, largely one of perception. There are concerns that we will be unable to take decisions efficiently and that enlargement may lead to a focus on national developments, rather than on the euro area as a whole. To address these concerns, a rotation model might be introduced that would restrict the number of national central bank governors with a vote at any point in time. The United States Federal Reserve uses a form of rotation for their Federal Open Market Committee. However, let me stress that I do not expect the substance of our discussions or decisions to change. The fact that we will all continue to participate in discussions, even if we have no vote, will facilitate this continuity. Our focus will continue to be on the euro area as a whole. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 5 Conclusions Looking at the key issues currently facing us at the ECB, it seems to me that our new currency has rapidly ‘grown up’. Our challenges are no longer those uniquely associated with the birth of the euro. Instead, we are mostly concerned with issues that are challenges for central banks around the world. That doesn’t make our job easier, but does at least mean that we are moving out of uncharted territory. Of course, financial market analysts and the media have also had to get used to the issues we are confronted with, and our style of dealing with those issues. I think that our coming of age as a currency is also reflected in the comments we now attract from analysts and the media. There seems to be increasing understanding about what we are trying to do and how we go about it. There is, naturally, always room for improvement. I hope that my comments today have made a contribution in this respect by adding to your understanding of how we go about monetary policy formulation within Europe. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 1 Mervyn King: The inflation target ten years on Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, delivered to the London School of Economics, London, 19 November 2002. The references for the speech can be found on the website of the Bank of England. *      *      * 1. Introduction Ten years ago, in this very room, Robin Leigh Pemberton (then Governor, now Lord Kingsdown), delivered the first LSE-Bank of England Lecture. It was entitled “The Case for Price Stability”. In the twenty-five years prior to that lecture, prices had risen by over 750%, more than over the previous two hundred and fifty years. So the audience on that evening in November 1992 had grown up in a world in which rapidly rising prices appeared inevitable. They were the inflation generation. To them price stability seemed remote. Inflation was simply taken for granted. But that LSE-Bank of England Lecture coincided with the introduction of a new monetary framework - the inflation target. Since then price stability has become a reality. Over the past decade inflation has averaged 2.5%, and has been no lower than 1.5% and no higher than 3.3% Alan Greenspan defined price stability as when “expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual enough that they do not materially enter business and household decisions.” With inflation expected to remain close to 2.5%, it is no longer a material concern to families and businesses in this country. Alan Blinder, who was Alan Greenspan’s deputy at the Federal Reserve Board, put it even more clearly. Price stability, he said, was when ordinary people stop talking and worrying about inflation. And so successful has been the pursuit of low inflation that some commentators have talked about the “death of inflation” and others have become increasingly concerned about the prospect of deflation. Tonight I want to re-examine the case for price stability, and ask the following questions. Did the benefits of low inflation promised ten years ago materialise? Is the case for price stability the same as in 1992? What does price stability mean in practice? Finally, what are the challenges for monetary policy over the next decade? 2. Ten years of the inflation target: what has it achieved? Since Britain’s departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September 1992, monetary policy has been based on an explicit numerical target for the rate of inflation - now 2.5% - and a high degree of transparency and accountability. Indeed, it was in his LSE lecture that Lord Kingsdown announced that the first Inflation Report would appear in February 1993. And last week’s Report completes exactly a decade of Inflation Reports - forty assessments of the outlook for growth and inflation in the British economy. Although inflation targeting in the United Kingdom is now ten years old, the most significant institutional changes occurred five years ago. Decisions on interest rates were taken out of the political arena in May 1997 and delegated by the Chancellor to the new Monetary Policy Committee. It is too soon to compare the nine-member Monetary Policy Committee with the Council of Nine that ruled Siena during the fourteenth century. Exactly 660 years before the Chancellor created the MPC, the Council of Nine commissioned Lorenzetti to paint the marvellous frescoes in the Palazzo Pubblico showing the virtues of Good Government and the vices of Bad Government. There are few more convincing representations of the case for stability than those frescoes. Since the MPC has not, at least yet, discovered a modern Lorenzetti, I shall present the case for price stability in a more orthodox, if less compelling, visual form. Chart 1 shows consumer price inflation in this country over the past fifty years. The decade of inflation targeting stands out as a period of low and stable inflation. Table 1 shows that not only has inflation been lower since inflation targeting was introduced, but that, as measured by its standard deviation, it 
 2 BIS Review 68/2002 has also been more stable than in recent decades. Moreover, inflation has been less persistent - in the sense that shocks to inflation die away more quickly - under inflation targeting than for most of the past century.1 Now this fall in inflation has led to sharp reductions in nominal interest rates, at both short and long time horizons, as shown in Table 2. That reflects both lower inflation expectations and smaller risk premia to compensate for future inflation uncertainty. The total inflation premium - the sum of expected inflation and the inflation risk premium - is measured by the difference between yields on conventional and index-linked government securities. Chart 2 shows that the total inflation premium fell significantly on the announcement of Bank of England independence and the creation of the MPC. It is highly suggestive of a fall not just in expected inflation but also in the inflation risk premium. In principle, the behaviour of businesses and households depends on real interest rates - nominal interest rates less the expected increase in prices.2 To the extent that the inflation risk premium falls, then so too does the level of real interest rates. The evidence in Chart 2 suggests that real rates have fallen too, although by less than nominal rates. Chart 1 Annual inflation in the UK  Note: Four-quarter growth rate of the quarterly retail price index (RPI) until 1974, and four-quarter growth rate of the quarterly retail price index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX) after 1974. Note that the RPI methodology before 1974 did not include mortgage interest payments, so the RPI series before 1974 is equivalent to RPIX in that sense. Data up to 2002 Q3. Source: ONS.                                                       1 The conclusion reflects statistical tests including first-order auto correlations of consumer price inflation over ten-year rolling windows, and estimated spectral densities for inflation from a random coefficient AR (4) and GARCH (1,1) model. The only periods in which persistence was lower than in the 1990s was in the early 1930s and early 1960s. 2 If index-linked contracts were widely used the relevant real rate would be the index-linked rate. And if the risk premium were determined largely in an integrated world capital market without frictions then again the real rate would be the riskless index-linked rate. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 3  Table 1 Inflation in the UK  Mean St. dev 1950-1959 4.14 1.06 1960-1969 3.65 0.72 1970-1979 13.07 1.81 1980-1992 6.40 1.14 1993-2002 2.49 0.24 1950-2002 5.93 1.41 Note: Mean inflation is the total increase in the quarterly price level (RPI until 1974, RPIX after 1974) over the period indicated, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate. Standard deviation is calculated on quarterly inflation rates (not annualised) over the period indicated. Data up to 2002 Q3. Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. Table 2 Short and long interest rates in the UK Short rate Long rate  Mean St. dev Mean St. dev 1950-1959 2.87 1.67 4.40 0.88 1960-1969 5.51 1.31 6.58 1.07 1970-1979 8.92 2.81 11.94 2.41 1980-1992 11.28 2.23 10.83 1.88 1993-2002 5.58 0.88 6.38 1.59 1950-2002 7.09 3.59 8.19 3.32 Note: Short rates are three-month treasury bill yields. Long rates are 20-year gilt yields. Data are monthly, and use the rate at the close of the last business day of the month. Data up to September 2002. Source: Global Financial Data, Inc.; Bank of England calculations.  
 4 BIS Review 68/2002 Chart 2 Total inflation premium expected in ten years time, UK 1997  Note: The total inflation premium is measured as the difference between implied forward nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence and implied real rates on index-linked gilts ten years hence. Source: Bank of England. So price stability appears to have led to a more stable macro economic environment, with fewer surprises to inflation, less inflation uncertainty, and a lower level of real interest rates. Has this improved nominal performance led to greater stability of the real economy? Table 3 shows that since 1992, output has grown at a little above its forty year average, and has been much more stable than before. The standard deviation of quarterly growth rates over the past decade was less than half that in earlier periods. Can these gains in terms of greater stability be attributed to a more stable monetary regime? After all, a sceptic might argue that the causation runs from a more stable economic environment to lower inflation. But some of these alternative explanations, such as the rise in the share of services in total output and better inventory management, are part of longer-term trends and do not fit well with the observation that volatility has fallen sharply over the past decade. And shocks to the UK from the world economy and from the sterling real exchange rate have been as large, if not larger, over the past five years as in earlier periods.3                                                       3 Most of the evidence on the link between inflation and stability comes from the United States where the greater stability of output is evident over the past two decades. A number of recent studies have concluded that at least part of the explanation for greater stability can be attributed to better monetary policy, for example Taylor (1998). 
 BIS Review 68/2002 5  Table 3 Real GDP growth in the UK  Mean St. dev 1956-1959 2.42 1.22 1960-1969 3.15 0.92 1970-1979 2.12 1.42 1980-1992 1.86 0.84 1993-2002 2.76 0.36 1956-2002 2.42 0.98 Note: Mean GDP growth is the total increase in real quarterly GDP over the period indicated, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate. Standard deviation is calculated on quarterly growth rates (not annualised) over the period indicated. Data up to 2002 Q2. Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. It is, of course, difficult to identify the effect of changes in the monetary policy regime on the path of total output. One approach is to consider long runs of data which make it easier to identify structural breaks in the behaviour of output. Luca Benati of the Bank of England has been investigating the statistical properties of inflation over long periods for a number of countries. He finds that changes in the behaviour of inflation appear broadly to coincide with changes in the monetary policy regime. Some tentative evidence that this general conclusion applies to the UK can be found in the behaviour of ten-year forward interest rates on UK government bonds. At this horizon, high and variable interest rates are signs of high expected inflation and a large inflation risk premium. As shown in Chart 3, the ten-year forward interest rate has fallen significantly in recent years, and has been less variable since inflation targeting, and especially the MPC, were introduced. What is the mechanism by which monetary policy contributes to a more stable economy? I would argue that monetary policy is now more systematic and predictable than before. Inflation expectations are anchored to the 2.5% target. Businesses and families expect that monetary policy will react to offset shocks that are likely to drive inflation away from target. In the jargon of economists, the “policy reaction function” of the Bank of England is more stable and predictable than was the case before inflation targeting, and easier to understand.4 More simply, monetary policy is not adding to the volatility of the economy in a way that it did in earlier decades.                                                       4 The behaviour of monetary policy in the United Kingdom after 1992 more closely resembles a “Taylor Rule” that has been shown to fit data in the United States than was the case before 1992. See the work of Ed Nelson of the Bank of England (Nelson 2000). 
 6 BIS Review 68/2002 Chart 3 Ten year forward rates in the UK 1970-2002  Note: Implied forward nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence, calculated on the last business day of the month. Source: Bank of England. 3. The case for price stability: what have we learnt over the past 10 years? The costs of departing from price stability - either inflation or deflation - depend upon whether it is expected or comes as a surprise. In his 1992 lecture, Lord Kingsdown distinguished three costs of unanticipated inflation and four of anticipated inflation. I shall focus on the former, commenting on the latter only briefly. Although none of the ideas are new, research since 1992 has thrown new light on both the theoretical and the empirical relevance of the costs of inflation. The main costs of unanticipated inflation are: (i) Distortions to production and investment resulting from mistakes in distinguishing between relative and absolute price changes The crucial link between price stability and production and investment is that high inflation is associated with more volatile and uncertain inflation. I showed earlier that as inflation has fallen in Britain, so too has its variability. The same link can be seen in cross-section data. Chart 4 shows the relationship between average inflation and its variability, measured by its coefficient of variation, over different time horizons for a sample of 144 countries. In all cases it is clear that inflation uncertainty increases with the average inflation rate. But does this link between inflation and its volatility mean that higher inflation results in greater variability of relative prices? Chart 5 provides the answer for the UK. For each (approximate) decade for which the data on 80 sub-components of the retail prices index are available, the chart shows the relationship between the standard deviation of those relative prices and the inflation rate in each month. At low inflation rates, say up to 4% a year, it appears that it is the absolute value of changes in relative prices that is linked to the inflation rate. This would be the case, as in Britain recently, where changes in relative prices, whether up or down, were largely responsible for short-term fluctuations in the inflation rate around a relatively stable long run level. Variability in relative prices might lead inflation to be either above or below the inflation target, but not systematically in one direction or the other. Increases in house prices move the inflation rate up and falls in oil prices move it down. In both cases, an increase in the variability of relative prices leads to movements of inflation away from the target, but not in a systematic direction. But at higher rates of inflation (or deflation) the deviation of inflation from zero is positively correlated with the variability of relative prices. Hence, outside a range close to price stability, the higher the inflation rate, the greater is the variability of relative prices. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 7 Chart 4 Cross-country relationship between level and variability of inflation  Note: Mean inflation is the total increase in the quarterly consumer price index, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate, over the indicated horizon ending in 1999 Q4. The variability of inflation is the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by the mean) of the gross inflation rate (ie 1 + growth rate) over the indicated horizon ending in 1999 Q4. Each panel covers the all the countries for which a consumer price index was available over the indicated horizon. The largest sample size is 144 (for the 5-year horizon), the smallest sample is 85 (for the 25-year horizon). Source: IMF International Financial Statistics, data item 64, and Bank of England calculations.  
 8 BIS Review 68/2002 Chart 5 Inflation and relative price variability in the UK  Note: Inflation is the total increase in monthly RPIX over the period indicated, expressed as a 12-month growth rate. Relative price variability is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the monthly increases of 80 sub-components of the RPIX in each month. Data ends August 2002. Source: Bank of England calculations based on ONS data. So inflation makes it more difficult for firms and households to work out whether the prices of the products they buy and sell have changed relative to other goods, or whether there has been a change in the overall price level. Such confusion can lead firms to produce, at least temporarily, the wrong level of output. And if many firms make these mistakes at the same time then the result is an unnecessary fluctuation in aggregate output. Another decision affected by uncertainty about prices is investment. Many investments are specific to a particular model or product, and so they become sunk costs. For such irreversible investments it may pay to wait before investing since time will resolve some of the uncertainty. A Premiership football team may decide to postpone the construction of a new stadium until their survival in the League is assured. Or a car manufacturer may postpone a decision about opening a new plant to see if a rise in demand is temporary or appears likely to last. And that uncertainty could stem from a difficulty in disentangling relative from absolute prices. In the language of finance, there is an option value to waiting when there is uncertainty about the returns on an irreversible investment. So a project must offer a rate of return sufficient not only to cover the cost of financing of the project, but also the option value to waiting. That may explain why surveys of firms show that their hurdle rates of return are often well in excess of the cost of either equity or debt finance. For example a CBI survey last year found that the average real hurdle rate for UK firms was 11.3% - down from rates of around 15% in surveys conducted in 1994 - but still well above the cost of financial capital. If uncertainty about inflation creates an option value to waiting, then it will reduce investment. And there is growing 
 BIS Review 68/2002 9 empirical evidence that inflation is a key explanatory variable for cross-country differences in investment to output ratios.5 (ii) Redistribution of wealth between debtors and creditors. Unexpected changes in the price level - the standard of value used to define contracts - produce arbitrary redistributions of wealth. As Keynes wrote in his powerful advocacy of price stability in A Tract on Monetary Reform, “We leave saving to the private investor. We leave the responsibility for setting production to the business man. These arrangements have great advantages. But they cannot work properly if the money, which they assume as a stable measuring-rod, is undependable. Unemployment, the precarious life of the worker, the disappointment of expectation, the sudden loss of savings, the profiteer - all proceed, in large measure, from the instability of the standard of value”. Or, as Lenin remarked, the best way to destroy capitalism is to debauch the currency. It is arguable as to whether it is high inflation or serious deflation which results in the greater economic damage. In Europe in the 1920s hyperinflation undermined economic and social arrangements, as it has done more recently in Latin America. But deflation has proved just as unpopular as inflation. In 274 A.D. the Roman Emperor Aurelian tried to restore the integrity of the coinage which had been adulterated by workmen in the Mint. Aurelian exchanged good money for bad, and ordered the destruction of accounts drawn up in the devalued currency. In the long run the operation restored the value of money. But in the short run it caused hardship. Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, observed that “a temporary grievance of such a nature can scarcely excite and support a serious civil war”. Unfortunately, taking a different and more Keynesian view that in the long run we are all dead, the population at the time rose in insurrection. Many of them found that they were dead in the short run as well, with seven thousand soldiers and countless civilians perishing during the suppression of the uprising. So let us consider the costs of wealth redistributions arising from unanticipated deflation. Such redistributions can lower aggregate demand. Why? Since it is difficult either to borrow or insure against uncertain future employment and earnings opportunities, current assets act as a buffer stock to make it possible to smooth consumption in the face of shocks to future prospects. When net worth is small it is risky to run down the buffer stock even further, and so the marginal propensity to spend out of wealth is much higher for households with low net worth than for families whose assets comfortably exceed their liabilities. If significant numbers of debtors have little net worth - recent first-time house-buyers with high debt-to-value ratios are a prime example - then an unanticipated deflation could cause a sharp fall in aggregate consumption spending. Such effects can be amplified if spending - consumption or investment - depends on the value of the assets that are used as collateral for loans. A fall in prices can produce a vicious circle in which the initial fall in demand lowers asset prices, reducing the value of collateral, which in turn leads borrowers to repay debt, exacerbating the original decline in aggregate demand. This “debt deflation” was first formulated clearly by Irving Fisher in the 1930s, and has recently been revived in a more sophisticated form by Nobu Kiyotaki and John Moore, here at the London School of Economics. Because deflations are, fortunately, few and far between, there is a lack of hard empirical evidence on the quantitative significance of debt deflation. In 1993, I argued that the depth of the recession in the UK and the US in the early 1990s was the result of debt deflation. Consumption fell more sharply than would have been expected given movements in incomes and interest rates, reflecting an unexpected fall in inflation and asset prices. The effects on consumption of negative equity in housing were particularly severe. The experience of Japan may add to our knowledge in this area, although, as shown in Chart 6, despite a stagnant economy over the past decade, deflation of consumer prices has not been especially large. And I am confident that all central banks will do their best to prevent the sample size of countries suffering from serious deflation from increasing.                                                       5 See for example Pindyck and Solimano (1993). Examples of how the option value to waiting can lead to significant increases in required rates of return are given in Dixit and Pindyck (1994). 
 10 BIS Review 68/2002 Chart 6 Consumption and deflation in Japan, 1985-2002  Note: Inflation is measured using the consumer price index excluding foodstuffs. The overnight interest rate is the nominal overnight uncollateralised call rate. Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. (iii) Aversion to long-term contracts and excessive resources devoted to hedging inflation risks. As we have seen, high inflation goes hand in hand with greater uncertainty about future inflation. Inflation is, therefore, associated with a positive risk premium to compensate investors for that uncertainty. The longer the time horizon, the greater the risk premium is likely to be. That discourages long-term contracts and interest rates in such contracts will often depend upon future spot interest rates. Floating-rate mortgages are a good example. With a floating-rate mortgage the borrower is exposed to the risk of sharp fluctuations in the proportion of income that is devoted to debt service, as many households in Britain still remember from the late 1980s when interest rates doubled to 15%. Fixed-rate mortgages eliminate that risk, but at the cost of introducing a new risk: the real value of the outstanding debt may change relative to the value of the house. John Campbell and João Cocco (2002) have suggested that a superior contract would be a fixed-rate mortgage where the principal was index-linked. That would reduce both income and capital risk. For whatever reason the market has not generated many private-sector index-linked contracts, despite the encouragement of high inflation in the past. Perhaps that is because the risks are generated not by some exogenous process, but by policy decisions. In any event, price stability is a good alternative to indexation. The move from a regime of high inflation to one of price stability can have consequences which again are best illustrated by the housing market. A credible move to inflation targeting can bring down inflation expectations relatively quickly, even if with a lag. Chart 7 shows that inflation expectations, as measured by surveys, fell steadily following the introduction of inflation targeting, and are now anchored on the 2.5% target. But a move to low inflation has other consequences that may be less easily understood. Price stability means lower nominal interest rates, and lower mortgage interest payments. It may also mean lower real interest rates if the inflation risk premium falls. But the fall in nominal rates is likely to be much larger than the fall in real rates. The lower mortgage payment largely reflects a rise in the effective duration of the loan because inflation no longer erodes the real value of the debt as quickly as before. In a low inflation world, nominal incomes rise more slowly than before and the real burden of servicing the debt persists. It may take longer for households to work out the 
 BIS Review 68/2002 11 impact of low inflation on real interest rates than to realise that the rate of increase of prices of everyday purchases has fallen. Learning takes time. Chart 7 One-year ahead inflation expectations and inflation outturns in the UK, 1988-2002  Note: Inflation is the four quarter change in the RPI. Expected inflation is based on the quarterly Barclays Basix survey of inflation one year ahead. It is the weighted average across all surveyed sub-groups, excluding the general public. Expected inflation is lagged on year in the chart, so that expectations and outturns for the same period can be compared. Source: ONS and Basix. One possible consequence of a slow adjustment to low inflation is that households may mistake too much of the reduction in nominal interest rates for a permanent fall in the real rate. As a result, asset prices are bid up to levels that prove unsustainable when learning finally occurs - and at the LSE you know that in time we do learn. How far this theoretical argument applies to the British housing market at present is difficult to say, but it demonstrates the risks from current house price to earnings ratios that are close to the peaks reached in the late 1980s. * * * So much for the costs of unanticipated inflation. What are the costs of anticipated inflation? Time permits me to comment only briefly on the four costs of anticipated inflation noted by Lord Kingsdown. (i) Distortions to cash balances Money - notes and coin - may no longer, as Sally Bowles claimed, make the world go round, but, even in a world of plastic, it oils the wheels of transactions. Cash still accounts for a large number of transactions, albeit a smaller fraction of the value of all transactions. The opportunity cost of holding cash is the interest rate on deposits. Inflation raises nominal interest rates and hence this cost. So agents economise on their real money balances, and incur additional costs in the form of more frequent trips to the cash dispenser - the so-called ‘shoe-leather costs’ of inflation. The traditional view was that these costs could be measured by the area under the money demand curve. Such estimates were typically small, and left researchers wondering if the costs of inflation were really all that important. But high inflation rates can affect more than just money demand. If agents economise on money balances, transactions costs may rise in markets for goods, labour and assets. As argued by Hahn (1965) and more recently articulated by Wallace (2001), many monetary models contain hidden inconsistencies in the sense that they ignore the credit or trade frictions - in particular, imperfect 
 12 BIS Review 68/2002 monitoring and enforceability - that give to money an essential role in the first place. To assess the welfare implications of inflation we need a theoretical framework that takes seriously the role of money in all these transactions. I have discussed elsewhere (King, 2001) the potential importance of money in reducing the transactions costs of firms by reducing liquidity premia in a wide range of financial markets. There is much to learn here. (ii) Incomplete indexation of the tax system A second cost of anticipated inflation is the added inefficiencies that arise when an already distortionary tax system is incompletely indexed. Martin Feldstein (1999) has edited a major study of the costs of incomplete indexation which includes a detailed analysis of the tax distortions to saving, consumption and investment in several major countries, and to which the Bank of England contributed. The benefit of reducing inflation in an already low inflation environment is estimated to be lower in the UK than in some other countries because some parts of the tax system are indexed. Nevertheless, the authors estimate that a reduction in inflation by 2 percentage points would bring an annual benefit equivalent to 0.2% of GDP. That may sound small, but it is a large absolute number. Against that, the end of mortgage interest deductibility will have lowered the impact. (iii) Front-end loading of debt burdens A third distortion is that of front-loading of the real debt burden when debt contracts are fixed in nominal terms. Inflation reduces the amount that households borrow because it raises the cost of servicing the loan in the early years. In this way decisions on consumption and investment may be distorted. (iv) Costs of changing price lists The costs of changing price lists and catalogues - so-called menu costs - are generally agreed to be of little direct consequence. But they may produce a degree of nominal rigidity in wages and prices which takes on greater significance. Inflation now causes relative price variability as not all firms are able to change their prices at the same time. The cost of greater relative price variability was discussed above, and continues to be an active field of research. Recent work at the Institute of Fiscal Studies (2002) shows that when inflation is higher, there is a larger dispersion in the inflation rates faced by individual households. This finding points strongly to the role of nominal rigidities in contributing to relative price dispersion. Taken together, the verdict of economics, history and common sense is that inflation and deflation are costly. It is clear that very high inflation - in extreme cases hyperinflation - can lead to a breakdown of the economy. There is now a considerable body of empirical evidence that inflation and output growth are negatively correlated in high-inflation countries. For inflation rates in single figures, the impact of inflation on growth is less clear. But in a study of 133 market economies over the past 50 years, Stanley Fischer and his co-authors (2002) concluded that “the old idea that in some sense inflation may be good for growth or is perhaps an inevitable part of the growth process should remain buried in the cemetery of harmful policy ideas”. 4. Price stability: what does it mean in practice? So there is a strong case for price stability. But what does price stability mean in practice? Recall that the definitions of price stability offered by Alan Greenspan and Alan Blinder are rather general in nature and make no reference to particular indexes of prices or precise numbers for inflation. There are good reasons for this. The prices of the goods that I buy may rise at a different rate from the goods that you buy. Relative prices are always changing. And the basket of goods and services that you buy today is very different from the basket you could or would have bought fifty or a hundred years ago. The official retail price index now includes computers and cable TV, but no longer bowler hats or the price of admission to cricket matches. Measurement problems mean that there is no unique way to calculate inflation. Information on prices of individual commodities in the past can be found in Harrods catalogues which were published from the mid-1890s until 1930, catalogues for the Army and Navy Stores from 1872 to 1940, and the advertising records for Selfridges which go back to 1909. To illustrate the problems of 
 BIS Review 68/2002 13 measuring inflation, I shall draw largely on historic price material kindly provided by Harrods - mainly the Catalogues, Harrods News, and Harrods Food News. No records were published after 1970, so we have supplemented the historical data by our own researches. And I am very grateful to the young Bank of England economist who was apprehended in the Food Hall, suspected of comparing prices for a competitor who was opening a store across the road. The richness of this information can be seen from the size of the Catalogue for 1907 - weighing over six pounds and containing 1375 pages. In those days the telegraphic address of Harrods was “Everything, London”. The Internet has nothing on Harrods in 1907 when a telephone service with real people answering was available to take orders right through the night which were despatched early the next day with free local delivery (as far as Windsor) and by mail elsewhere. According to the catalogues, a record player in Harrods cost £11 in 1910 (approximately £627 in today’s money). That would have bought you a hand-cranked machine that provided low-quality sound. Today, you could buy a record player for as little as £39 on the Internet, and at Harrods a better quality model for £250. How much have record-players increased in price? Ignoring quality changes, the price rose by a factor of 3.5 (that is, £39/£11). But ignoring the vast quality improvements would surely overstate this increase - a quality change bias. So how do we quantify the increase in the quality of today’s record player relative to the one in 1910? Statistically, there are a number of ways of dealing with this issue: one is to determine the price as a function of characteristics that do not change over time. The prime example of such hedonic pricing techniques in use today is for pricing computers, where the quality characteristics - performance in terms of speed and memory - can be fairly accurately measured. But hedonic pricing is not the only way to deal with this measurement issue, and recent research suggests that these techniques may overstate the extent to which quality has improved. Is a record player still the relevant product, since record players today are only used by a small group of enthusiasts of - now outdated - vinyl records? Perhaps a computer or CD (or DVD or MP3) player is the relevant product today. From about £34 you can buy a CD player on the Internet today. This is a much more sophisticated piece of equipment than even today’s record player, and its features are impossible to compare to those of a 1910 record player. If we ignore the invention and marketing of new products, we introduce a new product bias. To illustrate the quality change and the new product bias, imagine that we go shopping in Harrods both today and in 1910. Suppose that we are given £350 to spend - the same amount in both years. In 1910 you could have bought a vacuum cleaner, a record player, an iron, a camera, and a telephone. The vacuum cleaner would have spread as much dust as it removed, the record player would have been hand-cranked and the iron would need to be filled with coal. The camera would have been bulky and awkward to set up, and the telephone would have been largely silent because so few people owned one. Today you can buy a similar bundle of goods for the same total outlay, but all would be of vastly superior quality. So for durable goods it is not clear that the cost of living has increased at all. But if we buy food, however, the results are very different. Unlike appliances, many of the food items in 1910 are unchanged today - McVitie’s digestive biscuits, Quaker oats, Rose’s Lime Juice, Bournville cocoa, Frank Cooper’s Oxford marmalade, Marmite, Heinz baked beans and Colman’s mustard are only some of the familiar items for which precise comparisons over the years are possible. In 1910 you could have fed yourself on 10p a day by eating Marmite on Hovis toast for breakfast; eggs, bacon and toast for lunch; Heinz beans on toast for dinner; with a pint of milk to drink. The same menu, consisting of exactly the same brand products, would cost £4.80 today. The food basket has increased in price by a factor of 48. A vacuum cleaner, if you wanted one in 1910, cost £229. That is more than 6 years worth of food based on the menu used in the previous example. A vacuum cleaner was an item of such luxury that owners would invite their friends round to ‘Hoover parties’ to show off their prized possession. Over the years, the price of food increased in nominal terms by a factor of 48, but the price of vacuum cleaners stayed roughly the same. Today you can still buy a vacuum cleaner for £229. But that is only 47 days of food shopping, rather than 6 years. As vacuum cleaners became cheaper relative to food, people bought more of them - ignoring such change would introduce a substitution bias. If there is any degree of substitutability between products, then rational consumers would have taken account of such changes in relative prices, and the weight of this particular good in the consumption bundle may 
 14 BIS Review 68/2002 have changed. The overall result of the substitution is that the expenditure share of electrical appliances6 has not changed much, at least not in the past 50 years. If we ignored the fact that vacuum cleaners were a rare luxury item in 1910 and applied today’s quantities to calculate the 1910 consumption basket, we would greatly understate the increase in the average cost of living. And, of course, Harrods today is not exactly the typical place to go shopping - there was not much talk in 1910 of suburban shopping centres, or of Internet shopping. Ignoring developments in retail practice introduces an outlet bias. Had the bias remained constant over the years, this would have been less of an issue for measuring retail price inflation, but it clearly has not. Quality change bias, new product bias, substitution bias and outlet bias - these are some of the issues that the Boskin Commission discussed in their report on measuring inflation in the United States.7 The finding of the report, which generated wide national and international interest, was that the US CPI might have overstated changes in the cost of living by between 0.8 and 1.6 percentage points per year. The examples I have given show how difficult it is to measure changes in the price level over time. Precision is not to be had. According to the official retail prices index, the general level of retail prices rose by a factor of 52 between 1910 and 2002. But changes in the nature of the goods and services available, and the nature of retail selling, make such comparisons treacherous. Does this matter for price stability? Probably not. The Greenspan-Blinder definitions of price stability suggest that we know price stability when we see it, or rather, when we stop hearing about inflation. There is nothing mystical about the RPIX measure of inflation, nor the figure of 2.5%. But it is important to have a precise numerical target which is easy to understand in order to provide an anchor for inflation expectations and to which the MPC can be held accountable. 5. Monetary policy over the next decade: what are the challenges? Although inflation targeting has delivered many of the benefits from low inflation that were promised ten years ago, there remain real challenges for monetary policy over the next decade. Two questions have been prominent recently. First, is inflation targeting enough? Second, is deflation, not inflation, the main threat at present? Is inflation targeting enough? Do rapid increases in asset prices pose a threat to stability, even though inflation targeting has delivered steady growth with low inflation? Some commentators have suggested that monetary policy target asset prices in addition to inflation.8 But which asset prices, and what would that mean for interest rates? House prices have been rising rapidly, and as a ratio to average earnings have reached the previous peak in the late 1980s. That might suggest that interest rates should have been higher. Sterling has for six years now been around 30% higher against the euro (or its predecessors) than before, the trade deficit has grown and the profitability of manufacturing has fallen by two-thirds. That might suggest that interest rates should have been lower. Equity prices rose by 120% between 1995 and 2000, before falling 40% subsequently. Presumably that would have implied first higher and then lower interest rates. What this means is that asset prices cannot sensibly be viewed in isolation, but only in the context of the economy as a whole. I believe that, although there are justifiable concerns about recent movements in asset prices, the policy dilemma can be analysed within the framework of inflation targeting that we have in the UK. No honest person actually knows the “equilibrium” level of asset prices. They are dominated by expectations of the prices that other investors will pay for those assets in future. The relevant uncertainties can rarely be quantified by observing the frequencies of events in the past. And the response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy is also unpredictable. So targeting asset prices directly is virtually impossible. But changes in asset prices can have a major impact on levels of spending and the MPC devotes considerable time to the question of how such changes should affect policy.                                                       6 Electrical appliances and audio-visual equipment share was 0.021 in 1956 and was 0.018 in 2002. 7 See Boskin M et al (1996) ‘Towards a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living’. Final report to the Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory Committee to Study the Consumer Price Index. 8 The most rigorous statement of the case for stabilising asset prices is Dupor (2002). 
 BIS Review 68/2002 15 The immediate question is whether changes in asset prices have led to an imbalance within the economy that poses the risk of a large negative demand shock at some point in the future. I believe the answer is yes; but how big is that risk is extremely difficult to judge, and so the appropriate policy response is far from clear. Beneath the surface of overall stability in the UK economy lies a remarkable imbalance between a buoyant consumer and housing sector, on the one hand, and weak external demand, on the other. As a summary statistic of this imbalance, Table 4 shows that in the United Kingdom the growth of real domestic demand exceeded the growth of output by no less than 7½% over the five years to 2002 Q1, more than over any five year period in the 1980s and more than in any other major country during the recent past. Even the optimistic Mr Micawber would realise that this cannot continue indefinitely. How then, and over what timescale, will these imbalances unwind? Table 4 Domestic demand and output growth  UK US Euro area Japan Output growth (1997-2002 Q1) 2.4 3.2 2.5 –0.4 Dom. demand growth (1997-2002 Q1) 3.8 3.9 2.3 –0.6 Cumulative difference –7.5 –4.2 0.8 0.9 Note: Growth rates are calculated as the total increase in output (and domestic demand, respectively) over the period 1997 Q1-2002 Q1, based on quarterly data, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate. Cumulative difference is the cumulative growth rate, expressed as a percentage, of output less domestic demand. Source: ONS (for UK data); Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan). Three possibilities deserve consideration. First, the rapid growth in household consumption - averaging over 4% for the last five years - may reflect an adjustment to higher real disposable incomes. Consumption growth would then slow naturally as spending and debt reach their new levels. The imbalance between domestic demand and output would unwind as steadily as it built up, with no reason to fear a sudden correction. For this to occur the source of higher disposable incomes must be permanent. In part the increase in recent years has resulted from the improved terms of trade - 7% up on five years ago - which raise real national income for any given level of output. The main threat to the persistence of that improvement is the possibility of a fall in sterling that may be a necessary part of the rebalancing of the UK economy. It is very hard to assess the risk of that over any given time horizon. So far the path of consumer spending is not inconsistent with this benign outcome. The second possibility is that the level of debt taken out by households - the debt-to-income ratio is now at an all-time high - makes households sensitive to any adverse future shock to their employment or income prospects. In that event the risk is of a sharper adjustment of consumption to the shock than might otherwise have occurred. Monetary policy would respond, but a large negative demand shock might result in an undershoot of the inflation target for some considerable time. The third possibility I touched on earlier. Households may adjust more quickly to the implications of a low inflation world for the prices of goods and services than for nominal interest rates or the future growth of nominal incomes. A mistaken underestimate of real interest rates or overestimate of nominal income growth may raise borrowing, spending and asset prices temporarily. Eventually households learn and consumption adjusts, again possibly sharply. The policy dilemma is that by allowing consumption and demand to grow rapidly there is a risk that there will be a sharp correction of demand later. The essence of the argument is well put by Borio and Lowe who, in a BIS Working Paper, argued that, “lowering rates or providing ample liquidity when problems materialise, but not raising them as imbalances build up, can be rather insidious in the longer run. They promote a form of moral hazard that can sow the seeds of instability and of costly fluctuations in the real economy”. In practice it is difficult to know whether an “imbalance” does contain the seed of a future negative demand shock on a scale that would leave inflation below the target for some considerable time, or whether it will unwind of its own accord. The fact that growing imbalances might cause sharp deviations of inflation from target at some point in the future, raises the possibility of a trade off between deviations of inflation from target over the next 
 16 BIS Review 68/2002 year or so and deviations of inflation from target further ahead. That, I believe, is the right way to think about the challenge to monetary policy posed by asset price movements. Although there are no simple answers I hope I have shown that inflation targeting is enough, provided that one thinks carefully about the horizon over which policy can hope to affect inflation. The second challenge for monetary policy over the next decade is the possibility of deflation. That prices are now rising at the slowest rate for decades is, of course, a positive achievement of which the Bank is proud. But is the real threat now deflation? It is important to recognise that falling prices of manufactured goods is not the same as general deflation. In fact price stability, in the sense of an inflation rate overall of around 2½% a year, is likely to mean that the prices of manufactured goods will, on average, not rise at all. Faster productivity growth in manufacturing than in services, averaging around 2% over the last twenty years, means that the prices of services will rise faster than those of manufactured goods. And the rise in sterling over the past five years increased the difference between inflation rates in the two sectors. Table 5 shows the inflation rates for goods and services in the major economies. Positive rates of inflation for services, which account for around half of consumer spending, show deflation in most of the world economy is still some way off. In all countries over the past decade the gap between goods and services price inflation reflects productivity differences. That gap has widened somewhat in recent years as increasing competition from new producers has driven down prices of tradable goods. But the striking feature of the table is the extent to which the difference has increased to no less than 5.7 percentage points in the UK, much more than in the US where in turn the gap is larger than elsewhere. Exchange rate movements are largely responsible for these differences. The extent to which services inflation has risen relative to goods inflation is another manifestation of the imbalance within the UK economy. Table 5 Total, goods and services inflation  UK US Euro area Japan CPI inflation (year to Aug 2002) 1.9 1.7 2.2 –0.9 CPI goods –1.1 –0.1 1.4 –1.6 CPI services 4.6 3.1 3.3 0.0 Services - goods infl. 5.7 3.2 1.9 1.6 Services - goods infl. (1990-97) 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.3 Services - goods infl. (1990-2002) 2.3 1.8 1.3 1.3 Note: Inflation rates are calculated as the total increase in the price index over the indicated period, based on monthly data, expressed as a 12-month growth rate. Source: ONS (for UK data) and Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan). Deflation - in the sense of a sustained fall in the aggregate price level - can be found among the G7 economies only in Japan, where the consumer price level has been falling almost continuously for four years and by a cumulative total of 4%. Elsewhere, deflation is remote. All of this serves to remind us that, with a single instrument, monetary policy cannot ensure that inflation is at target and output on trend all of the time. To suppose otherwise is to believe in the “myth of the straight line”, as Nigel Lawson described it. Monetary policy can reduce, but not eliminate, fluctuations in output. Cycles in real activity sometimes reflect behaviour outside the influence of monetary policy. As Lawson (1994) put it, “I find it wholly unconvincing to believe that the credit cycle is caused simply by mistakes in monetary policy. Of course, such mistakes can exacerbate the cycle; but the cycle would be there without them. There is no way in which the monetary authorities can fine-tune bank lending, any more than they can fine-tune expectations”. That is why the framework introduced in 1997 explicitly recognises that the MPC would not attempt to bring inflation back to the target immediately following a large shock. As a result inflation might deviate from the 2.5% target by more than one percentage point. That would require the Governor to write an 
 BIS Review 68/2002 17 open letter to the Chancellor. Ed Balls explained in his Oxford lecture in 2001, “Some have assumed it [the requirement to write an open letter] exists for the Chancellor to discipline the MPC if inflation goes outside the target range. In fact the opposite is true. In the face of a supply-shock, such as a big jump in the oil price, which pushed inflation way off target, the MPC could only get inflation back to 2.5 per cent quickly through a draconian interest rate response - at the expense of stability, growth and jobs. Any sensible monetary policymaker would want a more measured and stability-oriented strategy to get inflation back to target. And it is the Open Letter system which both allows that more sensible approach to be explained by the MPC and allows the Chancellor publicly to endorse it.” That applies not just to a supply shock, but also to a demand shock that might follow a large movement in asset prices. Both challenges to policy in the future have one aspect in common: they make us think carefully about the consequences of current policy for inflation well into the future. Asset prices raise the question of how far one should err on the side of caution while imbalances are building up. Deflation makes us aware of the risk that the zero lower bound on interest rates might bind in the future. They imply that while, in normal circumstances, monetary policy should focus on meeting the inflation target eighteen months or two years ahead, in practise it may be necessary to look even further ahead about the consequences of present actions. But that should not deflect monetary policy from its task of keeping inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term, in other words achieving price stability. 6. Conclusions When Lord Kingsdown addressed the LSE ten years ago, he said that departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism, offered an opportunity - “An opportunity to demolish the image of the United Kingdom as a second-rate inflation-prone economy”. I believe that opportunity was taken. Today the UK has low and stable inflation. And that has not come at the expense of either output or employment. Britain has now experienced 41 successive quarters of positive economic growth. And unemployment in this country is lower than in any other G7 country. This greater stability is no accident. It is the product of a commitment to price stability as reflected in an institutional design encompassing a clear inflation target and a transparent and accountable process for reaching decisions on interest rates embodied in the Monetary Policy Committee. At the beginning of my lecture I referred to the frescoes of Good and Bad Government by Lorenzetti. If today you go to the Palazzo Pubblico in Siena to see these wonderful paintings in the Sala della Pace, which I translate as the Room of Stability, you will see the results of allowing daylight to fall on the walls. Yes, greater transparency - more daylight - has damaged the paintings. But if you look carefully, you will see that whereas daylight has caused no harm to the paintings of Good Government, it has indeed damaged Bad Government on the opposite wall. Even today, Lorenzetti’s frescoes tell us about the benefits of transparency and the importance of careful institutional design. Five years ago I delivered, again in this room, a lecture on the inflation target five years on. I argued that the new requirement on the Governor to write an open letter to the Chancellor whenever inflation deviated from target by more than one percentage point would provide ample opportunity for the Bank to restore the lost art of letter-writing. No letter has so far been required. But given Alan Blinder’s definition of price stability - when ordinary people stop talking about inflation and converse instead about more important matters - I hope that the MPC, by remaining focussed on its task of meeting the inflation target, will be more successful in restoring the equally lost art of good conversation. In that way the inflation generation will give way to a new generation able to devote its energies to the wider economic and social policies from which our attention has so often been diverted by the need to control inflation. The lesson of the past ten years is that it is stability - price stability and the broader economic stability which it generates - that is the platform for the deeper satisfaction portrayed so well in Lorenzetti’s frescoes. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 1 Urban Bäckström: Financial cycles Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum on Crises, Contagion and Coordination: Issues for Policymakers in the Global Economy, Philadelphia, 22 November 2002. *      *      * First I want to express my thanks to the organizers for inviting me to this very interesting conference. Let me especially thank Tony Santomero for everything he has done in his previous capacity in inspiring and assisting us at the Riksbank over the years as an academic adviser. I wish you, Tony, every success as president for the Philadelphia Fed and as an important policy maker here in the U.S. I think one can say that central bankers around the world have never before had such a central and well respected position as they have had during the past decade. Their task seemed to be well defined and the job to deliver price stability has worked rather well. Much of the mystique that typically surrounded central banks has gradually disappeared. Openness and transparency have become the key words of the day. Moreover, research concerning monetary policy has made good progress during the past decade. The world of central banking has indeed undergone positive changes. However, it would be most dangerous for us, central bankers, to just sit down and relax in the belief that all the important problems in the field of monetary policy have been resolved and need no further consideration. One aspect that indeed needs further thinking is the issue of financial cycles and how they could be mitigated and whether monetary policy should play a role in doing so. Let me say a few words about this. Before I became involved in central banking I was state secretary in Sweden’s Ministry of Finance in the early 1990s and dealt, among other things, with the management of our nation’s banking crisis. Being in the middle of a crisis like that was indeed a frightening experience. Financial crises would seem to evolve from excessive optimism. That is, credit expansion (domestic or foreign), which feeds into asset prices, lowers the cost of capital, stimulates investment and subsequently leads to an economic boom. Eventually, the investments are found not to be sustainable in that they do not generate profits. The whole structure may ultimately collapse, the economy moving from boom to bust, often followed by banking or currency crises or a combination of the two. The most severe bubbles have historically been those that involve rapid credit expansion in the banking system. Economic history books are full of examples of this process. Also, the 1990s provided many illustrations of similar events. The discussion about financial cycles is far from new. One example is the major debate of the 1920s and 1930s between the Austrians (Hayek, etc.) on the one hand, and Keynes on the other. Keynes was focusing on the demand side and on how to get out of the bust, whereas Hayek was focusing on the supply side and on how an economy got into the bust in the first place. While a great deal has been done to understand the reasons behind financial instability, many questions remain unsolved. So the discussion continues and when it comes to crises prevention, two conventional pieces of policy advice seem to emerge. The first line of defense is moral suasion. The central bank could warn market participants in various ways that they are becoming overly optimistic in their expectations about future cash flows, if we are talking for instance about stocks or real estate. The problem with moral suasion is that it is difficult to calm down a market that is rushing to new highs. Talk rather than action is often not enough. Still, if a bubble is starting to build up, it may be worth a try. This is one reason why several central banks have began to publish financial stability reports. In this way one can perhaps broaden the public discussion about what is happening. The second line of defense is prudential regulation. However, the way prudential regulation is done in practice raises two, interrelated problems. The first has to do with the fact that most financial crises stem not from individual banks getting into difficulties and affecting others by contagion. Rather, in most cases, many institutions act more or less similarly, encouraged by overoptimistic expectations that macroeconomic conditions can be extrapolated uncritically into the future. The second problem with prudential regulation is that the tools are themselves often based on perceptions of risk which are not independent of the credit and asset price cycle itself. On the one hand, underlying actual risk 
 2 BIS Review 68/2002 builds up as expansion and leverage continue and the financial cycle proceeds On the other hand, apparent risk declines with the rise in collateral values. This causes difficulties for supervisors who tend to concentrate on individual institutions and treat risks as exogenous. This is not to deny that by improving prudential regulation, setting international standards (for example Basle II) etc, the risk of financial instability can be significantly reduced. Supervisors are also recognizing the shortcomings I just mentioned and are increasingly focusing on developments that generate systemic macroeconomic risks and on constructing built-in mechanisms to dampen the financial amplification of the business cycle. For example, supervisors are trying to encourage stress-testing by private sector risk managers to enable them to better see through asset market misalignments. Another way is to make provisioning practices more forward-looking than at present and to adopt more conservative, less cyclically sensitive measures of value. The idea is to build capital cushions in good times that can be used in bad times. Hence financial cycles could be milder. Whether improved prudential regulations, supervisory practices and risk management techniques will suffice to avoid financial cycles in the future remains to be seen. Our experience so far does, however, leave some doubts about this. This brings us to a possible third line of defense that could at least in principle be used to prevent large financial cycles. I am of course thinking about monetary policy The argument is that since we live in a fiat money system, there is no exogenous constraint on the supply of credit except through monetary authorities. If those reactions are geared exclusively to controlling inflation, then the monetary anchor may not counter a build-up of credit that does not immediately lead to inflation in the price of current output. Hence, there is little to prevent the emergence of cycles in the prices of real and financial assets that are not included in the measure of inflation. In addition, experience has taught us that price stability is not, by itself, sufficient to ensure financial stability. So why don’t central banks simply change the way they conduct monetary policy and also try to prevent financial cycles? Well, the conventional view is that they should not. There are some very powerful arguments against a central bank trying to respond to credit expansion and “misalignments” in asset prices that do not lead to inflation in goods and services. First, how do we know that a bubble is a bubble and not a reflection of fundamental values? Second, even if the central bank does recognize the emerging bubble and wants to prevent it from building up, by the time it could form a judgement about this, it would be to late. Third, if a central bank is fortunate with both the recognition and the timing, there is still a risk that it will cause an economic recession. To have any effect on excessive optimism about future returns on financial assets, the monetary response might have to be. Nevertheless, the costs of financial cycles are sufficiently large to warrant an exploration of several avenues for mitigating them and this should, to my mind, not exclude the possibility of monetary policy actions. I’m not saying that a central bank should target asset prices per se. Stock prices and real estate prices rise and fall for many reasons. In my view, however, a central bank needs to be observant when notable increases in asset prices are one of several imbalances that are building up even if inflation in goods and services does not show any sign of rising. Such imbalances could be a combination of strong credit growth, rapidly rising investment and a marked deterioration in the private sector’s financial balance. I do not mean to imply that determining when such a situation is on the way is particular easy. My point is that monetary policy should not be excluded a priori in a scenario like this. There are many other difficult assessments that central banks have to make. Here I am thinking about variables like the economy’s potential growth rate, the output gap and the NAIRU etc. Why should identifying asset market misalignments, excessive credit growth and a rapid decline in private financial balances be more difficult than forming an opinion about variables such as these? My view about monetary policy in this respect is of course closely bound up with my experience of the Swedish banking crisis, but it is also in line with a central bank’s mandate to achieve long-run price stability. If anything, a financial crisis substantially increases the risk of outright deflation after some time. The central bank could manage this risk in two ways: by at least trying to prevent the bubble from building up by tightening monetary policy at an early stage, and then by loosening monetary policy aggressively if a bubble builds up and bursts anyway. To my mind, both such actions would be in line with focusing on long-run price stability, whether the central bank follows an explicit or an implicit inflation targeting approach. Although I will be leaving my job as governor of the Bank of Sweden towards the end of this year, I have no qualms about forecasting that financial stability will remain on the agenda and be a key challenge for financial authorities for many years to come. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 1 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Financial engineering and financial stability Speech by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Annual Conference on the Securities Industry, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Financial Management Division of the Securities Industry Association, New York, 20 November 2002. *      *      * As accounting and securities industry professionals, you are well aware of the very rapid development in recent years of new instruments and techniques for managing financial risks. You understand that financial engineering has both created new opportunities and posed new challenges for the securities and accounting industries. New financial instruments allow risks to be transferred to those most willing, and presumably most able, to assume and manage them. And new risk-measurement techniques can form the basis for more meaningful public disclosures of firms’ risk profiles. But use of the new instruments has resulted in large and well-documented losses to some firms, while other firms have used the new instruments to hide losses from more traditional activities. Policymakers generally have supported the use of derivatives and other new risk-transfer mechanisms by regulated and unregulated entities. Policymakers have tried to create incentives for risk mitigation and have sought to address potential pitfalls through a combination of regulatory oversight and market discipline. However, some have raised concerns about the potential effects of the new risk-management techniques on the stability of the financial system as a whole. In effect, they argue that even if individual firms manage their risks prudently and effectively, the aggregate effect of their activities may be to make the financial system less stable. As I shall make clear, I believe the potential for the new instruments and techniques to produce instability has been overestimated. Nonetheless, the arguments deserve careful consideration, not only by policymakers but by financial industry professionals as well. If the arguments were correct, the new instruments and techniques would likely provide less protection than the firms using them assume. Today I will review three specific topics that have been raised in the discussion of these instruments and techniques: (1) the dynamic hedging of options, especially options to prepay fixed-rate mortgages, (2) the so-called herding induced by common risk-management techniques, and (3) the concentration of counterparty credit risk that can be produced by credit derivatives. In each case I shall first evaluate the concerns and then consider how markets would function in the absence of the new instruments and techniques. Dynamic hedging of mortgages The development of our market for home mortgages over the past two decades has dramatically altered the role of traditional financial intermediation by depository institutions. Let me illustrate this change. In 1980, depository institutions, primarily savings and loan associations, held two-thirds of home mortgages in their portfolios. That proportion has fallen to less than one-third today. Over the same period, the share of mortgages that are securitized has risen from 10 percent to 59 percent. Of course, intermediaries still play a vital supporting role in today’s mortgage market by originating and servicing mortgages and by holding mortgage-backed securities in their investment portfolios. The interest rate risk inherent in home mortgages is still present in mortgage-backed securities. The risk is simply transferred from the originator of the mortgages to an investor, who is presumably more willing and able to manage the risk. Nevertheless, even for the most able, managing the risk is a significant challenge. The challenge is in managing prepayment risk. Prepayment risk arises because mortgage borrowers have the right to prepay their mortgages at any time without penalty. The right to prepay is an enormously popular--and therefore almost surely a permanent--element of mortgage finance in the United States. When market rates fall, holders of fixed-rate mortgages find their principal being repaid as borrowers refinance with a new lower-rate mortgage. When market rates rise, prepayment rates drop dramatically. 
 2 BIS Review 67/2002 One common strategy for hedging the interest rate risk of a mortgage-backed security is to short other fixed-income instruments, such as ten-year Treasury notes or interest rate swaps. But unlike most other fixed-income securities, mortgage-backed securities carry prepayment risk, which causes a change in the level of interest rates to change the amount of Treasuries or swaps one needs to short for an effective hedge. Specifically, when interest rates fall, prepayments increase, and as a result, the amount of ten-year Treasuries needed for the hedge falls. Thus, to reduce a short position in ten-year Treasuries, the hedger must buy ten-year Treasuries when their price is rising. This is the point where concern emerges that financial engineering may lead to higher market volatility. Such “dynamic” hedgers of mortgage-backed-securities have adopted a strategy that requires them to buy bonds when the price of bonds is rising. Conversely, they must sell bonds when the price of bonds is falling. Put another way, they will always be reinforcing the current direction of the market and never “leaning against the wind.” Clearly, if these hedging-related transactions are large relative to the underlying market, the hedging strategy could make significant demands on market liquidity and lead to higher market volatility. That is the theoretical argument behind the concern that dynamic hedging of mortgages could exacerbate volatility in fixed-income markets. To see whether this concern is just a theoretical curiosity or is more practical, two more questions must be answered. First, are the hedging-related transactions large relative to the underlying market? Second, could other mechanisms for hedging prepayment risk have a smaller impact on volatility and therefore hedge the risk more effectively? On the first question, both research and market observation suggest that hedging-related transactions are large enough to have an effect on the underlying fixed-income markets, but the effect is small and dissipates relatively quickly. Research at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York covering the years 1996 through 2000 and also the monetary policy tightening in spring 1994 has found hedging-related effects to be present in U.S. dollar interest rate movements. Although the effect was large enough to be detectable, it was small relative to overall interest rate volatility and lasted no longer than six weeks. Market participants have described the market conditions of November and December 2001 as a unique combination of circumstances that made the hedging-related effects much stronger than usual. These circumstances included a recent history of declining mortgage rates (which increased prepayment risk), a sharp unanticipated rise in market rates in November and December, low market liquidity in the months right before year-end, and a general reduction in activity after September 11. Even with these factors, market participants estimate that the temporary hedging-related effect on the ten-year Treasury yield was no more than 25 basis points--again, a measurable but small effect. According to market reports, hedging-related effects on the underlying fixed-income markets appear to have been muted so far this year, despite a record volume of mortgage refinancings thus far in the second half of 2002 that has surpassed last year’s peak. Turning to the second question, market participants have other ways to hedge prepayment risk besides dynamic hedging of the sort I have described. One way is through the acquisition of interest rate options, either by buying an option, such as a so-called swaption, or by issuing callable debt that has an option embedded in it. This allows the holder of a mortgage to hedge prepayment risk without dynamic hedging. The fact that hedgers have alternatives to dynamic hedging weakens the link between hedging and volatility. At the same time, some have suggested that the hedging of prepayment risk by buying interest options has begun to affect price dynamics in the options market. Clearly there are complicated forces at work. How the hedging of prepayment risk affects markets for both cash and derivative fixed-income instruments seems to be a fruitful topic for future research. Also, we must keep in mind that market participants have an incentive to monitor and limit the impact of dynamic hedging on the underlying market because the interaction makes the hedging less effective. Suppose that the effect of hedging on the underlying market rises substantially from its current low level. Dynamic hedging would become less effective and, as a result, the risk premium associated with exposure to the interest rate risk of mortgage-backed securities would rise. The rise in the risk premium would reduce the demand for hedging by inducing some homeowners to switch to adjustable-rate mortgages. It would also increase the availability of alternatives to dynamic hedging--more swaption writers and issuers of callable debt would step forward to take advantage of the higher risk premium. In short, we can expect the market to find an efficient way to adjust to the changed circumstances. To evaluate the performance of the current market-based financing model for home mortgages, including the effect of dynamic hedging, we need to compare its benefits and costs relative to an 
 BIS Review 67/2002 3 appropriate alternative model. In light of the history of this market, the relevant alternative would seem to be the intermediary-based financing model that characterized the U.S. mortgage environment before 1980. Given the experience to date, the shift from an intermediary-based model to a market-based model over the past two decades has, on balance, benefited mortgage borrowers, who have shown a strong preference for fixed-rate mortgages that can be prepaid at any time. The value of fixed-rate prepayable mortgages outstanding has risen from around $1 trillion in 1980 to almost $5 trillion today. As all of us are probably aware, the old model concentrated interest rate risk in depository institutions, specifically in savings and loans. And when interest rates soared in the early 1980s, the savings and loan industry suffered huge losses with collateral effects on the real economy. In comparison, the market-based model clearly seems to have spread the interest rate risk of mortgages throughout the economy, with depository institutions still bearing some of the risk through investments in mortgage-backed securities or callable debt. What are the lessons for policymakers? I can suggest two. First, policymakers still need to fulfill their traditional supervisory role. They need to ensure that regulated intermediaries manage prepayment risk effectively and have adequate capital to absorb losses. Second, I would note that new risk-transfer instruments, such as swaps and swaptions, are playing an important role in transferring the interest rate risk of mortgages to a broader and more diversified group of investors. Herding My second topic today is the concern that common approaches to risk management, such as value-at-risk modeling, may be promoting herding behavior that can destabilize markets. The idea is that market participants who use similar risk management techniques may respond to a perceived increase in the riskiness of their positions by paring back the size of those positions and perhaps by paring back positions in other markets as well. Such a response, while rational from the perspective of individual market participants, may have the collective and unintended consequence of reducing market liquidity at the time when it is most needed. I recognize the relevance of the questions and realize that herding might theoretically occur in a number of markets. However, based on some observations of how models are actually constructed and used at financial firms, I would like to outline three reasons why this concern might be overstated. First, the sophistication and structure of risk-management models vary widely. This point applies with full force to value-at-risk models in use at commercial banks, an area the Federal Reserve has some knowledge of through our supervisory oversight. Our examiners have observed that banks implement a common objective--measuring the value-at-risk of the bank’s trading account--in highly diverse ways. Given their early stage of development and the diversity with which they are implemented, the use of these models does not seem likely to create herding behavior. Second, other sources of diversity exist among financial firms, including differences in risk appetites, customer bases, and product lines. These additional sources of variation create considerable heterogeneity in financial firms’ trading strategies, in their risk-taking, and in how they respond to market shocks. In short, neither now nor in the future are the models and the actual risk positions likely to be as similar as those assumed by observers concerned about the potential negative implications of risk management. Finally, risk models are, and should be, just one part of the formal risk-management process. Regulators and institutions must not overestimate the role that models play, or should play, in decisionmaking. Risk managers get useful information from risk models. But judgment, experience, limits, and procedures for exceptions also play significant roles in risk management. As a consequence, risk models are never likely to be the dominant driver of the actions of financial firms and are therefore unlikely to generate significant herding behavior. As you are aware, models have brought a degree of both quantification and rigor to the risk-management process that had been badly needed. Before the advent of models, particularly value-at-risk models, bank managers could not easily compare or aggregate the risks of the various activities of a firm. The fixed-income desk would summarize its risk in terms of the portfolio’s duration, the foreign exchange desk would use its net delta by currency, and the equities desk would use portfolio standard deviation. Value-at-risk puts all types of traded risks on a common footing--as an amount that can be lost with a certain probability over a certain time horizon. 
 4 BIS Review 67/2002 Formal risk modeling, while not perfect, is on balance an improvement over previous practice. In my judgment, these models have made the risk-transfer process more efficient than it otherwise would have been, which is the proper test. Formal models help firms attempting to shed risk to identify available hedging strategies and choose the strategy that is most appropriate, given the prevailing market conditions. Formal models help firms with larger risk appetites evaluate their capacity to absorb and manage additional risks shifted from others. I would argue that firms with larger risk appetites will be relatively more willing to take on additional risk if they can better model and manage that risk. At times of high market volatility, firms would still be able to sense that their firm’s risk had risen even without formal risk management. But they would be uncertain about exactly how it affected them. They would be, in effect, flying by the seat of their pants. The uncertainty, it seems clear, reduces the effectiveness of decisionmaking, reduces the ability to transfer risk to someone willing to bear it because others, too, face the same uncertainty, and therefore increases the potential for markets to simply freeze up. What is the role for policymakers in overseeing the growth of formal risk-measurement models? First, we must continue to promote the use of best-practice risk-management modeling as one component of a good risk-management system. These models enable firms to better quantify the risks they face. Having better information on risks can only improve a firm’s decisionmaking. Second, we should remind firms that formal risk modeling is just one part of sound risk management. Firms do not look at the output of a model in isolation, nor should they. For example, firms should continue to augment formal risk models with more judgmental stress testing. Third, the imposition of rigid requirements on the risk models that firms are allowed to use would be a mistake. It would increase the likelihood that risk models could lead to herding. Also, firms are constantly improving their models, and policymakers should support this process. Credit derivatives My final topic today is credit derivatives. The credit derivatives market has grown rapidly over the past few years. According to statistics from the Bank for International Settlements, the notional value of credit derivatives outstanding rose from $108 billion in 1998 to $695 billion in 2001. According to market sources, this rapid growth continues unabated. Banks have been an important engine behind the growth of credit derivatives. They typically have used credit derivatives to transfer some of the credit risk they incur in making loans or to create customized credit-risk exposures for investors. Banks pay the investors to take on credit risk. The investors agree to compensate the bank in case of a credit loss. Investors who sell credit protection can be motivated by a desire to earn higher returns in exchange for taking on more credit risk or by a desire to increase the geographic, sectoral, or other diversification of their credit portfolios by expanding the range of borrowers to which they are exposed. Insurance companies, particularly insurance companies from continental Europe, have been cited as large investors in this market. In theory, the risk transfer associated with a bank’s purchase of credit protection for its loan book should be effective. Instead of suffering a loss when a borrower defaults, the bank now suffers a loss only when both a borrower and its credit derivative counterparty default. The risk of simultaneous default is certainly much lower than the risk of a single default. Credit derivatives, while making markets more complete, are not a panacea and must be used wisely. Most credit derivatives require the counterparty to make a payment to the bank when a credit loss or default occurs. For this type of credit derivative, traditional credit risk may reappear as counterparty credit risk, that is, the risk that the bank’s counterparty will not fulfill its agreement to compensate the bank in case of a credit loss. The price of a credit derivative should take into consideration the credit risk posed by the seller of the protection and the appropriate default correlation, though default correlations are difficult to estimate precisely. But some credit derivatives, such as credit-linked notes, are prefunded--the counterparty pays the principal up front and the repayment it receives at maturity is contingent on a credit event not occurring. Banks selling these funded credit derivatives have no counterparty credit risk at all. Recognizing that they must understand the characteristics of new risk-sharing mechanisms, several regulatory bodies have taken a close look at the credit derivatives market in recent years. The Federal Reserve, in its role as a bank supervisor, monitors banks’ participation in the credit derivatives market. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 5 In addition, the U.K. Financial Services Authority and the Bank of England have issued reports on credit derivatives in recent years. Thanks to these efforts, we have a much better picture of the credit derivatives market than we did a year or two ago. These groups have all reported that they find no evidence that the credit derivatives market threatens financial stability. The nonbank firms that are active in the credit derivatives market, notably some insurance companies, do appear to understand the nature of the risk they are taking on. Although regulatory capital arbitrage was cited as a factor spurring the early growth of the credit derivatives market, the increasingly active portfolio management of credit risk, by both banks and insurance companies, has driven growth of the market in recent years. Even at this relatively early stage in their life cycle, credit derivatives do appear to offer benefits. The creation of a market for credit risk transfer has probably enhanced efficiency and economic resiliency by enabling credit risk to be dispersed throughout the financial system. Credit risk diversification using credit derivatives is thought by many to be one factor that has helped banks to weather the recession of 2001, and its accompanying increase in defaults, without apparent major problems. In recent financial releases, several U.S. banks specifically noted that credit derivatives had helped them mitigate credit losses. Of course, a general improvement in credit-risk management by banks in recent years is another important factor. The experience with the 2001 recession was markedly different from the preceding recession in the United States, in 1990 and 1991. In that recession, banks took serious hits from credit losses, and the weakness in the banking sector led to “headwinds” that restricted the availability of business credit and slowed the recovery. The past two years have seen the largest-ever corporate bankruptcy, that of WorldCom, and the largest-ever sovereign default, in Argentina. There have been many other high-profile defaults, such as Global Crossing, Kmart, and Enron. By helping to spread the credit risk associated with these large borrowers throughout the financial system, the credit derivative market likely contributed to financial stability. These large defaults give us some insight into one of the concerns I mentioned earlier--that the growth of the credit derivatives market was being driven by investors who did not understand the risks they were taking on. Because of the defaults of Enron, Argentina, WorldCom, and others, investors in the market have made large payouts on credit derivatives recently. If investors were underestimating the risks before, they certainly should not do so now. On the contrary, there does not appear to have been any general retreat from the market. The credit derivatives market has continued to grow. I can only conclude that the majority of investors must have understood the risks and been willing and able to bear them. What should financial policymakers do in response to the rapid growth in the credit derivatives market? Clearly, they must keep abreast of market developments so they can perform their traditional supervisory role. Regulators should continue to insist that banks manage their counterparty credit risk prudently. This prudence includes paying attention to potential concentrations of counterparty credit risk. However, just as important is ensuring that regulators keep enough distance from the markets to give financial innovations such as credit derivatives a chance to succeed. The new market for credit derivatives has grown largely outside of traditional regulatory oversight, and as I have described, evidence to date suggests that it has made an important contribution to financial stability in the most recent credit cycle. Conclusion The three topics I have addressed today--dynamic hedging of mortgages, risk measurement systems such as value-at-risk, and credit derivatives--are examples of newer risk-management techniques. Because these techniques are relatively new, regulators and market participants must work to build their understanding of how they function in differing economic environments. To date the new tools appear to demonstrate that financial engineering can enhance economic efficiency and, at the same time, contribute to financial stability by enabling firms to disperse risk throughout the financial system. All these new techniques were made possible by the fact that financial firms have had the latitude to develop them and pursue the ones that appear to be most useful. For all three techniques, the best approach for policymakers is to monitor developments, to insist that regulated firms practice sound risk management, to encourage transparency, and to avoid interfering with financial innovations that have the potential to improve financial stability, whether they occur inside or outside the realm of regulation. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 1 Ernst Welteke: European Monetary Union - experience and outlook Speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Svedbank, Stockholm, 19 November 2002. *      *      * I Ladies and gentlemen It is good to be here in Stockholm. Thanks to a good friend, my connections with Sweden have grown deeper over the past few years. Today, I have the pleasure of sharing with you my views on experience of the Eurosystem during the almost four years of its existence. I am well aware of the ongoing debate on your membership in the European Monetary Union. Therefore, our experience might be of particular interest to you. That relates to monetary and economic aspects as well as practical matters, such as the changeover of banknotes and coins. In addition, you have asked me to extend my view and also give an outlook for the near future. Again, most of the major challenges for the monetary union stem from the process of enlargement. Too often, enlargement is only referred to with respect to eastern and southern Europe. To me, an equally interesting and important question is whether Sweden and other countries in northern and western Europe (UK, Denmark) will join monetary union. I guess you may not have the answer to that yet. However, if I may, I would like to express a wish about that later on. II The primary objective of the European Monetary Union (EMU) is to maintain price stability. The Governing Council of the ECB has defined price stability as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. At the same time, the Governing Council also stated that price stability “is to be maintained over the medium term”. Looking at the annual HICP rate in the euro area over the past few years in the light of those requirements tends to reveal a mixed picture. It was only in 1999 - the year which started with the Eurosystem - that the annual rate of price increase, strongly influenced by developments in 1998, remained within the defined stability corridor at 1.1%. Since then, the price norm has not been met. In 2000, the average annual rate of inflation was 2.3%. In 2001, with Greece having joined the euro area, the figure was 2.5%. In the first nine months of this year, the rate was 2.2%. It is therefore no longer possible to speak of a short-term overshooting. In its defence, the ECB-council can point to a number of exceptional circumstances during the past few years - events over which the ECB has no influence and which have intensified upward pressure on prices. First, there have been, at times, sharp increases in international oil prices and thus also in European energy prices. Second, BSE and foot-and-mouth disease in addition to unfavourable weather conditions, especially in southern Europe, led to a considerable rise in food prices at the start of 2001 and in early 2002. Excluding the volatile components, energy and unprocessed food, the picture is significantly more favourable. This gives a core rate of below 2.0% in 2000 and, at 2.0% in 2001, a core rate on the edge of the price norm. In the current year, however, that figure will clearly be exceeded. All in all, the larger currency area has cushioned the substantial price shocks. Especially, no additional yield spreads have occurred. So far, the general expectation that the euro area, with a single currency and a single monetary policy, would see a rapid convergence of price developments has not been fulfilled. Since 1997, there has been a trend widening in the range of data from the individual countries. This indicates that specific, persistent, national factors continue to shape price developments. One reason for this may be seen in consumer habits, which vary from country to country. Another reason consists in diverging price trends, especially in the sector of non-tradable services or services of limited tradability. 
 2 BIS Review 67/2002 As a consequence, euro-area real rates of interest vary quite considerably. However, the national real interest rate is not the same for each sector. The relevant real interest rate differs according the different price developments. It is lower in the sector with higher sectoral inflation rates et vice versa. For the sector of tradables the real interest rates do not differ that much. European Economic and Monetary Union has a population of 300 million people. That is around 20 million more than in the United States. However, overall output in the euro area is almost 30% lower and per capita income as much as one-third lower than in the USA. In many instances, there were expectations that there would be a real convergence - in other words a reduction in the prosperity gap. The necessary strengthening of economic growth in the euro area - so it was hoped - would more or less occur automatically. In this context, reference was made, first, to the expansionary impact of interest rate convergence down to the lower German level in the run-up to Stage Three, which mainly benefited the former “high interest rate” countries. Second, it was expected that the introduction of a single currency would lead to a better allocation of the production factor capital as a result of the sudden improvement in capital market integration. Furthermore, an accelerated restructuring of the corporate landscape owing to an increased number of mergers and participations - added to more intense competition in the euro area - were supposed to act as a “fitness programme” for European enterprises. Significant positive growth effects were also forecast owing to the disappearance of the foreign exchange rate risk within the euro area. So far, however, those expectations have only just started to be fulfilled. On an average of the years since 1999, the rise in overall output in the euro area, at just over 2% annually, has been noticeably slower than in the USA (2½%). The pace of expansion has also lagged behind that of the pre-ins, the United Kingdom and Sweden. The euro area has thus been unable to isolate itself from the cyclical slowdown in the USA, as had been hoped in early 2001. It has, in fact, more or less fully shadowed the price slumps on the US stock markets and the deterioration in sentiment of US investors and consumers, even though the bubble in the IT and telecoms sector was less pronounced here and the macroeconomic imbalances are less severe. The differential in per capita income compared with the United States - where the population is growing considerably more quickly than in the euro area - has been narrowing somewhat since 1999, however. But this development is due to the fact that the USA was hit harder by the cyclical slowdown than the euro area was. Looking at the longer-term trends, the US lead in potential growth over the euro area - which the IMF puts at ¾ percentage point - is even larger than the difference in population growth. This means that, under these conditions, the per capita income between these two economic areas is even diverging. The euro area’s growth performance has, on the whole, been unsatisfactory. This is revealed not least by the fact that EMU, despite some undeniable progress, still represents a quite heterogeneous economic area. This is shown by the wide spread of growth rates among the member countries. In 2000, for example, rates of growth ranged from just under 3% in Italy and Germany to 10% in Ireland. The differentials in growth across the euro-area countries did narrow in 2001 and 2002. However, a number of member countries converged on the low German pace of expansion - and not the other way round, as would actually have been desirable. In almost every case, economic analyses of the euro area’s growth weakness come to the conclusion that the problems lie mainly on the labour market. The contribution made by the factor labour to economic growth in the 1991 to 2000 period was no more than roughly one-third as high as in the United States. The inadequate involvement of the factor labour in the production process is also reflected in the high core level of structural unemployment that has emerged, above all, in the larger euro-area member countries. It follows from this that strengthening the forces of growth in Europe is not so much a macropolicy task but more a challenge to structural policy. In this connection, what is of key importance is the elimination of rigidities on the labour markets. Although significant efforts have been undertaken in that respect over the past few years, many pressing problems remain and governments as well as both sides of industry have to face up to them. The development of the external value of the euro has been disappointing in the first two years after its introduction. It was not so much depreciation in itself that was felt to be surprising and exaggerated but rather its scale. At their peak, the exchange rate losses on an trade-weighted average against the 12 most important trading partners outside the euro area amounted to 23%. A crucial factor in this 
 BIS Review 67/2002 3 development was the strength of the US dollar, reflecting the decidedly robust pace of growth in the US economy up to early 2001. It is only since many high, and ultimately unfounded, expectations on the part of market players had to give way to a more sober assessment that this development has stabilised and, to a certain extent, gone into reverse. However, we are still a long way off from the exchange rate relationships that existed before the changeover to monetary union. The depreciation has not inflicted lasting harm on the euro-area countries. The exchange-rate-related gain in competitiveness in trading with countries outside the euro area has provided growth in the region with an external mainstay. And the inflationary effects which intermittently strengthened the oil-price-induced external price surge have been brought under control by monetary policy. In the long run, however, business in the euro area cannot rely on such advantages continuing. Ultimately, there is no option but to keep an eye on the cost-side risks and to undertake structural reforms in order to strengthen the efficiency and adaptability of the euro-area economies on a sustained basis from the inside. In the second half of the 1990s, there was a significant improvement in the fiscal position of general government in the member states of the euro area. The average deficit ratio in the euro area initially continued to go down, as did the government debt-to-GDP ratio. The fiscal policy framework in the monetary union, which is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact, has played a crucial role in this. The majority of member states are now meeting the requirement, laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact, that budgets should be close to balance or in surplus under normal cyclical conditions. However, some countries - including the largest economies in the euro area - have neglected to use the years of favourable cyclical development for consolidating their public finances. In many cases, welcome tax cuts were not adequately counter-financed by savings on the expenditure side, which led to a further deterioration in the underlying budgetary position. Together with cyclically induced strains, this has resulted in a situation where those countries are now finding it difficult to comply with - or are already overshooting - the 3% deficit ratio limit. Germany is among these countries. The EU-commission has already implemented the excessive deficit procedure. The fiscal policy problems of some countries have occasioned a debate on possible changes to the Stability and Growth Pact, implying a softening of its terms. This would, however, jeopardise the objective of sound underlying fiscal policy conditions, which are a major and essential component of a monetary policy that is geared to stability. In order to preserve the credibility of the fiscal policy ground rules in the monetary union, what those countries need to do instead is undertake a speedy correction of the undesirable developments that have emerged and achieve structurally balanced budgets in the near future. This will make it easier for the European Central Bank to perform its task of maintaining price stability. Sound public finances, moreover, contribute to sustained economic growth and a long-term increase in employment. Over the past four years, the Governing Council of the ECB has demonstrated that it takes its stability mandate seriously. With its consistent and forward-looking monetary policy, the Governing Council has succeeded in anchoring inflation expectations at the targeted low level. That success is all the more notable in view of the fact that price developments in the euro area since January 1999 have been shaped, as described earlier, by a series of negative shocks. In terms of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB Governing Council has repeatedly had to contend with the accusation of a lack of transparency. Criticism was mainly aroused by the unclear weighting of the two pillars in the event of conflict. The ECB has now improved its communication with the markets to the extent that its interest rate decisions are, as a rule, correctly anticipated by the markets. But it still has to be said that the two-pillar strategy, owing to its complexity, makes heavy demands on the Eurosystem’s communications policy. Following a two pillar strategy the ECB council does neither ignore the possible threats by monetary expansion nor does he feel bound by monetary orthodoxy. It is true, that inflation is a monetary phenomenon. However, that holds only in the long run. For the short term inflation is also determined by a couple of non-monetary variables. In addition, growth of monetary aggregates can be disturbed by special determinants such as portfolio effects. Therefore, there suitability as indicators may suffer. As a consequence, the ECB-Council pursues a more broadly based approach. A second pillar is added. In monitoring the price developments and determinants the ECB-council judges the inflation expectations over the medium term. 
 4 BIS Review 67/2002 For the euro-area financial markets, the introduction of the euro has had far-reaching implications. These include, in particular, the rapid convergence of the national markets to form a fully integrated euro money market, the strong growth in the market for euro-denominated corporate bonds as well as the wave of consolidation in the case of banks and stock exchanges. It has gradually become apparent, however, that a complete integration of the financial systems is currently still hindered by a large number of regulatory, tax and legal obstacles and eliminating those obstacles is proving to be complex and arduous. The Lamfalussy proposals are designed to accelerate that process. III Let me now turn to more practical aspects of the Monetary Union. European Monetary Union works. That is by no means a matter of course. The introduction of workable common instruments for monetary policy, the proper functioning of payment systems and the harmonisation of statistical methodologies are crucial to the success of the monetary union. Most important among the technical aspects managed by the Eurosystem was, of course, the smooth introduction of euro banknotes and coins as sole legal tender. The 2002 cash changeover proved to be a formidable challenge for cash management and communication departments. The legacy currencies were withdrawn from about 300 million Europeans as well as from outside the euro area, where especially D-Mark was in circulation. At the same time, the new currency was issued. To meet this challenge, a long and thorough preparation took place. The general framework for the changeover - including national changeover scenarios - was agreed at the European level as early as 1999 and 2000. Close collaboration with third parties - mainly banks, retailers and manufacturers of cash handling machines - was initiated at an early stage. The withdrawal of national currency started in mid-2001. An award-winning campaign under the title “Don’t let sleeping coins lie”, the Bundesbank called upon the general public to hand in unused coins hidden in piggy banks, under pillows or among their socks. By November 2001, we had already collected more than 20% of all coins in circulation. Of course, a substantial amount of D-Mark is still in circulation. In comparison to December 2000 almost 4% of all D-Mark banknotes are in circulation. Some of it may never come back. However, the Bundesbank has committed itself to exchanging D-Mark banknotes for an indefinite period. The logistical preparations for the introduction of euro banknotes and coins cash proved equally successful. In order to smooth the final changeover, the banks were supplied with notes and coins in advance (front-loading). The banks, in turn, provided retailers with the new cash - a process known as sub-frontloading. Of course, special debiting models had to be applied for the credit institutions in order to limit the costs they incurred in the changeover. In addition, a set of coins worth about 10 euro (starter kits) was sold to the general public around Christmas time in order to familiarise them with the new coins and provide them with the small change that they would need early in the new year. Euro cash was put into circulation and change in euro was given from the very first few days of 2002 onwards. By 4 p.m. on 2 January, an average of 92% of automated teller machines had been converted to dispense euro notes across the 12 countries. Moreover, the new cash rapidly gained overwhelming acceptance. The old currencies were therefore withdrawn much more quickly than expected.This also led to an exceptionally high demand for low-denomination euro banknotes and coins and even caused some short-term bottlenecks. Besides the logistical challenge, the changeover called for major efforts in communication. Every man and woman and child had to be familiarised with the new currency. That meant, at the very least, their denomination, appearance and security features. Equally, we were reluctant to make the security features known too early because of the potential threat of counterfeiting. And indeed, we do have some indications that the euro as a leading currency is more subject to counterfeiters than the former national currencies of smaller countries. Hitherto, in Germany the number counterfeited euro banknotes is limited and lower than before. Therefore, the tremendous efforts to prevent counterfeiting proved worthwhile. All major instruments of communication policy were used. The information campaign provided the general public with details of the new banknotes and coins. There was close cooperation with the press and the mass media. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 5 Of course, the differing information needs of the general public and of professional cash handlers (banks, retailers) had be taken into consideration. Opinion leaders were informed and cash handlers were trained in working with the euro cash in advance. All accounting systems and each cash point had to be made ready for the new currency and the dual circulation period. As things turned out, the two-month dual circulation period was, if anything, too long. The changeover had given rise to fears of inflation There were three main aspects to this. First, there was the possibility that businesses might try to recoup their changeover costs by putting up prices. Second, businesses might defer scheduled price increases until after the changeover owing to the need to display prices in the new currency. Third, price increases might occur owing to rounding differences. However, the changeover itself did not have a major impact on consumer prices. Many consumer goods were subject to automatic conversion since they are paid by standing order out of a bank account. Nevertheless, even almost a year after the changeover, perceived inflation diverges significantly from the actual low rate of inflation. Consumers perceive inflation to be much higher and react accordingly. They attach greater importance to price developments in goods and services which they buy more frequently and pay for in cash. However, the harmonised indicator of consumer prices does cover a broad basket of goods. Higher perceived inflation occurred first in Germany but in the course of this year also in other member countries.  The Governing Council of the ECB keeps a close watch on the development of perceived inflation - not only because this is crucial to acceptance of the new currency but also because it may additionally have macroeconomic implications, such as matching rising wage demands. All in all, the euro cash changeover is an outstanding example of the Eurosystem’s ability to cope with major challenges. IV At its last meeting, the ECB Governing Council discussed in depth the arguments for and against a cut in key interest rates. The rates were left unchanged, but we indicated that we would closely monitor the downside risks to economic growth in the euro area. After a rather mild recession in 2001, economic growth picked up remarkably only in the US. In all other major economies, slight growth was mainly driven by external factors. Capacity adjustments - in particular in hi-tech businesses in major industrialised countries - are still taking place. Therefore, investment prospects look clouded. The ongoing deflation in Japan is due to persistent structural problems in the banking sector. Recent announcements to reform the banking system have shed some light on possible solutions. As usual, however, it is harder to implement reforms than announce them. Japan, however, is benefiting a little from fairly strong growth in East Asian countries. Recent data may point at least to an end of recession during the ongoing fiscal year. Among the emerging markets, East Asia and eastern Europe have performed better than again-crisis-ridden Latin America. The crises in Argentina and subsequently in Uruguay and Brazil have proved not to be as contagious as earlier emerging market crises. Financial markets are more aware of fundamental aspects nowadays. Contagion is more limited. However, economic integration with the other side of the Atlantic seems to be closer than ever. The devastating effects of September 11 were by no means confined to the United States. We realised that there have been major repercussions in the European economy, even though trade and financial flows reacted with a time lag and not as strongly. This psychological transmission channel is much faster than trade flows or even financial investments. The worsening of the business climate in the US is having an impact on German investment. In spite of high expectations early this year, the euro-area economy did not accelerate after the first quarter. Among the reasons for this are oil prices, the considerable turbulences on financial markets and the looming threat of a military conflict. Both factors continue to be among the downside risks to the economy. Nevertheless, the ECB Governing Council expects growth rates to pick up and to return to potential in the course of 2003. Private consumption might benefit from rising real income due to lower inflation rates. Investment activity is supported by the low level of interest rates and a possible stabilisation on 
 6 BIS Review 67/2002 the financial markets. And improvements in the world economy as well as faster trade growth will foster export development. The present annual inflation rate, 2.2% is very close to the mark for stability. Most likely developments indicate a declining rate in the first half of next year. Of course, upward risks to prices are always present. Most important among these are oil prices and labour costs. At the most recent meeting of the Governing Council, price risks were judged to be balanced. However, the described growth scenario is subject to a great deal of uncertainty. The risks to the economy tend to be - I am sorry to say - on the downside. V The outlook for European Monetary Union in the medium term depends first and foremost on the enlargement process and the union’s ability to cope with it. The ongoing enlargement of the European Union and joining EMU represent the most important challenge. The accession of the candidate countries in central and eastern Europe is a major item on the agenda. EU accession is decided on the basis of the criteria adopted at the Copenhagen European Council. Monetary union is the final stage in a process of evolution. In principle, all the Maastricht criteria, including the exchange rate criterion, have to be met before a country can join the Eurosystem. Country-specific exceptions must not be allowed to set a precedent. At most, exchange rate arrangements based on currency boards could potentially be considered equivalent to ERM II. For accession countries to join monetary union, they need to catch up by striving for real and nominal convergence. The past few years have already seen significant progress towards real and nominal convergence. However, each individual accession country’s situation must be judged separately. Some countries already have a level of prosperity and convergence that is close to the EU average. Cases in point are Cyprus and Slovenia. Per capita GDP, expressed in purchasing power parities, is 85% of the EU average in Cyprus and 69% in Slovenia. Those two countries generate a higher per capita GDP than some EU countries. Some of the remaining accession countries lag considerably further behind. When looking at the averages, it should not be forgotten that, in some cases, there are major regional disparities within EU countries and accession countries. In real economic terms, the accession of central and east European countries is already a fact of life. Between 1993 and 2000 the share of accession countries’ total exports going to the EU rose to two third. Sixty per cent of imports come from the EU. The integration of central and east European countries has been made easier by progress in capital market liberalisation. Positive macroeconomic data and the prospect of EU accession have been leading to large-scale direct investment. Since 1999, direct investment has accounted for around 5% of all accession countries’ GDP. The heterogeneous nature of monetary union will increase along with enlargement - labour and goods markets therefore need flexible adjustment mechanisms. The single monetary policy is a catalyst for reforms in other policy areas. The nation states are in competition with one another to find the best solutions for economic, labour market and fiscal policies. Successful policy solutions set a benchmark for the less successful countries. Besides the economic criteria for a successful monetary union, the European System of Central Banks should be reformed to cope with enlargement. The present structures were designed for a 15-member monetary union. Reform should take account of the fact that, in a few years’ time, the EU could comprise as many as 27 members. Reform must therefore be designed to take account not just of the current round of enlargement, in which up to ten nations will join the EU. Let me conclude by making some comments on your debate about possible EMU membership. The ECB Governing Council is well aware of the ongoing public discussion in your country. Sweden would be very welcome in the monetary union. More than that, for Sweden - neighbouring Finland and across the Baltic Sea from Germany - EMU membership should be a natural choice. In macroeconomic terms, membership would be of mutual benefit. The Swedish business cycle moves in notably close harmony with the euro area. Inflation, inflation expectations and long-term interest rates are closely correlated. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 7 At the core of the debate in your country lies the concern about the threat of an asymmetric shock. To my mind, the Eurosystem has demonstrated its capacity to cope well with economic shocks. In addition, strong asymmetric shocks are increasingly rare in times of ongoing economic integration. The possibility of major asymmetric shocks declines with the rising importance of trade, foreign direct investment and capital market integration. Swedish banks have already shown a greater inclination to invest on foreign markets. They are, to some extent, among the leaders in terms of European integration. To sum up: economic and financial integration is deepening within the monetary union and even with the other side of the Atlantic. Therefore, the built-in-stabilisers and the cushioning effects of the integrated European markets provide the shelter needed - for your country as well - to cope with asymmetric shocks. Sweden’s EMU membership is in your and our interests. I hope that very soon, on another visit to your beautiful country, I shall be able to use the same currency that I do in Rome, Paris or Frankfurt. 
BIS Review 73/2002 1 Mark W Olson: The importance of market structure Remarks by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile Santiago, Chile, 13 December 2002. *      *      * It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this interesting and thought-provoking conference, and I wish to begin by thanking Carlos Massad and the Central Bank of Chile for inviting me to attend.  My remarks today will address, from my perspective as a policymaker, a former banker, and a former adviser to the Congress, some of the issues that were raised in this morning's session and that will be discussed in this afternoon's presentations. Specifically, I would like to comment on some of the potential implications of the U.S. banking sector's changing structure for competition in the context of the Board's supervision and antitrust responsibilities. I will also discuss the deposit insurance system, which is administered through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the allocation of credit, with a focus on loans to small businesses.  As everyone here is fully aware, changes in market structure can have profound effects in each of these areas. By changes in market structure, I will refer primarily to changes in the number, size, charter, and other characteristics of firms on the supply side of banking and nonbanking markets brought about by the ongoing consolidation of the banking and financial services industry. However, the demand side of markets is also clearly relevant, and when necessary, I will include demand characteristics in my discussion.  The issues to which I refer are not new nor unique to the United States but, rather, have existed for many years and transcend national boundaries. In fact, the consolidation of banks and other types of financial institutions is one of the most notable features of the international financial landscape over the past decade or more. In recognition of the importance of financial consolidation, its potential impact on market structure, and its potential implications for public policy concerns, the Finance Ministers and central bank governors of the G-10 nations in late 1999 asked their deputies to study financial consolidation and its potential effects. My colleague, Roger Ferguson, directed this study, which was published in early 2001. Today, I would like to use some of the findings of the study as my starting point for addressing the issues I mentioned a few moments ago. Because the study was international in scope it will allow me to put some of my comments on the United States into a global context.  Competition In the United States and many other countries, a common concern is the potential for banking and financial consolidation to change the structure of banking markets in ways that reduce competition and thus harm consumers. The fact that the Federal Reserve has significant responsibility for enforcing antitrust laws in banking ensures that this issue has received considerable attention at the Fed.  Consolidation in the U.S. banking industry has occurred on a massive scale. In 1934, the year federal deposit insurance was implemented in the United States, the total number of bank charters was greater than 14,000. A similar number of chartered institutions were still functioning when the consolidation wave began in 1986. Today the number is just less than 8,000, a reduction of 43 percent. That consolidation, however, has not caused a diminution of competition for consumers or small businesses. For many reasons, including the rise of nonbank providers for many bank and bank-like services and the increased use of electronic banking, consolidation in the United States has generally been accompanied by heightened competition.  Still, in my view, ignoring the significance of market structure and its implications for competition would be a mistake. This was certainly the conclusion of the G-10 study. For example, the study found that, in the United States and the other nations included in the study, the markets for a number of key bank products - such as retail deposits and small business loans - appeared to be primarily local. Local, in this context was defined as a market that can be approximated geographically by such concepts as metropolitan areas and rural counties in the United States, and provinces and cantons in some other nations. On the demand side, studies in the United States indicate that both households and small 
2 BIS Review 73/2002 businesses procure key components of their banking services overwhelmingly from suppliers located within a few miles of themselves. It is still not common for these consumers to deal with institutions that can be reached only by telephone or the Internet. On the supply side, the number of banking offices in most developed countries, including the United States, continues to increase, despite a consolidation process that has reduced the number of independent banking organizations. In the United States, for example, although the number of bank charters has declined 43 percent over the past fifteen years, the number of bank branches has increased 47 percent (from 44,392 to more than 65,600). This increase suggests that firms continue to feel the need for a local presence to compete for the business of customers.  Of course, banks have many products for which the markets are not local in the way that I have defined the term. For example, markets for products such as large corporate loans, bond and equity underwriting, and credit cards are generally national or international in scope. Even products such as mortgages for single-family homes, which tend to be originated locally in the United States, are funded, serviced, and traded as securitized assets in national markets.  But the evidence continues to indicate that the structure of a properly defined market, regardless of whether its geographic scope is local, national, or international, makes a difference. Studies in the United States, Italy, and Switzerland find that substantial increases in market concentration have the potential to cause a reduction in deposit interest rates or an increase in loan interest rates.  In both research and policy analysis in the United States, the supply structure of banking markets has been measured by the shares of, say, the top three or five firms, and an indicator of overall structure, using a measure of concentration known as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. At the antitrust policy level, in the United States we use screens based on such measures to determine if a proposed merger has the potential to adversely affect consumers. There are indications, however, that our banking system's ongoing evolution may be making these traditional measures less reliable as indicators of the degree of competition in a given market. I would like to report the results of some interesting research that the Board staff has been doing in this area.  In three recent studies, members of the Board staff have analyzed the possible effects of aspects of market structure not considered in more traditional research. These studies strongly reinforce the importance of local markets for antitrust analysis of certain financial products, especially retail deposits and small business loans.1 But they also suggest that the current focus of U.S. antitrust analysis on the traditional measures of local market concentration that I mentioned earlier, to the exclusion of other structural measures, is perhaps becoming less appropriate. Specifically, the relative market presence of banks that operate in multiple markets and the market share of large banks may also be significant.  Supervision and administration of the safety net A critical issue addressed by the G-10 study was whether ongoing changes in banking system structure in the studied nations were affecting the risk of individual institutions or, more important, the level of systemic risk in the overall banking industry. The study concluded that, for both types of risk, the effects of changes in market structure were unclear.  With regard to the risk of an individual institution, the study came to the intuitively appealing conclusion that the evaluation of individual firm risk must be done case by case no matter what the market structure. The one area in which consolidation seems likely to reduce single institution risk is diversification gains, although even here the possible outcomes are complex. For example, diversification gains seem likely to occur from consolidation across regions of a given nation and from combinations across national borders. In the United States, there is some evidence that diversification gains have generally resulted from the expansion of interstate banking. Bankers in the United States                                                       1  Berger, Allen N., Richard J. Rosen, and Gregory F. Udell, "The Effect of Market Size Structure on Competition: The Case of Small Business Lending," FEDS Working Paper 2001-63, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2001; Hannan, Timothy H., and Robin A. Prager, "The Competitive Implications of Multi-market Bank Branching," FEDS Working Paper 2001-43, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2001; and Heitfield, Erik, and Robin A. Prager, "The Geographic Scope of Retail Deposit Markets," FEDS Working Paper 2002-49, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2002. 
BIS Review 73/2002 3 well remember the mid-1980s, when our nation was hit with systemic weaknesses in both the agriculture and the energy segments of the economy. Throughout the Plains states and extending to the Southwest, these sector weaknesses led to significant bank failures. It is not a coincidence that many states affected by these bank failures responded by dropping their prohibition on interstate bank ownership and prospectively allowing for greater diversification of these banks.  Consolidation of banks in the United States has not been uniformly consistent with management or shareholder expectations, however. The strategic justification for mergers typically takes one of two forms - either to consolidate presence in an existing market or to enter a new market. Consolidation within an existing market is typically expected to achieve greater efficiency through significant consolidation of operations. Mergers to enter new markets provide fewer opportunities to achieve these efficiencies. Not uncommonly, a consolidated bank, particularly when entering a new market, does not achieve the cost saving or efficiency gains initially expected. As a result, some mergers actually increase operational or reputational risk of the consolidated institution.  In part because the net effect of consolidation on the risk of an individual firm must be assessed case by case, the net effect of consolidation on systemic risk is also uncertain. The G-10 study, however, concluded that, if a large and complex banking organization becomes impaired, then consolidation and any attendant organizational complexity may increase the probability that the workout, or wind-down, of such an organization would be difficult and could be disorderly. Because such firms are the ones most likely to be associated with systemic risk, this aspect of consolidation has probably increased the chances that a wind-down could have broad economic implications.  These conclusions regarding individual firm and systemic risk reinforce the need for central banks and other financial regulators to prudently administer the safety net extended to depository institutions - a central topic of this conference. The precise meaning of prudence is complex, and it includes interrelated concerns such as the need to intervene promptly in failing institutions, the necessity of carefully administering the lender of last resort function, the willingness to let insolvent institutions die, the insistence on the maintenance of adequate capital, the need for supervision that focuses hard on risk measurement and management, and the encouraging of market discipline through putting stockholders, managers, and uninsured creditors truly at risk.  One aspect of such prudence in the United States concerns the administration of the deposit insurance system. Of the sixty-eight deposit insurance systems evaluated by the International Monetary Fund in a 1999 worldwide study, the U.S. system is the oldest. Created in 1933, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) began insuring deposits for approved banks in January 1934. In its original form, the FDIC was a model of clarity regarding its mission and function. Its mission was to insure the deposits of small-dollar savers up to $2,500. Its function was essentially to be a paying agent for insured depositors in the event of a bank failure. At that time, it was only an insurer, it had no supervisory or regulatory authority. The original construct lasted only one year. The following year, the Congress amended the charter to give the FDIC supervisory authority and doubled the amount of coverage to $5,000.  For the next forty-five years, the changes in deposit insurance were subtle. But these subtle changes had significant public policy implications. Insurance coverage was increased in several stages, but it remained relatively stable in constant dollar terms until 1980. Of greater long-term significance was the FDIC's practice of resolving bank failures of that era by arranging mergers of failed banks; by doing so it instituted a de facto policy of effectively insuring 100 percent of all deposits. This practice did not receive careful scrutiny during the period, and the public policy implications of 100 percent coverage remained unnoticed. The public policy implications finally received attention after the failure of the Continental Illinois Bank in 1984 and the subsequent decision to hold all depositors harmless. In the volatile 1980s, the public policy issues implicit in that policy - "moral hazard," "too big to fail," and expansion of the "safety net" - became unavoidable and needed to be addressed. Through a series of legislative initiatives, from 1989 to 1999 the Congress addressed, in varying degrees, each of the issues.  Not only the banking industry and the FDIC insurance fund faced public policy issues in that decade. The savings and loan industry and its insurer, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), were under even more severe pressure. With a loan portfolio consisting largely of fixed-rate mortgages, the thrift industry came under extraordinary duration-risk pressures in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when inflation drove deposit rates into a double-digit range and maturities on deposit instruments dropped from more than four years to less than one year on new savings deposits. The thrift regulators responded by allowing and, at times, encouraging mergers, many with little or no 
4 BIS Review 73/2002 tangible capital. As a result, when real estate loans went sour a few years later, the savings and loan industry did not have the capital strength to withstand the strain. Eventually, the Congress was compelled to step in and recapitalize the underfunded FSLIC fund and, at the same time, move its administration to the FDIC.  Current FDIC Chairman Donald Powell, like his predecessor, has offered a number of proposals to reform the current FDIC law. The extent to which the FDIC is in need of fundamental updating can best be described through the following examples.  A well-managed, well-capitalized bank with $1 billion in deposits can have its annual premium for deposit insurance range from a low of zero to a high of $2.3 million, entirely on the basis of the overall level of the FDIC fund. In other words, that range bears no relationship to the risk profile of the individual institution.  As a second example, a newly chartered insured institution - say, a bank affiliate of a securities firm - could grow very rapidly by aggressively marketing insured deposit products and, because of the accumulated premiums of long-time institutions, could enjoy a free ride by paying no deposit insurance premiums in times when the insurance fund is above its mandated threshold of 1.25 percent of total insured deposits. Yet several fast-growing, free-riding institutions could trigger premium increases for the entire industry by altering the ratio of the fund's level to total industry deposits.  Adding to the need to address fundamental change to the FDIC statute is the arbitrary nature of the 1.25 percent designated reserve ratio, the maintenance of which can trigger wide premium swings. The ratio was the product of political expediency when written into the law a decade ago and has now assumed relevance far exceeding its value.  All in all, the current deposit insurance system has a number of aspects that one would never observe in the private sector and that need to be reformed. Indeed, most parties to the deposit insurance issue agree on the need to provide the FDIC with greater flexibility in setting premiums, to eliminate the free-rider provision, and to encourage increased risk-based assessment of premiums. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System endorsed these proposed changes.  My final observations on deposit insurance reform concern the most controversial part of the current debate in the United States: whether to raise the deposit insurance limit. As many of you know, my fellow Board members and I oppose an increase in, or an indexing of, the current $100,000 deposit insurance ceiling. In our judgment, increased coverage would be unlikely to add in any measurable way to the stability of the banking system. Macroeconomic policy and other elements of the federal safety net for depository institutions, including the still-significant level of deposit insurance, continue to be effective deterrents against bank runs.  Moreover, that household depositors would benefit from an increase in coverage is not apparent. According to our periodic surveys of consumer finances, most U.S. household depositors have balances well below the current insurance limit, and those who have larger balances appear to have been adept at achieving the level of deposit insurance coverage they desire by opening multiple accounts. Such spreading of asset holdings is perfectly consistent with the counsel always given to investors to diversify their assets - be they stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or certificates of deposit - across different issuers.  Some small banks argue that they need increased deposit insurance coverage to compete effectively with their larger and more diversified cousins. An analysis of small bank performance does not support that claim. For example, since the mid-1990s, smaller banks' assets and uninsured deposits, adjusted for the effects of mergers, have expanded at twice the pace of those at the largest banks. Throughout the 1990s, small banks' return on equity was well maintained, and the viability of small banks is evidenced further by the fact that more than 1,350 new banks were chartered over the past decade in the United States, virtually all of them small institutions.  With few, if any, benefits, raising the ceiling would risk incurring substantial net costs by expanding the safety net, increasing the government subsidy to banking, encouraging moral hazard, and reducing the incentive for market discipline.  Supply of credit to small business I now turn to my final topic for today - possible implications of the changing structure of the U.S. banking sector for the supply of credit to small businesses. In the United States and many other 
BIS Review 73/2002 5 countries, consolidation in the banking industry has involved large numbers of small banks. As a net result of mergers, failures, and new entry, the number of commercial banks in the United States with total assets under $100 million (in 1994 dollars) fell from a little more than 8,800 in 1990 to not quite 4,800 at the end of 2001. Although, as I have indicated, these small banks have generally been doing quite well, some observers have expressed concern that such changes in the structure of the banking industry may adversely affect the availability of credit to small businesses. Given the importance of small businesses to all of our economies, the supply of credit to such firms deserves serious attention. For this reason, the effect of consolidation on small business lending was a focus of the G-10 study. It has continued to be a topic of research by Board staff, and I am pleased to see that it is the subject of papers presented at this conference.  Concern about the effects of consolidation on the supply of credit to small businesses is predicated on the view that the larger banks resulting from consolidation may restructure their portfolios by discontinuing credit relationships with smaller borrowers and expanding lending to larger borrowers. To the extent that the credit relationship between a bank and a small business is characterized by a relatively high level of specialized knowledge by the bank about its customer, small firms could face difficulties in finding credit from other sources.  Early statistical studies of the effect of bank consolidation on small business lending provided some support to the concerns I have just summarized, as early studies suggested that banks reduce the percentage of their portfolio invested in small businesses after consolidation. However, subsequent research has allayed some of these fears, at least in the United States. Importantly, more recent research has recognized that what is relevant is what effect of changes in market structure have on the total availability of credit to small borrowers and whether such changes are associated with more accurate pricing of risk.  In the United States, studies that have examined the effect of mergers and acquisitions on small business lending by other banks in the same local markets have found that other banks and new bank entrants tend to offset any reduction in the supply of credit to small businesses by the consolidating banks. In addition, a recent study by Board staff and others suggests that earlier conclusions regarding the behavior of larger banks may need some qualification.2 This study finds that the creation of large banks may not significantly reduce lending to small businesses. Evidence is beginning to emerge that technological change, such as the use of credit-scoring models for small business loans, may serve to expand the supply of credit to small businesses.33 In any event, the remaining uncertainties suggest to me that this topic will be a fertile one for all of us in the coming years.  Conclusion I would like to close my remarks by returning to where I began. It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference, and once again I thank our hosts for their invitation to me and for their generous hospitality. The topics we are discussing are important, and I hope that I have contributed to our understanding of some of the relevant issues. Thank you.                                                        2  Berger, Rosen, and Udell (2001). 3  See Allen N. Berger, W. Scott Frame, and Nathan H. Miller, "Credit Scoring and the Availability, Price, and Risk of Small Business Credit," FEDS Working Paper 2002-26, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2002. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 1 Bruno Gehrig: Review of the Swiss economy Introductory remarks by Prof Bruno Gehrig, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 13 December 2002.  *      *      * The past year was an eventful one for the international financial markets. The global deterioration in economic prospects and eroded investor confidence deepened the stock market slump as from the middle of the year. Parallel to this development, the interest rate level continued to fall. The central banks contributed to the interest rate reduction. However, with risk premiums increasing at the same time, financing conditions failed to improve for many companies but actually often deteriorated. Foreign exchange Following the steep slide of the US dollar, exchange rates stabilised again from mid-year onward once it had become clear that the growth slump was affecting all major economic regions equally. The Swiss franc fluctuated within a relatively narrow margin to the euro this year. The geopolitical uncertainty premium applied to the Swiss franc after the shock of 11 September 2001 is still being paid (see graph).  In the current year, we again recorded phases of heightened upward pressure on the Swiss currency. We tried to counteract the negative consequences of the strong Swiss franc and the risk of further upward movements by lowering the interest rate several times. Since the beginning of September 2001, the key interest rate differential between the euro and the Swiss franc has widened from one to two percentage points. The yield on long-term bonds in Swiss francs is also around two percentage points below that on corresponding euro paper. This has lowered the attractiveness of the Swiss franc somewhat compared with the euro. The stabilisation of the euro/Swiss franc relationship – albeit at a relatively high rate for the Swiss franc – is a positive development. Experience has shown that the exchange rate development has a significant influence on business activity in Switzerland. We are still determined to counteract any additional upward trend of the Swiss franc that might jeopardise the economic recovery. 
 2 BIS Review 73/2002 Bonds In the capital markets around the world, nominal yields dropped considerably (see graph). However, borrowers with medium and low credit ratings did not benefit much from this development as credit risk premiums rose during the year. This also limits the macroeconomic stimulus effect of the yield decline. In addition, real interest rates did not decrease to the same extent because simultaneously inflation expectations again subsided markedly. Particularly in the euro's core countries – first and foremost in Germany – real interest rates are high. They depress the economic outlook and increase the growth differences between the member countries.  Shares Stock markets were characterised by extraordinarily sharp fluctuations and hefty price losses. This was due to risk aversion increasing in the course of the year and the effectively higher risk level, which both depressed share prices. The sharp price swings mirror the difficulty of assessing the risks and opportunities in this environment. The stock market slump has persisted for almost three years now. In the past few weeks, though, all major stock markets have at least witnessed some upward corrections. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 3  The long-term expectation that higher yields can be achieved only by taking higher risks has not proven true over a relatively long period of time. Unlike shares, low-risk bonds have generated attractive yields during this phase. This experience together with the fact that numerous, notably institutional investors have lost part of their risk capability might, in many instances, result in equity weightings remaining low in the foreseeable future. This change of behaviour will limit the stock markets' growth potential for the time being. At present, the price/earnings ratios of the major stock markets are close to the average of the past 15 years. This indicator suggests that, despite the price losses suffered, shares are not yet particularly low-priced. However, compared with the very low yield level of bonds, which are the most important investment alternative, shares do seem quite inexpensive. Does the stock market slump have any adverse effects on economic development? This seems certain for several reasons. For the corporate sector, it has become more expensive to raise capital, which undermines investment activity. Although direct shareholding is less common in Switzerland than, for example, in the United States, the asset losses incurred discourage private consumption. In many cases, the deteriorated financial position of pension funds necessitates an increase in contributions and/or a decrease in existing premium reductions. Such perspectives and occasionally voiced doubts about the reliability of pension promises adversely affect consumption and investors' willingness to take risks. Last but not least, the bearish stock markets directly affect the value added by our financial sector, which contributes over 10 percent to GDP. Risk management In Switzerland and abroad, banks have adopted a more cautious attitude. International institutions, in particular, manage their credit risks much more actively than they used to. They sell some of these risks to other financial intermediaries, including insurance companies and institutional asset managers. The available data do not allow any reliable conclusions to be drawn as to the risk distribution after the credit risk transfers. It can be concluded, though, that credit risks are borne by a larger number of market players than previously and that diversification possibilities are probably better utilised nowadays. In interbank business, too, more attention is being paid worldwide to default risks. A growing share of interbank business is hedged; this is also the case in Switzerland, where repo business has developed steadily. Unhedged transactions still clearly account for the bulk of interbank business, but with an average volume of approximately Sfr 20 billion, interbank repos, which were neglected for a long time, 
 4 BIS Review 73/2002 have grown to a respectable size. With respect to system stability, this development is favourable and should be further promoted. Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) As regards credit risks in foreign exchange business, the launch of the CLS system this autumn is a milestone achievement. CLS Bank, which has its headquarters in New York, serves as a platform to eliminate the so-called Herstatt risk, i.e. the settlement risk inherent in foreign exchange deals. Previously, the two legs of a foreign exchange transaction were settled at different times. If US dollars were bought against Swiss francs, the franc amount was to be paid during European trading time. The corresponding amount in US dollars, however, was credited only a few hours later – during US trading time. In the few intervening hours, a credit risk existed. If a bank had been closed down during this time period, its counterparties might possibly have lost huge amounts of US dollar receivables. CLS Bank now makes it possible to settle foreign exchange transactions in the major currencies based on the «payment versus payment» principle, thereby eliminating the settlement risk for these transactions. Currently, 42 financial institutions are directly linked to the system (Settlement Members) and settle their foreign exchange payments via CLS in seven different currencies. One of these settlement currencies is the Swiss franc. Three Swiss banks – UBS, CS and Zürcher Kantonalbank – participate in CLS. Apart from these three Swiss banks, two other financial institutions – HSBC and Bank of America – effect foreign exchange transactions in Swiss francs via CLS. Every day, these five institutions together enter around 1,400 payments in the amount of almost Sfr 20 billion into CLS. Settlement takes place via a direct link between the Swiss Interbank Clearing System (SIC) and CLS Bank. To meet their delivery obligations in Swiss francs, the five banks draw on intraday liquidity, which the SNB offers through interest-free repo transactions. Since November, direct system participants have been able not only to use CLS services for their own purposes but also to offer these services to other banks. With this so-called third party business expanding and further direct participants and currencies joining the system next year, more and more payments will be settled through CLS. Currently, about 35,000 transactions in the amount of approximately USD 400 billion are settled in CLS every day. All parties involved are very satisfied with the system's mode of operation. By eliminating the settlement risk, CLS has made a significant contribution to the stability of the international financial infrastructure.  
 BIS Review 73/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: Issues for monetary policy Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 19 December 2002.  *      *      * Although the gold standard could hardly be portrayed as having produced a period of price tranquility, it was the case that the price level in 1929 was not much different, on net, from what it had been in 1800. But, in the two decades following the abandonment of the gold standard in 1933, the consumer price index in the United States nearly doubled. And, in the four decades after that, prices quintupled. Monetary policy, unleashed from the constraint of domestic gold convertibility, had allowed a persistent overissuance of money. As recently as a decade ago, central bankers, having witnessed more than a half-century of chronic inflation, appeared to confirm that a fiat currency was inherently subject to excess.  But the adverse consequences of excessive money growth for financial stability and economic performance provoked a backlash. Central banks were finally pressed to rein in overissuance of money even at the cost of considerable temporary economic disruption. By 1979, the need for drastic measures had become painfully evident in the United States. The Federal Reserve, under the leadership of Paul Volcker and with the support of both the Carter and the Reagan Administrations, dramatically slowed the growth of money. Initially, the economy fell into recession and inflation receded. However, most important, when activity staged a vigorous recovery, the progress made in reducing inflation was largely preserved. By the end of the 1980s, the inflation climate was being altered dramatically.  The record of the past twenty years appears to underscore the observation that, although pressures for excess issuance of fiat money are chronic, a prudent monetary policy maintained over a protracted period can contain the forces of inflation. With the story of most major economies in the postwar period being the emergence of, and then battle against inflation, concerns about deflation, one of the banes of an earlier century, seldom surfaced. The recent experience of Japan has certainly refocused attention on the possibility that an unanticipated fall in the general price level would convert the otherwise relatively manageable level of nominal debt held by households and businesses into a corrosive rising level of real debt and real debt service costs. It now appears that we have learned that deflation, as well as inflation, are in the long run monetary phenomena, to extend Milton Friedman's famous dictum.  To be sure, in the short to medium run, many forces are at play that complicate the link between money and prices. The widening globalization of market economies in recent years, for example, is integrating a growing share of previously local capacity into an operationally meaningful world total. That process has, at least for a time, brought substantial new supplies of goods and services to global markets. In addition, the more rapid rate of technological innovation, so evident in the United States, has boosted the pace at which our productive potential is expanding. These shifts in aggregate supply - whether foreign or domestic in origin - influence the relationship between money and prices. Moreover, the tie between money and prices can be altered by dysfunctional financial intermediation, as we have witnessed in Japan. Thus, recent experience understandably has stimulated policymakers worldwide to refocus on deflation and its consequences, decades after dismissing it as a possibility so remote that it no longer warranted serious attention.  The meaning of deflation and the characteristics that differentiate it from the more usual experience of inflation are subjects being actively studied inside and outside of central banks. As I testified before the Congress last month, the United States is nowhere close to sliding into a pernicious deflation. Moreover, a major objective of the recent heightened level of scrutiny is to ensure that any latent deflationary pressures are appropriately addressed well before they became a problem. *      *      * Central bankers have long believed that price stability is conducive to achieving maximum sustainable growth. Historically, debilitating risk premiums have tended to rise with both expected inflation and deflation, and they have been minimized during conditions of approximate price stability.  Although the U.S. economy has largely escaped any deflation since World War II, there are some well-founded reasons to presume that deflation is more of a threat to economic growth than is inflation. 
 2 BIS Review 73/2002 For one, the lower bound on nominal interest rates at zero threatens ever-rising real rates if deflation intensifies. A related consequence is that even if debtors are able to refinance loans at zero nominal interest rates, they may still face high and rising real rates that cause their balance sheets to deteriorate.  Another concern about deflation resides in labor markets. Some studies have suggested that nominal wages do not easily adjust downward. If lower price inflation is accompanied by lower average wage inflation, then the prevalence of nominal wages being constrained from falling could increase as price inflation moves toward or below zero. In these circumstances, the effective clearing of labor markets would be inhibited, with the consequence being higher rates of unemployment.  Taken together, these considerations suggest that deflation could well be more damaging than inflation to economic growth. While this asymmetry should not be overlooked, several factors limit its significance. In particular, more rapid advances in productivity can make this asymmetry less severe. Fast growth of productivity, by buoying expectations of future advances of wages and earnings and thus aggregate demand, enables real interest rates to be higher than would otherwise be the case without restricting economic growth. Moreover, to the extent that more-rapid growth of productivity shows through to faster gains in nominal wages, there will be fewer instances in which nominal wages will be pressured to fall.  One also should not overstate the difficulties posed for monetary policy by the zero bound on interest rates and nominal wage inflexibility even in the absence of faster productivity growth. The expansion of the monetary base can proceed even if overnight rates are driven to their zero lower bound. The Federal Reserve has authority to purchase Treasury securities of any maturity and indeed already purchases such securities as part of its procedures to keep the overnight rate at its desired level. This authority could be used to lower interest rates at longer maturities. Such actions have precedent: Between 1942 and 1951, the Federal Reserve put a ceiling on longer-term Treasury yields at 2-1/2 percent. With respect to potential difficulties in labor markets, results from research remain ambiguous on the extent and persistence of downward rigidity in nominal compensation.  Clearly, it would be desirable to avoid deflation. But if deflation were to develop, options for an aggressive monetary policy response are available.  *      *      * Fortunately, the ability of our economy to weather the many shocks inflicted on it since the spring of 2000 attests to our market system's remarkable resilience. That characteristic is far more evident today than two or three decades ago. There may be numerous causes of this increased resilience.1 Among them, ongoing efforts to liberalize global trade have added flexibility to many aspects of our economy over time. Furthermore, a quarter-century of bipartisan deregulation has significantly reduced inflexibilities in our markets for energy, transportation, communication, and financial services. And, of course, the dramatic gains in information technology have markedly improved the ability of businesses to address festering economic imbalances before they inflict significant damage. This improved ability has been further facilitated by the increasing willingness of our workers to embrace innovation more generally. Irrespective of how deflationary forces might influence it, our economy has                                                       1  A considerable economics literature in recent years has documented a decline in the volatility of real GDP over the past two decades. Some researchers have argued that the decline in volatility is the result of smaller disturbances to the macroeconomy. Others have argued that improved monetary policy should be credited for the reduction. Another line of work points to structural changes that have increased the flexibility of the economy to respond to shocks. In that vein, I have argued that advances in information technology and the cumulative effects of a quarter century of deregulation have likely played a major role in promoting the increased flexibility of our economy. Of course, these explanations are not mutually exclusive and could, indeed, be interconnected.  But to the extent that this resilience reflects increased flexibility of the economy, we should be searching for policies that will further enhance economic flexibility and dismantling policies that contribute to unnecessary rigidity. The more flexible an economy is, the greater is its ability to self-correct to inevitable disturbances, reducing the size and consequences of cyclical imbalances. An implication is that, at any given point in time, the economy is more likely to be producing close to its productive potential. So often, discussion of policies intended to improve macroeconomic performance have focused solely on traditional monetary and fiscal policies. But structural policies intended to promote flexibility may be an important complement to standard macro policies, and they may be important enough to influence both the cyclical performance and long-run growth potential of the economy. This issue surely deserves examination and debate. 
 BIS Review 73/2002 3 the benefit of enhanced flexibility, which has, at least to date, allowed us to withstand the potentially destabilizing effects of some substantial negative shocks.  *      *      * Certainly, lurking in the background of any evaluation of deflation risks is the concern that those forces could be unleashed by a bursting bubble in asset prices. This connection, real or speculative, raises some interesting questions about the most effective approach to the conduct of monetary policy. If the bursting of an asset bubble creates economic dislocation, then preventing bubbles might seem an attractive goal. But whether incipient bubbles can be detected in real time and whether, once detected, they can be defused without inadvertently precipitating still greater adverse consequences for the economy remain in doubt.  It may be useful, as a first step, to consider both the economic circumstances most likely to impede the development of bubbles and the circumstances most conducive to their formation. Destabilizing macroeconomic policies and poor economic performance are not likely to provide fertile ground for the optimism that usually accompanies surging asset prices.  Ironically, low inflation, economic stability, and low risk premiums may provide tinder for asset price speculation that could be sparked should technological innovations open up new opportunities for profitable investment. Even in such circumstances, bubble pricing is likely to be inhibited for a company with a history. To be sure, the stock prices of old-line companies do rise somewhat through arbitrage when the market as a whole is propelled higher by stock prices of cutting-edge technologies. But it is difficult to imagine stock prices of most well-established and seasoned old-line companies surging to wholly unsustainable heights. With some prominent exceptions, their capabilities for future profits have been largely tested and delimited.  The situation is likely different in the case of a new company that employs an innovative technology. Under these circumstances, the dispersion of rationally imagined possible future outcomes could be wide. If forecasts are unfettered by a need for consistency with the past, investors might take off on unwarranted flights of optimism. Moreover, skeptics find it too expensive or too risky to short sell the shares of such a company, especially when its stock price is rising rapidly.  The conditions of extended low inflation and low risk were combined with breakthrough technologies to produce the bubble of recent years. But do such conditions always produce a bubble? It seems improbable that a surge in innovation in the near future would generate a new bubble of substantial proportions. Investors are likely to be sensitive to the need for asset prices to be backed ultimately by an ongoing stream of earnings. Hence, a further necessary condition for the emergence of a bubble is the passage of sufficient time to erode the traumatic memories of earlier post-bubble experiences.  *      *      * Most standard macroeconomic models fitted to the experience of recent decades imply that a distortion in valuation ratios induced by a bubble can be offset by adopting a sufficiently restrictive monetary policy. According to such models, a tighter monetary policy, on average, credibly constrains demand and lowers asset prices, all else being equal. These models can also be interpreted to suggest that incremental monetary tightening can gradually deflate stock prices. But that conclusion is a consequence of the model's construction. It is not based on evidence drawn from history. In fact, history indicates that bubbles tend to deflate not gradually and linearly but suddenly, unpredictably, and often violently. In addition, the degree of monetary tightening that would be required to contain or offset a bubble of any substantial dimension appears to be so great as to risk an unacceptable amount of collateral damage to the wider economy.  The evidence of recent years, as well as the events of the late 1920s, casts doubt on the proposition that bubbles can be defused gradually. As I related this summer at the annual Jackson Hole symposium sponsored by the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, "... our experience over the past fifteen years suggests that monetary tightening that deflates stock prices without depressing economic activity has often been associated with subsequent increases in the level of stock prices .... Such data suggest that nothing short of a sharp increase in short-term rates that engenders a significant economic retrenchment is sufficient to check a nascent bubble. The notion that a well-timed 
 4 BIS Review 73/2002 incremental tightening could have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble is almost surely illusion."2 In short, unless a model can be specified to capture the apparent market tendency toward bidding stock prices higher in response to monetary policies aimed at maintaining macroeconomic stability, the accompanying forecasts will belie recent experience. Faced with this uncertainty, the Federal Reserve has focused on policies that would, as I testified before the Congress in 1999, "...mitigate the fallout [of an asset bubble] when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion."3 The Federal Open Market Committee chose, as you know, to embark on an aggressive course of monetary easing two years ago once it became apparent that a variety of forces, including importantly the slump in household wealth that resulted from the decline in stock prices, were restraining inflation pressures and economic activity.  It is too soon to judge the final outcome of the strategy that we adopted. The contractionary impulse from the decline in equity prices appeared to be diminishing around the middle of this year. But then the fallout for stock prices from corporate governance malfeasance, argued by some as having been spawned by the bubble, became more intense. This, in turn, damped capital investment and trimmed inventory plans. More recently, of course, geopolitical risk has risen markedly, further weighing on demand. Though unrelated to the bubble burst of 2000, it has muddied the evaluation of the post-bubble economy.  If the postmortem of recent monetary policy shows that the results of addressing the bubble only after it bursts are unsatisfactory, we would be left with less-appealing choices for the future. In that case, finding ways to identify bubbles and to contain their progress would be desirable, though history cautions that prospects for success appear slim.  The difficulties that policymakers and private agents face become especially acute as an economic expansion lengthens. The decline in risk premiums under these circumstances presumably results, in part, from rational appraisals. In an economy in which the business cycle has averaged four years in length over a protracted period, households and businesses would doubtless become more cautious in the fourth year of a new cycle. But how do they behave when, as for the past two decades, expansions have been long and cyclical downturns have been exceptionally rare? After five or six years of uninterrupted expansion, is it irrational or even unreasonable to assume that expansion would continue for the subsequent six months? Thus, it was disturbing to observe risk seemingly being priced so cheaply in late 1997 when BBB corporate spreads over ten-year Treasuries sunk to only 70 basis points. That spread is now about 250 basis points, although it has narrowed significantly in recent weeks.  *      *      * Weaving a monetary policy path through the thickets of bubbles and deflations and their possible aftermath is not something with which modern central bankers have had much experience.  As I noted earlier, it seems ironic that a monetary policy that is successful in inducing stability may inadvertently be sowing the seeds of instability associated with asset bubbles. I trust that the use by the central bank of deliberately inflationary policy as protection against bubbles can be readily dismissed. While the current episode has not yet concluded, it appears that, responding vigorously in a relatively flexible economy to the aftermath of bubbles, as traumatic as that may be, is less inhibiting to long-term growth than chronic high-inflation monetary policy. Moderate inflation might possibly inhibit bubbles, though at some cost of reduced economic efficiency. However, I doubt that such policies could be sustained or well-controlled by central banks. Among our realistically limited alternatives, dealing aggressively with the aftermath of a bubble appears the most likely to avert long-term damage to the economy.4                                                       2  Alan Greenspan, “Economic Volatility,” August 30, 2002, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 3  Committee on Banking and Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 22, 1999. 4  Some argue that bubbles can be prevented or defused by financial regulatory initiatives. It is observed that asset bubbles have often been associated with rapid credit expansion, and hence it is claimed that restraining credit growth could quash nascent bubbles. A bubble could conceivably be defused by restrictive credit regulations that stifle economic growth. It is by  
 BIS Review 73/2002 5 Regardless of history's verdict on a policy that addresses only the aftermath of bubbles, we still need to improve our understanding of the dynamics of bubbles and deflation to contain the latter, if not the former. *      *      * Before closing this evening, I would like to take a few minutes to address recent economic developments.  As I pointed out earlier, the U.S. economy exhibited considerable resilience to a series of post-boom shocks. The list is rather impressive: First, a halving of stock prices and household equity wealth; second, a dramatic decline in capital expenditures; third, the tragic events of September 11; fourth, the disturbing evidence of corporate malfeasance; and fifth, the recent escalation of geopolitical risks. I would scarcely state that our economy was not shaken by these series of shocks, one on top of the other. But after we experienced a mild recession, real GDP grew in excess of 3 percent over the year ending in the third quarter.  The recovery, however, ran into resistance in the summer, apparently as a consequence of a renewed weakening in equity prices, further revelations of corporate malfeasance, and then the heightened geopolitical risks. Concern on our part led the Federal Open Market Committee to reduce its targeted federal funds rate 50 basis points at our early November meeting as some insurance against the possibility that the weakening would gain some footing. Although our most probable forecast already was that growth would pick up, we judged the cost of the insurance provided by additional easing as exceptionally modest because we viewed the risk of an imminent rise in inflation as remote.  The limited evidence since the November easing has supported our view that the U.S. economy has been working its way through a soft patch. And the patch has certainly been soft. The labor market has remained subdued, as businesses apparently have been reluctant to add to payrolls. The manufacturing sector remains especially damped, and nonresidential construction has trended lower. By all reports, state and local governments continue to struggle with deterioration in their fiscal conditions. Oil prices have recently risen and, not least, the economies of most of our major trading partners have shown little vigor.  Still, low interest rates and rapid advances in productivity have been providing considerable support to economic activity. Those influences have been most evident on consumer spending and new home sales, which have been remarkably firm this year. Motor vehicle sales have been supported by low financing costs, by high levels of customer incentives, and by high rates of vehicle scrappage and multiple car ownership. More broadly, strong growth of labor productivity, supplemented by reduced tax payments, has provided a boost both to incomes and to spending. Meanwhile, new home sales have been buoyed by low mortgage interest rates as well as favorable demographics.  Cash borrowed in the process of mortgage refinancing, an important support for consumer outlays this past year, is bound to contract at some point, as average interest rates on households' total mortgage portfolio converges to interest rates on new mortgages. However, applications for refinancing, while off their peaks, remain high. Moreover, simply processing the backlog of earlier applications will take some time, and this factor alone suggests continued significant refinancing originations and cash-outs into the early months of 2003.  Corporate risk-taking underwent pronounced retrenchment following the traumatic disclosures of corporate malfeasance this summer. Capital appropriations slowed noticeably across a broad spectrum of American industries. Aggressive accounting practices seemingly disappeared virtually overnight. I would not be surprised if further disclosures of questionable practices were to surface in the months ahead, but I would be quite surprised if such practices were introduced after mid-2002.  Since early October, conditions in financial markets have turned less adverse. Stock prices have, on net, moved up, and corporate yield spreads, especially for below-investment-grade debt instruments, have narrowed significantly. Those spreads, nevertheless, remain quite elevated relative to their                                                                                                                                                                       no means clear, however, that such a regime would be more conducive to wealth creation over time than our current regulatory system. Also of relevance, in a vibrant financial system, such as exists in the United States, there will always be many avenues available to investors for financing a bubble. Furthermore, many analysts maintain that stocks are priced at the margin by institutions with little or no financing needs. 
 6 BIS Review 73/2002 readings of early 2000. Credit derivative default swaps have improved recently in line with yield spreads. The overall cost of business capital has clearly declined, inducing in recent weeks increased issuance of bonds of all grades and halting the runoff of commercial paper and business bank loans.  The recent increase in the expansion of business credit may hint at some stirring in capital investment, but it is simply too early to tell. There is evidence that some corporate managers are beginning to tentatively venture out on the risk scale. New orders for capital goods equipment and software, after falling sharply over the preceding two years, have stabilized and in some cases turned up in nominal terms this year - an improvement, to be sure, but not necessarily the beginnings of a vigorous recovery.  In the end, capital investment will be most dependent on the outlook for profits and the resolution of the uncertainties surrounding the business outlook and the geopolitical situation. These considerations at present impose a rather formidable barrier to new investment. Profit margins have been running a little higher this year than last, aided importantly by strong growth in labor productivity. But a lack of pricing power remains evident for most corporations. A more vigorous and broad-based pickup in capital spending will almost surely require further gains in corporate profits and cash flows.  A full enumeration of the caveats surrounding the economic outlook would, as usual, be lengthy. But often-cited concerns about the levels of debt and debt-servicing costs of households and firms appear a bit stretched. The combination of household mortgage and consumer debt as a share of disposable income has moved up to a historically high level. But the upward trend in the series reflects, in part, financial innovations that have increased access to credit markets for many households. These innovations include the development of a deep secondary market for home mortgages, along with the advent of credit scoring and automated underwriting models that have enhanced the ability of loan officers and credit card companies to identify good credit risks. These innovations lower the risk level of any given amount of debt.  To be sure, the mortgage debt of homeowners relative to their income is high by historical norms. But, as a consequence of low interest rates, the servicing requirement for that debt relative to homeowners' income is roughly in line with the historical average. Moreover, owing to continued large gains in residential real estate values, equity in homes has continued to rise despite very large debt-financed extractions. Adding in the fixed costs associated with other financial obligations, such as rental payments of tenants, consumer installment credit, and auto leases, the total servicing costs faced by households relative to their income appears somewhat elevated compared with longer-run averages. But arguably they are not a significant cause for concern.  Some strain from corporate debt burdens became evident as rates of return on capital projects financed with debt fell short of expectations over the past several years. While overall debt has not been paid down, corporations have significantly increased holdings of cash and have reduced their near-term debt obligations by issuing bonds to pay down commercial paper and bank loans.  *      *      * In early 2000, as financial imbalances and increased risk brought the surge in capital investment to an end, significant profitable opportunities remained to be exploited. One must presume that they still exist and may well have been enlarged by subsequent technological advances. Indeed, one of the most remarkable features of the performance of the U.S. economy over the past year had been the extraordinary gains in productivity. The increase in output per hour over the year ending in the third-quarter - 5-1/2 percent - was the largest increase in several decades. That pace will not likely be sustained, but it suggests that the underlying supports to productivity growth have not yet fully played out. Against that background, any significant fall in the current geopolitical and other risks should noticeably improve capital outlays, the indispensable spur to a path of increased economic growth.  *      *      * In summary, as we focus on the dangers of bubbles, deflation, and excess capacity, the marked improvement in the degree of flexibility and resilience exhibited by our economy in recent years should afford us considerable comfort for now. Still, economic policymakers are having to grapple with what seems to be a much larger portfolio of problems than that which our predecessors appeared to face a half-century ago. The ever-growing complexity of our global economic and financial system surely plays a role. Moreover, the very technologies that have helped us reap enormous efficiencies have also presented us with new challenges by increasing our interconnectedness.  
 BIS Review 73/2002 7 I venture that future invitees to the Economic Club of New York dinners will not lack interesting problems to address.  
 BIS Review 102/2001 1 Laurence H Meyer: Financial Stability in Emerging Markets - What Have We Accomplished and What Remains To Be Done? Remarks by Mr Laurence H Meyer, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, 18 December 2001.  *      *      * Economic crises in emerging-market economies were a prominent feature of the economic landscape during the second half of the 1990s. Though such crises were by no means a new phenomenon, what brought special attention to the recent episodes was the perception of a heightened possibility of contagion--the spread outward of pressures from one crisis country to other countries. The risk of such contagion became evident when the collapse of Thailand's currency triggered a cascade of crises in other Asian emerging markets. Pressures could also spread through world financial markets to industrial economies, as happened with the Russian financial crisis.  In the wake of the Asian crises in particular, initiatives were launched on several fronts to improve financial stability in emerging-market economies and thus to reduce the frequency and intensity of future crises. These initiatives have ranged widely, from efforts to improve policymaking in emerging-market economies in areas such as choice of exchange rate regime and debt management to development of international standards and codes of best practices and to reforms of international financial institutions. Today, I venture an assessment of how much progress has been made and how much remains to be done. I believe that there have been improvements in our understanding of the causes of crises, in economic policymaking in emerging-market economies, and in international institutional arrangements. The key to preventing future financial crises is for emerging-market economies themselves to institute sound domestic economic policies and to build robust domestic financial institutions. No improvements in international financial architecture can make up for deficiencies in these crucial areas.  Reducing Contagion and Promoting Financial Stability  Before I evaluate prescriptions for reducing the likelihood of emerging-market financial crises, I need to examine the causes of such crises. In general, financial crises result from adverse shocks to an already vulnerable economy. External shocks that a robust economy would shrug off can have a disproportionate impact on an economy beset by speculative excesses in asset markets, poor risk management, and inadequate regulation and supervision of the banking system.  In broad terms, this describes the Asian emerging-market economies in the run-up to their crises in the late 1990s. Countries in the region did experience external shocks, including a slump in the semiconductor market and an appreciation of the dollar relative to the yen, that undermined their competitiveness. However, these shocks alone were not sufficient to account for the dimensions of the ensuing crises. The problem was that the shocks hit economies suffering from speculative excesses in their financial and real estate markets. Serious deficiencies in corporate governance and prudential oversight resulted in inadequate restraint on firms' indulgence in risk. Financial sectors were weakened by political interference in lending decisions and the moral hazard associated with wide-ranging, albeit often implicit, government credit guarantees. As a result, banks had insufficient incentives to manage their credit risks, and firms had inadequate incentives to limit their leverage and make sound investments. In particular, the corporate sector was enormously leveraged, and longer-term domestic investment projects were financed with shorter-term foreign-currency-denominated borrowing. Pegged exchange rate regimes in the presence of volatile international capital flows created additional vulnerabilities. Financial sector weaknesses, rigid exchange rate regimes, and volatile capital flows combined to yield a highly combustible mixture that, with the spark of adverse external shocks, ignited currency and debt crises, including the collapse of banking systems throughout the region  The Asian crisis experience highlights the crucial importance of robust institutions and sound policies in mitigating the risks emanating from external financial shocks. One implication of this view is the importance of policy "sequencing" in emerging-market economies. Sequencing involves constraining the pace of increased participation in global financial markets to the pace at which a sound domestic economic infrastructure can be put in place. In particular, capital account liberalization in emerging-
 2 BIS Review 102/2001 market economies needs to be preceded by significant progress in strengthening domestic financial systems. If liberalization proceeds too rapidly, the economy becomes vulnerable to risks associated with volatile capital flows. In the years leading to the Asian financial crises, the region moved toward capital account liberalization while domestic financial institutions and regulations were still underdeveloped. This mismatch encouraged excessive foreign borrowing, especially at short-term maturities, that greatly exacerbated the impact of the crises.  Of course, some policymakers could use sequencing as a pretext to put off capital account liberalization indefinitely. With this concern in mind, some have argued that we really need to encourage rapid liberalization, independent of the state of financial sector institutions, in the hope that financial liberalization would pressure the authorities to improve supervision and regulation more quickly. I believe that the Asian crisis provides a strong argument against this approach. Before proceeding with capital account liberalization, a country needs to carefully consider deficiencies in domestic financial institutions, corporate governance, and bank regulation and supervision. Emerging-market economies in which such financial market infrastructure is still in an early stage of development should consider the use of prudential regulations that discourage capital inflows, especially short-term capital flows, along the lines of the approach formerly in place in Chile. Such regulation of capital flows may be appropriate in the period before robust domestic institutions and sound policies are fully in place and tested by experience.  The Process  The Asian financial crises generated several initiatives aimed at preventing or better managing future crises. The academic and policy communities have sought a better understanding of the causes and transmission mechanisms of crises. There have also been initiatives to reform what has come to be called the international financial architecture. Issues related to the prevention and management of emerging market financial crises have entered the agenda--and sometimes dominated the discussions--of the G-7 in recent years. In addition, some groups have been formed specifically to study such issues. The G-20, which includes finance ministers and central bank governors from major emerging-market countries in addition to the G-7, was launched in September 1999 to facilitate dialogue between systemically important countries and to promote international stability. The G-20 has recently focused on reform of the international financial architecture and the implications of globalization.  I have participated in two of the new groups established in response to the Asian financial crisis: the Manila Framework Group and the Financial Stability Forum. I represented the Federal Reserve at the first Manila Framework meeting and in the Financial Stability Forum for the last few years. My focus in these groups has reflected my specialties at the Board, including Asia-Pacific developments and bank supervision and regulation.  The Manila Framework Group was founded in November 1997, in the throes of the Asian crisis, with the aim of restoring financial stability in the region. It consists of finance ministry and central bank officials from fourteen Pacific countries, including the United States. The group has met twice a year and has undertaken a number of studies and launched cooperative ventures among its members.  The Financial Stability Forum was established by the G-7 in April 1999, after the Asian and Russian financial crises, to provide a means for cooperation in the supervision of financial markets among national governments, international financial authorities, regulatory groups, and other experts. The forum's membership includes central bank and treasury representatives and a financial services supervisor from each of the G-7 countries; a single representative of a few more economies; and representatives of several international financial institutions and of global standard setters for banking, securities, and insurance. The forum is supported by working groups, committees, and task forces, which often include the participation of several emerging-market countries. The forum's mandate is to identify vulnerabilities affecting the international financial system and to improve coordination and information exchange among the various authorities responsible for financial stability. Its working parties have addressed issues such as off-shore financial centers, highly leveraged institutions, and short-term capital flows.  The international official community has also taken up initiatives to reform the international financial institutions, inspired in part by proposals put forth in 1999 by Lawrence Summers, then Treasury Secretary. As a result of this process, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the multilateral 
 BIS Review 102/2001 3 development banks have instituted many changes, which I will discuss in more detail later, and reform initiatives continue.  What We Have Accomplished  Recent work, both under the auspices of the groups I just enumerated as well as elsewhere, has resulted in substantial achievements. We have a better understanding of the policies and institutional frameworks best suited to creating financial market stability in emerging-market economies, and changes in the international institutional environment have facilitated the adoption of such policies. I want to discuss five of the most important changes--choice of exchange rate regime, debt management policies, promulgation of standards and codes, reform of the international financial institutions, and private-sector involvement in debt restructurings.  Exchange Rate Regimes  The financial crises that enveloped Mexico, Russia, and several Asian developing countries in the 1990s reinforced what already appeared to be a growing consensus against pegged exchange rates. The experiences of these countries showed that pegged exchange rate regimes greatly limited the ability of real exchange rates to adjust in reaction to external shocks and restricted monetary authorities' ability to correct excessive growth of credit or to act as lender of last resort. Fixed rates also tended to encourage excessive borrowing of foreign currency, by reducing concerns about exchange rate risk, and contributed to particularly abrupt and disruptive reversals of investor confidence once exchange rate pegs were broken.  Some countries, particularly those in which monetary policy has had low credibility, have felt that the adoption of a fixed exchange rate was necessary to reduce inflationary expectations. In particular, countries with histories of high inflation and poor macroeconomic management may have felt the need for fixed exchange rates, at least for a transitional period, until they developed a better track record for policy performance. In such cases, a key question is how long the rigid exchange rate regimes must stay in place before inflationary expectations can be reduced.  The experience of the 1990s suggests that, in the context of rapid international capital mobility, sustaining a fixed exchange rate in the face of domestic policy imbalances or international financial market shocks is very difficult, and a forced abandonment of a pegged rate under pressure has proved quite disruptive. To provide greater stability to fixed-rate regimes, some countries have adopted currency board systems or moved to full-blown dollarization. However, such moves are by no means panaceas, as evidenced by Argentina's current difficulties. Considerably more countries have moved in the opposite direction--toward more freely floating exchange rates--often following experiences in which their pegged exchange rates proved not to be viable.  I believe that, as a general rule, flexible exchange rate regimes are the best choice for emerging-market economies. A fixed-rate regime is appropriate only in the relatively rare instances in which it can be fully credible. The fact that many policymakers in emerging-market economies seem to have adopted a similar viewpoint in recent years provides some grounds for optimism that, in the future, emerging-market economies may experience fewer and less severe financial crises.  Debt Management  In recent years, a broad consensus has emerged within the international official community that prudent debt and liquidity management is a key element of crisis prevention. Emerging-market economies that experienced financial crises in the late 1990s generally had significant mismatches in the composition and maturity of their liabilities and assets that left them vulnerable to external shocks. In particular, almost all the crisis countries had high ratios of short-term external debt to foreign reserves. There was too much emphasis on borrowing strategies that aimed simply at minimizing short-term funding costs and that, in the process, created significant rollover risks. Authorities also failed to adequately monitor national balance sheets on a consolidated basis, while taking into account off-balance-sheet obligations, implicit government guarantees, and various other contingent liabilities that might arise if the private sector were unable to honor its obligations.  
 4 BIS Review 102/2001 One general principle to draw from this experience is that emerging-market countries should avoid issuing large quantities of short-term debt because ongoing exposure to rollover risk intensifies vulnerability to changes in market conditions. Some initial fiscal cost may be associated with lengthening debt maturities because long-term interest rates generally are higher than short-term rates. However, to the extent that lengthening the maturity of a country's debt improves its fiscal viability and reduces the likelihood of having to borrow at the high rates charged during a crisis, any increase in debt-service costs should be seen as a prudent insurance premium. In addition, the development of domestic government securities markets, in which debt denominated in local currency can be issued, can help reduce the vulnerability to shifts in global capital flows.  The international financial institutions have launched several initiatives to help emerging-market countries improve their debt- and risk-management policies. Last year, the IMF and World Bank staffs, responding to discussions initiated by the Financial Stability Forum, completed a document entitled "Guidelines for Public Debt Management" that was based on some of the principles just discussed. These guidelines will be used to inform the IMF's technical assistance and surveillance efforts. The IMF is also conducting research examining various indicators that may serve as guideposts for debt and may help in managing reserves in emerging-market economies.  Standards and Codes Among the initiatives that arose from the emerging-market crises was the international official community's effort to articulate "standards and codes" to encourage improved practices in the economic and financial policies of emerging-market countries. Some noteworthy progress has been made in this area. Standards and codes have been developed that cover a wide array of areas, including data quality and dissemination, transparency in monetary and fiscal policy, and best practices in banking supervision, payment systems, and accounting standards. The Financial Stability Forum has focused on ways to provide incentives for greater compliance with the standards and codes. The IMF is leading the implementation of this effort, but other international bodies--including the World Bank, the Basel Committee, and the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development--are also taking part. Examples of actions so far include the Financial Sector Assessment Program, under which IMF and Bank staff assess the strengths and vulnerabilities of member countries' financial sectors, and the IMF preparation of reports on the observance of standards and codes, which address a country's progress on meeting standards in a broad range of areas.  While promising, these initiatives have not been without difficulties. Implementation and compliance in the emerging-markets countries is uneven, and much remains to be done. Market participants are beginning to pay more attention to compliance with standards and codes, but scope for significant progress in this area remains. For example, compliance does not appear to be important in setting credit ratings or lending terms. More fundamentally, some emerging-market countries have complained of a lack of sensitivity to their particular circumstance, and have called for a more realistic view of the feasible pace of reform and clearer priorities. For emerging-market economies, it makes sense for standards and codes to focus on minimum standards because the appropriate standards will vary across countries depending on the resources and experience of officials, the structures of financial systems, and the cultural values and norms. Because a country may have unique circumstances, not all international standards are appropriate for each emerging-market economy. In the Basel II process, for example, standards appropriate for large, internationally active banks in the developed industrial economies may be inappropriate for emerging-market economies.  Reform of International Financial Institutions Another focus of reform efforts in recent years has been the international financial institutions. Changes have been made, and more are planned. The IMF's lending facilities have been modified, including the introduction of an "expectation of early repurchase," which will tend to reduce the maturity of IMF lending, and an escalation of loan charges once a country's outstanding obligations to the IMF exceed certain thresholds. These measures are intended to encourage countries' return to capital markets as quickly as possible and to discourage excessive dependence on IMF financing.  The IMF also has recently moved to make the pricing of its Contingent Credit Lines, or CCL, more attractive to potential borrowers. The CCL was established in 1999 to provide liquidity to prequalified countries with track records of sound policies. However, this facility has never been used. Countries 
 BIS Review 102/2001 5 have expressed concerns that the benefits of being prequalified are more than offset by the potential costs of being disqualified if their policies subsequently are deemed to have weakened. Countries have also voiced concerns that simply applying for the CCL may be interpreted by the markets as a signal of vulnerability.  As mentioned previously, the IMF has also moved to improve its ability to assess the economic and financial vulnerabilities of its members, including efforts to identify national balance sheet and liquidity risks, as part of a broader initiative to strengthen the IMF's surveillance efforts. Measures to discourage misreporting have been strengthened, and efforts have been made to make the IMF's operations more transparent, including the publication of policy documents.  The role of conditionality in IMF programs has been a subject of ongoing debate. Critics have argued that these programs, particularly those constructed during the Asian crises, have carried too many detailed conditions and have focused disproportionately on structural objectives rather than on the macroeconomic issues that are the IMF's core mandate. It has been argued that this represents micromanagement and reduces the scope for country ownership of adjustment programs. In response to this critique, the IMF has said that it is moving to streamline and focus conditionality, particularly with respect to structural measures, and to provide greater clarity as to why conditions in certain areas are included in or excluded from programs. Though efforts to provide greater focus to conditionality are welcome, they should not come at the expense of the underlying rigor of Fund programs or the protection of its resources that conditionality provides.  There have also been initiatives to reform the multilateral development banks. It has been suggested that there should be increasing selectivity in projects, a reform in pricing policies involving more differentiation across lending activities and borrowers, and improved methods of monitoring the compliance of borrowers. In addition, there have been calls for the IMF and the World Bank to show greater sensitivity to the needs of the world's poorest countries. The process of translating these general principles into concrete policies has somewhat progressed, but it appears still to be in its early stages.  Private-Sector Involvement  An important and evolving aspect of dealing with emerging-market financial crises is what has come to be referred to as private-sector involvement. The central issue here is the role of private-sector creditors during default or restructuring of an emerging-market economy's debt. Unlike the bankruptcy of a firm in a domestic market, for which procedures are generally codified and settled, the default of a sovereign nation currently involves no binding legal jurisdiction or enforcement mechanism. The goal of private-sector involvement is to ensure that, in a crisis, private-sector creditors, particularly bondholders with instruments denominated in or linked to a foreign currency, participate in efforts to resolve the problem. Such participation can take various forms--debt exchanges, rollovers, restructurings, provision of new money, or outright losses.  The extent to which the private sector has helped resolve emerging-market crises has evolved over time. During the debt crises of the 1980s, official support generally was focused on financing current account shortfalls and easing the macroeconomic adjustment process. Bank creditors restructured old loans, extended new loans, and eventually--under the Brady plan--exchanged their loans for bonds with diminished value. During the 1990s, however, bonds became much more important as sources of credit for many countries. This greater importance raised new issues for debt restructuring, given the more atomistic and dispersed nature of bondholders as a group. The emergence of very large international support packages--for Mexico in 1995, several Asian countries and Brazil in 1997 and 1998, and Turkey and Argentina more recently--may be seen in part as a response to the perceived difficulties of engaging private creditors, particularly bondholders, in the resolution of emerging-market debt problems. This point, however, should not be overstated. Many private investors--most notably those who invested in equities--have taken substantial losses during recent crises.  The provision of large financial-assistance packages has been criticized because of a focus on only two possible outcomes for emerging-market economies facing financial difficulties--either default or no default, with the international official community viewed as often endeavoring to avoid default at all costs. Developing procedures aimed at facilitating intermediate solutions--namely, some form of debt restructuring with private-sector involvement--might, in this view, help avoid disruptive, corner solution outcomes. Moreover, large support programs have been criticized for exacerbating so-called moral 
 6 BIS Review 102/2001 hazard by encouraging overborrowing and overlending through leading investors to believe that the official community will bail them out should debt repayment problems arise.  A key argument for private-sector involvement is that markets will price risk properly and allocate resources efficiently only if investors are forced to bear the costs of their bad decisions. The hope is that, if the broad principles for achieving private-sector involvement are known in advance, they might reduce investors' uncertainty about the rules of the game and help to ensure that workouts proceed smoothly and predictably. The principles could facilitate orderly resolution of financial crises and might also help prevent crises by reducing uncertainty as to how investors would be dealt with during times of crisis.  In recent years, a tremendous amount of discussion has been devoted to considering means by which private investors could be involved during financial crises on an orderly, systematic, and predictable basis. Yet these efforts still have a long way to go. Some members of the official community find it difficult to accept the notion of sanctioning arrears or default. Also, some have concerns that strict limitations on official IMF support could constrain the official sector when such support was genuinely needed to avert international contagion.  Agreement on abstract principles of private-sector involvement remain elusive, but on the practical level, instances of private-sector involvement are accumulating, laying down a foundation of practices and precedents that should serve to make future restructurings more orderly and predictable. In recent years, international bond restructurings have been conducted by Pakistan, Ukraine, and Ecuador as a means of either dealing with an existing default or avoiding an impending default. In addition, the IMF-led financial assistance to both Turkey and Argentina has included various forms of private-sector involvement. The authorities in Argentina are currently exchanging government debt on terms that involve significant concessions from the private sector.  IMF First Deputy Managing Director Anne Krueger has recently weighed in on the issue of international bankruptcy arrangements. She proposed that, in the event of an imminent financial crisis by an IMF borrower, there should be, among other policies, an IMF-sanctioned temporary standstill on debt-service payments and negotiated restructurings under IMF auspices of debts to private-sector creditors. Though better international bankruptcy arrangements have certainly been a longstanding need--as noted by Chairman Greenspan as far back as 1995, immediately after the Mexican crisis--an initial reading of Krueger's proposal suggests that it would face very significant practical problems. The major problem with the Krueger proposal, as with any scheme to establish international bankruptcy arrangements, stems from the fundamental fact of the political sovereignty of nations. Debtor and creditor countries alike would have to cede significant sovereignty to the IMF under Krueger's proposal and would almost certainly prove reluctant to do so. Krueger's proposal merits further study, but some of the more evolutionary, piecemeal changes in international debt-restructuring arrangements, which I discussed under the general rubric of private-sector involvement, probably represent a more realistic hope for near-term improvement in international bankruptcy arrangements.  What Is Left To Be Done?  I have outlined some of the main efforts to prevent or mitigate financial crises in emerging-market economies. Now the question arises--What are the main tasks that remain to be accomplished? Many of the initiatives that I have discussed, such as formulation of standards and codes, reform of the international financial institutions, and development of procedures for private-sector involvement in debt restructurings, are processes that are already well under way and that have a momentum of their own. These areas do not so much need new initiatives as they do the extending, improving, and implementing of existing initiatives.  For the future, the main objective should be to improve economic policymaking and institutions in the emerging-market economies. All economies are subject to periodic external financial shocks. But these shocks are unlikely to turn into financial crises if the country experiencing the shock has a sound macroeconomic environment and robust, well- regulated financial institutions. It is hard to think of an emerging-market economy experiencing a crisis over the past decade in which preexisting financial market weaknesses were not a prominent feature. They certainly played a central role in the Asian financial crises of the late 1990s, and financial-sector reform was a key ingredient in the IMF programs that these countries entered. Though significant progress has been made in this regard, much remains to be done. In particular, sometimes governmental initiatives have been launched in areas such banking reform or corporate governance without sufficient followup. Once more stable financial-market 
 BIS Review 102/2001 7 conditions have returned, the hard work of implementing financial-sector reform has sometimes slackened. However, to the extent that significant financial-sector weaknesses remain, so too does the potential for future crises.  Economic crises in emerging-market economies usually manifest themselves in the form of financial-market pressures, but unsound fiscal policies are frequently at the root of the problem. An unsustainable fiscal position has often proved to be the main threat to financial stability. Fiscal problems were an important factor in the crises experienced by Mexico and Russia in the second half of the 1900s and by Argentina currently. If market participants come to perceive high levels of government debt and continuing fiscal deficits as threatening a government's ability or willingness to meet its debt obligations, capital flight can be triggered. When the government's fiscal position is truly unsustainable, international financial assistance aimed at providing temporary liquidity will not suffice, and some form of debt restructuring becomes unavoidable. Thus, a sound fiscal position is as important as a healthy financial sector in preventing emerging-market financial crises.  We must be realistic about the feasible pace of improvement in economic policymaking in many countries. Economic institutions and practices take a long time to develop--they cannot be put in place or changed radically overnight. Furthermore, as I argued previously, efforts to introduce policies that open an economy to international markets before the appropriate legal and institutional infrastructure is in place--for example, taking all controls off short-term capital movements when the banking system is underdeveloped and inadequately regulated--can be counterproductive. Thus the importance of sequencing--of coordinating the timing of policy reforms with the evolution of supporting institutions.  Some of the changes in the international economic environment in recent years appear favorable to a reduction in the likelihood of financial crises in emerging-market economies. Although it is difficult to generalize, macroeconomic policymaking in emerging-market economies seems to have improved somewhat in recent years. The trend toward adoption of more flexible exchange rate regimes has already been mentioned. Also, over the past decade policymakers in emerging-market countries seem to have developed a heightened recognition of the costs of high inflation, as evidenced by the general reduction of inflation rates in such economies over this period. The behavior of investors in international capital markets appears to have evolved in ways that make future financial crises somewhat less likely also. The composition of international capital flows has shifted toward relatively more foreign direct investment and longer-term portfolio investment and relatively less flows into shorter-term "hot money" investments. Also, international investors seem to be differentiating more clearly among emerging-market economies, as indicated by the current wide dispersion of debt spreads across countries. This situation could mean less potential for serious contagion if one country gets into trouble, since there would be a reduced tendency to treat all emerging-market countries alike. The so far minimal financial market spillover to other emerging-market economies from the current difficulties in Argentina and Turkey is consistent with such a trend. Furthermore, to the extent that international investors have differentiated among emerging markets, countries have incentives to improve the availability and quality of their economic data as a way of favorably distinguishing themselves.  Conclusion In conclusion, it is worth reiterating that the most important consideration in preventing future emerging-market financial crises is establishing sound domestic policies and robust financial institutions in individual economies. No reforms of the international financial architecture can, by themselves, overcome deficiencies in these critical areas. However, an incremental contribution can nonetheless be made through improvements in the international financial system and in international institutions. Such initiatives can provide information, incentives, and assistance to emerging-market economies to encourage them to adopt sound policies and can mitigate the damage to international financial markets when problems do arise. A number of such initiatives are under way, and they hold the promise of reducing the incidence and severity of emerging-market financial crises in the future.  
 BIS Review 102/2001 1 I J Macfarlane: Australia and the international cycle Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Australian Business Economists/Economic Society of Australia (New South Wales Branch) Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 6 December 2001. *      *      * I last spoke at this Conference Dinner two years ago, and a lot has happened to the Australian and world economies since that time. I am pleased to be invited back and given a platform from which to share a few thoughts with you tonight. In keeping with the theme of the Conference – which is about forecasting – I will address the issue of how well placed the Australian economy is to handle the challenges of the next year, particularly the international challenge. In a sense, the talk will also be a replacement for my regular half-yearly report to the Parliamentary Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration. Because of last month’s election, there has not been time to re-form the Committee and schedule a hearing date in the current half-year. I will start tonight by showing a graph which compares Australia’s current economic expansion with its predecessors in the 1970s and 1980s. Some people may think I am tempting fate by showing this graph at this particular juncture, but I have been doing so, from time to time, over the past three years without ill effect. What the graph shows is that the current expansion is a good deal longer and smoother than its predecessors. One of the most important reasons for this is that inflation has been a lot lower on average and less variable than in the earlier expansions. Monetary policy, therefore, has been able to play a different role than formerly – one that involves earlier movements in interest rates, but with smaller amplitudes of movement. The inflation targeting framework has been a crucial element in bringing about this result.  95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 1 Diagram 1: Expansions in GDP Cyclical trough = 100Index Index 1980s1990s1970sYears since trough2 345678910  Table 1 Expansions in GDP  1970s 1980s 1990s Length of expansion in quarters  31  28  40 so far Total increase1  26.6  36.5  45.6 Average growth rate  3.1  4.5  3.8 Number of quarterly declines  7  2  2 Standard deviation of quarterly growth rates2  1.1  0.9  0.6 Average inflation rate  11.2  6.9  2.4 Standard deviation of quarterly inflation2  1.2  0.7  0.3 1 Percent.   2  Percentage points. 
 2 BIS Review 102/2001 For most of the period of the current expansion, the international background has been benign. The exception until recently was the period between mid 1997 and the beginning of 1999, when the Asian crisis confronted us with a pronounced fall in the demand for our exports and some pretty skittish international capital markets. We survived – indeed, prospered – in that period, much better than any of us thought likely at the time. Now we are confronted with another period of weak international demand, and this time the United States – the former powerhouse of the world economy – is the principal source of the weakness. This time we confront a problem that is global rather than specific to our region. The current problems did not, of course, start on 11 September, and I think there has been a tendency to exaggerate the economic consequences of that event, and under-estimate the underlying weakness that preceded it. If I had to give a date when it became clear that the international economy was in for a rough ride, I would nominate 3 January, when the Fed surprised everyone with the first reduction in interest rates in this phase only a fortnight after their previous meeting at which they had kept rates constant. After a flurry of interest rate reductions around the world in the next few months, the situation then settled down for a while. In Australia, after our three initial reductions, we paused for four months while we evaluated the incoming information. By mid August, we had concluded that the international situation was worsening again, and we began a second round of easings in early September, about a week before the fateful events in New York. Thus, taking these events together, we have been in a situation where we were conscious of a weakening world economy for virtually a full year. During that time – or for the three quarters covered by the national accounts – the Australian economy has grown at an annual rate of 4 per cent, while the US has been flat. We have also done better than other comparable economies. This is a very encouraging result for us, but success so far does not guarantee success in the future. Indeed, there is a large body of opinion that says we are destined to follow where others have led. Table 2 Growth and Inflation in 2001 per cent, year-to-date annualised.  GDP Growth CPI Inflation United States 0.2 2.1 Canada 0.5 1.8 Euro Area 0.9 2.5 United Kingdom 2.1 1.5 Australia 4.0 3.0 I suppose that is the question that has been on everyone’s lips for quite a few months – if the world economy goes into a recession, as the United States and Japan have done and much of the rest of the world seems to be doing, does that mean that Australia has to follow? People who would answer yes to this question would point out that we have done so in the past, for example, in the mid 1970s, the early 1980s and the early 1990s. Why should this time be any different? This is a view of the world that I would call historical determinism, and it may or may not be a good guide. But before we accept such a prediction, it should be challenged by a close examination of the circumstances then and now. What such an examination reveals is that present domestic circumstances are very different to those prevailing in the earlier episodes. To put it bluntly, we brought a lot of the problems on ourselves in the previous episodes, whereas this time we have not done so. On the previous occasions, we could not in all honesty make the claim that it was mainly the fault of the rest of the world – much of the fault was clearly of our own making. In other words, Australia had a lot of serious domestic imbalances that contributed to the downturns. Imbalances - then and now For a start, each of the earlier downturns was preceded by an episode of high inflation. In the 1970s and 1980s, the CPI was rising in double digits; in the 1990s, although this measure peaked at a lower rate – about 8 per cent – it was accompanied by unsustainably high asset price inflation. Accordingly, monetary policy had to be tightened on all three occasions to combat these imbalances, and short-
 BIS Review 102/2001 3 term interest rates reached very high levels – either a little above or below 20 per cent on each occasion. Nothing remotely like that has happened this time to either inflation or to interest rates. Perhaps more importantly, monetary policy this time has been able to be eased much earlier than on previous occasions – interest rates have been successively lowered for nearly a year now, during which the economy has been growing at a good rate. While I think the different behaviour of inflation and interest rates is the biggest change between then and now, there are a number of other factors that contributed to our difficulties in earlier times that are not present now. I have listed these before, but there is no harm in doing so again: • There were large rises in real wages that squeezed the business sector in the 1970s and 1980s. This time wages have grown at a reasonably steady 3½ per cent per annum over the past year or two. • There was an investment boom that led to over-capacity in the early 1980s. Investment has been quite subdued over the past two years, and, in more normal circumstances, we should be due for a pick-up. Even in current circumstances, a straightforward reading of last week’s Capex Survey suggests a rise in the current financial year, though it is concentrated mostly in one sector (mining). • In the early 1990s, the exchange rate appreciated sharply in the period ahead of the downturn. On this occasion, it goes without saying that the exchange rate is exerting an expansionary influence. • On each earlier occasion, the deficit on current account of the balance of payments widened by an amount that alarmed many people. On this occasion, it has fallen to a level not seen in more than 20 years. I will return to some of these subjects later, but before I do so, I would like to address another form of historical determinism. Imbalances - United States and Australia The macro-economic performances of Australia and the United States in terms of output growth and inflation were very similar over the 1990s. It would therefore not be unreasonable to ask the question of why they should not also be similar in the first few years of the new century. Again, I think there is a reasonably straightforward answer to that question which stresses some very big differences between the two economies. • The US economy exhibited in the late stages of its expansion two or three developments which arguably warranted the use of the term “bubble”: • The US stock market, particularly the technology sector as measured by the NASDAQ, rose to exceptional heights and has since fallen. The broad indices such as the S&P 500 or the Wilshire are down by about 25 per cent from their peak, whereas in Australia the ASX 200 is only down about 4 per cent. • In the United States, there was a burst of physical investment towards the end of the expansion, mainly in high technology equipment. We are now seeing the reaction to this and the consequent excess capacity, in the form of sharp falls in investment. As explained earlier, this pattern of action and reaction is absent in Australia. • The trade-weighted value of the US dollar has risen appreciably over recent years and, despite lowering interest rates faster than any other country this year, the currency remains at a very high level. These three factors were really a manifestation of the excessive euphoria associated with the widely held view that the secret of economic success was to pour resources into the “high tech” sector. In the event, the countries that were most exposed to that sector are the ones that are showing the largest falls in output. 
 4 BIS Review 102/2001 The transmission from the world to Australia So far, I have emphasised the strong points about the Australian economy, and the differences between us and other more vulnerable economies. But it would be foolish to deny that a fall, or even a pronounced slowdown, in the world economy and world trade would have a significant contractionary effect on the Australian economy. Clearly, such an effect will occur, some of which is already showing up. The two classical channels are through a fall in the volume of exports and through a lower terms of trade, but there may also be other channels. The remainder of my presentation will look at the probable size of these channels. Table 3 Export Contribution to GDP Downturns Period (year-ended) Contribution to GDP Mid 1970s Mar 1974 –1.4 Early 1980s Jun 1983 –0.9 Early 1990s Dec 1989  0.3 It is true that during world recessions, the volume of Australian exports usually falls. Table 3 shows that at the time of previous world recessions, Australia has experienced periods of falling or weak exports roughly coincident with these recessions. But the negative contributions to GDP in any one year are not large; the biggest we can identify is the 1.4 percentage points in the year to March 1974. Clearly, if the rest of the economy was growing at a reasonable rate, this would not be enough to induce a recession. Traditionally, the Australian economy has had a reputation for doing better than most other economies in the good times and suffering more in the bad times. One reflection of this was that the Australian dollar was seen as a “commodity currency” because it was heavily influenced by our terms of trade. Again, it is true that during previous world recessions, Australia experienced periods of falling terms of trade that coincided roughly with the recessions. The biggest negative contribution of 1.7 percentage points of GDI was in the year to March 1975 (following a massive positive contribution the previous two years). The magnitude of these effects is such that, although they have made a noticeable contribution to slowing the economy, they would not be enough to cause a recession. Table 4 Terms of Trade Contribution to National Income (GDI) Downturns Period Contribution to GDI Mid 1970s Year to Mar 1975 –1.7 Early 1980s Year to Mar 1982 –0.6 Early 1990s Year to Jun 1991 –1.2 Even if we add the export volume effects and the terms of trade effects together (noting that they usually cover different, but roughly adjacent, periods), the combined effect in any one year would not be enough to turn a reasonable positive growth rate into a negative one. The other conclusion that can be drawn from this table is that the contributions tend to be getting smaller, particularly for the most recent recession in the early 1990s. 
 BIS Review 102/2001 5  80 85 90 95 100 8085909510090 100 110 120 130 90100110120130March 1980 = 100Diagram 2: Trade Prices IndexIndex IndexIndex Pricesin SDR termsTerms of Trade200119971993198919851981ImportsExports I would like to say a little more about the terms of trade before I leave that subject. As I said earlier, there has been a tendency to see Australia as being some sort of “loser” in the international economic competition because of our vulnerability to terms of trade movements. There is an assumption that our terms of trade are subject to a long-term downward trend, that they are also cyclically sensitive, and that both of these characteristics stem from an unfortunate export mix, with its over-representation of “commodities”. I think this is a somewhat dated view for the following reasons: • On the question of long-run trends, it should be noted that the low point in our terms of trade was as far back as 1986/87. The two troughs since then have been at successively higher levels. • On the question of cyclical sensitivity, we have had conflicting signals over recent years. Our terms of trade fell between mid 1997 and mid 1998 as a result of the Asian crisis, but since that time, i.e. over the past three years, they have risen, even though the last of those three years has been a very weak one for the world economy. They are now above the peak they reached immediately before the Asian crisis. • The focus on our export prices is misplaced because the really interesting action seems to be taking place on import prices. They are not as cyclical as export prices, but they have shown a more pronounced downward trend over the 1990s, particularly over the past five years. We know that a lot of this is due to the sharp falls in the prices of telecommunications and computing equipment, but it is more widespread than this. Of the 29 categories of goods for which the ABS publishes import prices, 26 fell in SDR terms between 1996 and the present. Nearly all of them are categories of manufactured goods. Whether the trend in the price of a particular category of internationally-traded goods is up or down depends to a large extent on long-run supply elasticities. It now seems likely that the highest supply elasticities are to be found in large-scale manufacturing rather than resource-based goods. Semi-conductors are an obvious example, as are less sophisticated products such as clothing, textiles and footwear, but it also seems to be true for electrical equipment, automobiles, and for many types of industrial equipment. In some senses, these are now the “commodities” of international trade. I am not suggesting that all manufactured goods have this characteristic, but it seems that most of them do. My conclusion from this discussion of movements in exports, imports and the terms of trade is that they are not big enough by themselves to transmit a world recession into a domestic recession. A fall in domestic spending would be required to bring about that result. Why should domestic spending fall if the domestic economy was in reasonably good shape? One possible explanation is multiplier effects from the export sector, but most econometric estimates suggest that these would not be large enough to tip the balance. Another channel is through confidence effects – perhaps business and consumer confidence are influenced, not only by domestic developments, but also by international ones. Given 
 6 BIS Review 102/2001 the massive amount of information about the US economy that is routinely transmitted to Australians, it would not be surprising if this were the case. It is clear that some international events show up in measures of confidence among Australian consumers and business, September 11 being an obvious example. But, on the other hand, consumer confidence is still above its long-term average, and like most measures of business confidence, its recent trough was in the March/April period of 2001 – about nine months ago. At that time, we were getting bad news on the domestic front, particularly the temporary decline in GDP in the December quarter of 2000. The level of confidence recovered from this temporary trough, and on average over the past six months, has been a good deal higher than earlier in the year, and has held up reasonably well through the recent international turmoil. There is one thing about recent business behaviour that has worried me a little, but so far it seems to be mainly confined to the United States. I am referring to the practice by companies of announcing large lay-offs of employment whenever a downward earnings revision occurs. This practice is no doubt designed to please investors and therefore to prop up the company’s share price. If these lay-offs are occurring as announced, it suggests a more rapid employment response than in previous downturns. While the practice may help one company when viewed in isolation, it is a serious error to think that companies in general can protect their earnings in this way. Earnings are meant to decline cyclically in circumstances such as the present because it is impossible to cut costs as fast as revenue is declining. The more the cyclical fall in earnings is resisted in this way, the more it is transferred to employment, and the more pronounced the cycle becomes. Conclusion Calendar year 2001 has been a difficult one for the world economy, and the first half of 2002 looks like remaining weak before a recovery gets underway. This would mean 18 months of economic weakness for the world economy, and be classified as a recession like those of the mid 1970s, early 1980s and early 1990s. The Australian economy has got through the first half of it in reasonably good shape considering the circumstances. Can we keep up our present performance until we are again in an environment of reasonable world growth? Can we span the valley? I have given a number of reasons why I think we can, even though we will experience falling exports, falling earnings and the usual inventory adjustments. These are examples of externally-induced contractionary effects that cannot be avoided, but which are not big enough by themselves to cause a recession. For that to occur, we would have to see an over-reaction by domestic consumers and businesses. The evidence to date from surveys of confidence, from household spending and from business investment intentions is that they are holding up reasonably well. Far from over-reacting, they are exerting a generally stabilising influence. If this changes for the worse, or if it appears that the outlook for the world economy is weaker than currently assumed, we will be prepared to adjust monetary policy accordingly. 
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 T T Mboweni: A review of economic and financial developments in South Africa during 2002  Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the dinner for Heads of Foreign Missions, Pretoria, 10 December 2002. *      *      * Mr El-Herfi, Acting Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, Heads of International organisations, Senior management of the Department of Foreign Affairs, Senior management of the Reserve Bank and honoured guests, all protocol observed 1. Introduction Integrating dinner with discussions of finance is not unfamiliar to central bankers. The key ingredients are good food and brevity and relevance of the discussion. I will do my best to adhere to the latter two ingredients. The former is out of my hands. 2. The global economy in 2002 The developed countries were already experiencing a slowdown in economic activity in 2001 when the events of 11 September shocked the world. Transport and tourism in particular were hit very hard, with some fallout continuing to this day. World growth in 2002 has been subdued and for the full year is expected to amount to around 2,8 per cent, slightly better than the 2,2 per cent recorded in 2001 but still way below the 4,7 per cent recorded in 2000. Alongside the uninspiring growth performance, however, inflation has been very low. In Japan prices are in fact falling, while in the Euro area the latest average inflation rate is 2,2 per cent. In the United States, inflation is running at 2,0 per cent. Beyond the lacklustre world growth and low inflation, there were a number of key events in 2002. Argentina's one-to-one peg of the peso to the American dollar, that had led to a significantly overvalued peso, collapsed. Against the one-to-one rate at the end of last year, the current exchange rate is 3,54 peso per dollar. The Argentinian economy has been contracting, while their inflation rate has accelerated to more than 40 per cent. Brazil experienced some problems, partly related to the country's high government debt and its linkages with troubled Argentina. IMF funding is helping to soften the adjustment process. In the Northern reaches of the American continent, the demise of Enron led to disillusionment with corporate governance and accounting practices. This has led to a greater awareness of the need for sound structures and practices, revised codes of conduct and a sharpening of regulation. And, closer to home, there were unfavourable climatic conditions in large parts of Southern Africa together with policies in some of our neighbouring countries which disrupted food production. As a result, the region is becoming dependent on large-scale imports of food. 3. The South African economy in 2002 The exchange rate of the rand has been at the centre of most discussions of economic developments this year. Against a basket of currencies the rand lost 34 per cent of its value during 2001 - mostly in the final two months of the year. Its gyrations were the topic of an official enquiry led by Judge Myburgh. Not surprisingly, it was found that quite a number of factors could have contributed to its sharp depreciation. Some of these factors reinforced each other, causing an exceptional overshooting of the exchange rate. At one stage importers speeded up payment for imports, afraid that they would otherwise have to pay even more rand for their import consignments, while at the same time exporters 
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 delayed repatriating their export proceeds, expecting that by doing so they would be able to exchange their foreign earnings for even more rand later on. Of course, this could not last indefinitely. With imports becoming horrendously expensive and with South African exports extremely price-competitive, supply and demand fundamentals came to the fore and the exchange rate had to turn around. From the beginning of 2002 to date the rand has appreciated by 24 per cent against a basket of currencies. To illustrate what happened to the rand's international purchasing power, in terms which may be diplomatically familiar: a 25 pound dinner in a London restaurant would have set a South African diplomat back R280 at the beginning of 2001. Just before Christmas 2001, it would have cost the diplomat R500. Today, the same meal's bill will amount to R360.  Looking back at 2002, the competitiveness gained by the South African economy on account of the (overdone) exchange rate depreciation helped to smooth domestic production and income during a period of general weakness in the world economy. Import substitution progressed and South African exports penetrated various markets quite successfully. This was helped along by improved market access. In this regard, the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act of the United States should be mentioned, along with the European Union Free Trade Agreement and the Southern African Development Community Free Trade Agreement. Most importantly, numerous South African companies are reorienting their strategies, aiming to structurally raise their share of output flowing to the export market. In the process, upcoming markets such as China and India are also receiving due attention. Tourism is also doing well in spite of, and perhaps even because of, the unease following the September 11 attacks. South Africa is a pleasant destination. The number of non-residents visiting South Africa rose from 4,8 million in the first 10 months of 2001 to 5,3 million in the same period of 2002. Visitor numbers from virtually all countries have increased significantly, with the exception of Argentina - the worsening of the exchange rate in that instance caused a decrease from 13 000 persons in the ten months to October last year to 4 000 this year.  Under these circumstances, South Africa maintained a healthy growth rate in the first three quarters of 2002. It seems likely that growth in real gross domestic product this year will amount to around 3 per cent, compared to 2,8 per cent in 2001. It is also heartening that the growth is spread across virtually all sectors of the economy. A further gratifying aspect of the economy's current performance is the acceleration in real fixed capital formation, so necessary to boost the future production potential of the economy. From a contraction in 1999, real fixed capital formation reversed to 0,8 per cent growth in 2000, 3,6 per cent growth in 2001 and 7,6 per cent year-on-year growth in the third quarter of 2002. Once again, the acceleration is fairly widely spread over the various sectors of the economy.  The accusation is often heard that South Africa grows, but without creating jobs for the huge number of unemployed people. However, in the second quarter of 2002 our quarterly surveyed non-agricultural employment series picked up, rising by about 0,6 per cent. This may be early days, but it stands in welcome contrast to the declining trend in such employment recorded since 1989. Sadly, the 2001 fall in the external value of the rand caused a strong surge in inflation in 2002. This was first and foremost visible in production prices, which accelerated from a twelve-month rate of increase of 7,8 per cent in September 2001 to double-digit rates right from January 2002, peaking at 15,4 per cent in both August and September. In October it abated somewhat to 14,6 per cent. Consumer price inflation took longer to pick up. Twelve-month CPIX inflation accelerated from 5,8 per cent in September 2001 to double-digit levels from August 2002, reaching 12,5 per cent in October. Both at the production and consumer level, food price inflation picked up dramatically, reaching maximum year-on-year levels of 30 and 20 per cent respectively. This was related to the exchange rate depreciation coupled with the need to import grain into the Southern African region. In the face of these inflationary forces, and given the imperative to work inflation down again to the 6 to 3 per cent target range, the South African Reserve Bank responded by tightening monetary policy. On each occasion, in January, March, June and September 2002, the Reserve Bank's repurchase rate was raised by one percentage point, leading to corresponding increases in the interest rates charged by commercial banks. The banks' prime overdraft rate for instance rose from 13 per cent at the beginning at the year to 17 per cent at present. At that level, the public is clearly feeling the impact of monetary policy. Our assessment is that this will be sufficient to bring inflation down in a fairly dramatic fashion during the course of next year. But dishing out this medicine doesn't make the Bank very popular.  
 BIS Review 72/2002 3 Partly in reaction to the tighter monetary conditions, growth in credit extension has come down from a twelve-month rate of 15,6 per cent in January 2002 to 8,8 per cent in October. Growth in M3 has been more sticky, receding from 19,7 per cent to 17,8 per cent over the same period. This still doesn't leave any room for complacency, but calls for ongoing scrutiny of all available information about our economy. An extremely positive element of our financial situation is the reduction in the Reserve Bank's exposure to foreign exchange rate risk, as captured in the decrease in the our net open foreign currency position (NOFP). This has receded from US$23,2 billion in September 1998 to $4,8 billion at the end of 2001 and $1,7 billion at present. At the same time, South Africa's foreign exchange reserve level is quite strong at around 20 weeks' worth of imports, double as much as 5 years ago.  It is my pleasant duty to also point out that South Africa's government finances are in a healthy shape, with tax revenue again exceeding earlier projections and the deficit before borrowing for 2002/03 now projected to amount to only 1,6 per cent of GDP. Less pleasant to point out are the setbacks to our banking system in early 2002. One troubled bank's business was eventually sold off to other institutions, while a second medium-sized bank was acquired by one of the big four banks. This episode tested numerous depositors' and bankers' nerves to the extreme; many elderly investors now choose to keep their deposits with more than one institution, which is a wise move. 4. Financial markets South Africa's financial markets are robust, liquid and well-developed. Turnovers remained brisk in 2002 to date. In the bond market, for example, the value of turnover in a single month is approximately equal to South Africa's annual gross domestic product of one trillion rand. Non-residents also take a keen interest in these markets. In an average month non-residents buy more than a R100 billion in bonds and R18 billion in shares on our bourses. They of course usually sell bonds and shares of a roughly equal amount, but some net inflow or outflow is recorded from month to month. During the first half of 2002 nonresidents bought a net amount of R13 billion in shares and bonds on the South African formal exchanges, but sold R17 billion during the third quarter. Further net sales in October were followed by net purchases in November. Predicting foreign portfolio capital flows is clearly dangerous, only to be surpassed by bargaining on net inflows from that source.  South African share prices performed well up to May 2002, but then fell back sharply, partly in sympathy with foreign bourses as Enronitis took hold. In rand terms, the JSE overall price index is currently 10 per cent down on its value at the end of last year. Nonresidents, because of the 24 per cent stronger exchange rate of the rand, nevertheless made substantial profits on the JSE in foreign currency terms. Those who had invested in South African bonds or real estate in early 2002 of course recorded even better returns, since in contrast to shares those asset prices also rose handsomely in rand terms. But beyond these events on the formalised exchanges involving portfolio capital flows, South Africa has an important role to play in the area of foreign direct investment. In particular, numerous direct investment projects into other parts of Africa are being undertaken, fitting in under the broad NEPAD initiative. South Africa's involvement ranges from the Mozal smelter in Mozambique to SAA's participation in Tanzania, and includes hotels, factories, cellphone operators and shops in numerous countries on the African continent. South Africa's investments in Africa at the end of 2000 exceeded R24 billion.  Other continents are also attracting the attention of South African companies that are leaders in their respective fields and some of these companies have sought listings on foreign exchanges. Companies like the resources giants Anglo American and Billiton, the financial services companies Investec and Old Mutual, the brewer SABMiller and Sappi, the pulp and paper company now have global reach and are making their presence felt beyond their home market. 5. Conclusion In short, then, the South African economy is in fairly good shape, with the exception of the inflationary consequences of the 2001 exchange rate depreciation. And the four interest rate increases as well as the notable appreciation of the rand in 2002 will in due course brake the inflation spiral decisively. 
 4 BIS Review 72/2002 While my address tonight focused on broad macroeconomic trends, it is worthwhile to stress that the macroeconomy is built up from the microeconomic decisions and actions of millions of participants. Real life happens at the microeconomic level. As diplomats you will know that it is your individual encounter with the businessperson or potential tourist that counts - where interest in South Africa or in your country is either nurtured, or nipped in the bud. A sparkling, enthusiastic, well-informed diplomat is a catalyst forging friendship and economic ties across borders. Indifference or ignorance sabotages these linkages. Accordingly, I would like to challenge you to continue deepening your knowledge of our country, its people, its economy, its incentives, rules and regulations, its magnificent places. True expert knowledge takes many years to build up, plus a lifetime of ongoing study to maintain. But it enables one to sparkle, to catch the attention of the key investor or potential tourist, to make things happen. I wish you well in 2003 and beyond in sparkling for your fraternal countries, forging links that are crucial to our mutual economic success and our ability to understand and appreciate one another. Once again it is our honour and privilege to host you at this function which has become one of the highlights of the calendar of the South African Reserve Bank. May the friendships between South Africa and your countries continue to go from strength to strength.  Thank you. 
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 I J Macfarlane: Overview of the Australian economy Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Warrnambool, 6 December 2002. *      *      * I would like to endorse the remarks of the Chairman and say what a pleasure it is to be in Warrnambool, for the second hearing to be conducted outside the Sydney-Melbourne-Canberra triangle. The first was in Wagga Wagga, and I remember at the time suggesting that the second should be a little further away from Canberra. Warrnambool passes that test and is an important agricultural and tourist centre, so it is a fitting venue for this meeting. I would also like to thank the Mayor of Warrnambool, Councillor James Nicol, for his hospitality in hosting a civic reception for the Committee and the members of the Bank appearing before it. I would like to start the substance of this statement by observing that in the six months between this Hearing and the previous one in May quite a lot has changed, and this has had an important influence on our judgment about what we have needed to do with monetary policy. This change has happened relatively steadily, with the result that the financial markets and the public more generally have had no trouble in adjusting to the changed outlook. We have assisted, where we thought necessary, by way of several speeches and articles on the subject over the past six months; they have probably helped at the margin, although I think the public was not having any difficulty in recognising the changing outlook as it unfolded. That being so, it could be argued that there is nothing further to add on the subject. However, I am very aware of the fact that I gave some quite frank indications about the expected future direction of monetary policy at the previous Hearing, and that those indications have not been followed through. So I would like to place on the record before this Committee another account of the changing circumstances, even at the risk of being accused of going over old ground. In May I said to this Committee that since the Australian economy was behaving normally, and the world economy was getting back to normal, unless unforeseen developments intruded, we should continue the process of getting real interest rates back to normal, while all the time carefully examining incoming data, both from here and abroad, to ensure that developments remained on track. We did continue the process of getting interest rates up towards normal in June, but have not done anything more in that direction in the following six months. Why not? I think the answer has been obvious to nearly everyone - something did intrude and the incoming data from abroad showed that developments were not remaining on track. After a promising start to the year, the world economy began to weaken about mid-year. Financial markets - particularly equity and bond markets - were the first to show this from about the beginning of the second quarter of the year. By mid-year there were also signs from a range of economic indicators in the United States and the Euro area that the recovery was likely to be weaker than formerly thought. These signs tended to become clearer as events progressed during the second half of the year. A good way of summarising this large body of data is to look at three indicators of perceptions of economic conditions: business confidence, consumer confidence, and consensus forecasts of GDP growth. As can be seen in the graphs for the United States and the Euro area, these indicators show a clear improvement in the first half of the year followed by a clear deterioration in the second half. So what we have seen for the world economy is a weakening through calendar year 2001, an apparent strong recovery in the first half of 2002, followed by a relapse in the second half of 2002. The relapse does not mean that the world economy is returning to recession, but it indicates that the recovery is going to be weaker than was thought likely in mid-year. This gradual change in outlook in the second half of the year obviously had implications for monetary policy around the world. In the first half of the year, those countries with strong fundamentals, such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Sweden, had started the process of getting their interest rates back up to normal. This process was occurring when we met in May, and, as I said at the time, it was a process that we thought would be continuing. In the event, it did not continue for much longer, and in fact none of these countries has raised rates since July, and one (Sweden) has cut them, as has the United States. 
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 The caution shown by central banks such as ours derived in part from the downward revisions to world growth, but also in part from our suspicion that the risks were on the downside. In other words, if an outcome very different to the consensus were to occur, it would be more likely to be weaker than stronger. Having said that, I recognise that even though the second half of the year has been disappointing compared with the first half, equity and bond markets have become a little more confident over the past month or so. It is too soon, of course, to know whether it represents a change in direction or just another blip in the data. Turning to the Australian economy, I will approach this by way of my usual practice of reviewing the forecasts I gave the Committee last time and presenting some new ones. Last time I said we expected GDP growth through 2002/03 to be between 3½ and 4 per cent - we are now forecasting around 3 per cent. Obviously, the major factor behind the reduction has been the drought, but the weaker world economy has also had an effect at the margin. On the other hand, the fact that house-building is now forecast to continue to expand for a longer period has pushed the forecast up somewhat. For next year, that is calendar 2003, our forecast is for growth through the year of 3¾ per cent. The fact that it is higher than the current financial year rests importantly on the assumption that there is a recovery from the drought in the second half of the year, and that the world economic recovery gradually picks up momentum through the year. As I said before, strength in house-building has continued for longer than earlier thought: nevertheless, we still expect a downturn to occur in that sector during the course of 2003, which will subtract from growth. On the inflation front, I said that we were forecasting the CPI to remain near the top of the target range in 2002/03, although we expected it to go down slightly for a time and to then come back up. Implicit in this forecast was that the rising phase would continue after mid-2003 and so, other things equal, begin to exceed the target range by the second half of 2003. What has happened so far is that headline CPI is slightly above 3 per cent, but our estimate of underlying inflation is that it is running at about 2¾ per cent. We see no reason now to expect underlying inflation to rise any further, and are now forecasting that it will stay around this rate through calendar 2003. The main reasons for this slight downward revision compared with our forecast six months ago are the lower forecasts for world and Australian growth. The price effects resulting from the drought will have the effect of holding up CPI inflation in the next quarter or two and then reducing it slightly later in the forecast period.    
 BIS Review 72/2002 3   I would now like to return to a subject which the Committee spent a fair bit of time discussing in May, namely residential property prices. As you know, we became particularly concerned about this issue when we noticed that virtually all of the increase in housing loan approvals in the past year was going to investors, not to aspiring owner-occupiers. At the same time, the building approvals data showed that monthly approvals to build multi-unit developments, i.e. apartments, had speeded up to an exceptionally fast pace, while approvals to build houses were going along steadily. These developments suggested to us that a disproportionate amount of the upward pressure on residential property prices was coming from investors. One response to this would have been to sit back and do and say nothing, on the grounds that the market would sort out the problem. We accept that it no doubt would, but it could take a lot of time, the excesses could get worse in the meantime, and the eventual resolution of the issue could cause a lot of financial distress. The problem is that the market works, but with long lags during which people are encouraged to take decisions based on little more than an optimistic extrapolation of the past. Developers will continue to put up new apartment blocks while ever there are investors willing to pre-commit to buy. When investors purchase apartments off the plan (and it is almost exclusively investors to which the marketing is directed), they are making a financial commitment the wisdom of which may not become apparent for 18 months or so. It is only when they take possession of the apartment that they discover whether they can find a tenant willing to pay high enough rent to justify the financial calculation that underlay the original purchase. Of course, any individual investor can hope to get around the problem by selling to another investor, but they in turn will depend on finding a renter. Investors as a group are dependent on finding enough tenants willing to pay sufficiently high rents when the time comes, which may be 18 months away or more. These investment calculations (or forecasts) are difficult, and we fear that many investors are just assuming that things will work out, which is a very dangerous thing to do if you are making a highly-leveraged investment. Certainly, recent trends would warn against such an assumption. From the best figures available, it is clear that rents are falling and that vacancy rates in apartments are rising. And, as the pipeline of partly-built buildings is completed, there will be many more new apartments coming onto the market in the next two years than in other recent years. Our purpose in what we have been saying is to try to get the market to work a little better and so avoid the overshooting that often characterises parts of the property market. We all remember the excesses that occurred in commercial property in the 1980s and the large falls in prices that followed them. Investors should remember that even when they are buying a residential unit, they are making a 
 4 BIS Review 72/2002 commercial property decision, i.e. they are borrowing for an investment which will be rented to a tenant with the purpose of making a profit. There are now some preliminary indications that market forces are starting to work at last. I have already referred to falling rents and rising vacancy rates, but there is also recent evidence of a flattening out or, in some cases, falls in apartment prices and marked falls in auction clearance rates in Sydney and Melbourne. There have also been reports of some of the more ambitious projects planned for Brisbane and Melbourne being withdrawn, which makes it all the more surprising that there has been such a large increase in October in approvals to build multi-unit buildings. On balance, however, these developments, if fully understood by investors, should make them very cautious and so limit the extent of over-supply in coming years. I suppose the other big event in our area that has occurred since we met last May is that we brought down the final report on the Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia in August. In this context, we welcome your endorsement of the reforms, Chairman, as being ‘an important win for Australian consumers’. Our intention, as stated in our document, is to put these reforms into effect in stages over the next year. Although the reforms are being challenged in court by the two main international credit card systems, I do not think this court action prevents me from answering questions. I do not think I need to say any more at present. We will have plenty of time to discuss any of the subjects I have covered plus any others that Committee members may wish to raise. 
 BIS Review 72/2002 1 Ernst Welteke: An institutional framework for monetary stability Opening speech by Mr Ernst Welteke, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the first conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation, Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen I am very pleased to welcome you to the first conference held by the Monetary Stability Foundation.  It is a great pleasure to be able to welcome President William Poole of the Federal Reserve Bank St. Louis, Professor Otmar Issing and Mr Nout Wellink of the Governing Council of the ECB, and Counsellor Gerd Häusler of the IMF. It is an honour that Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice-Chairman of Citigroup, has found the time to be with us.  Last but not least, I am especially delighted that so many prominent members of the academic world are taking part in this conference. I wish to extend a warm welcome to Professor Alan Meltzer on their behalf. The Monetary Stability Foundation was established on 1 January this year. But the idea behind the foundation is naturally much older than that. One thought that was uppermost in our minds was the desire to transfer the positive qualities which we have associated with 50 years of stable money in Germany into the new era of European monetary union. That was important to me from the very outset. And that is why I was very happy to take on, together with Finance Minister Hans Eichel, the sponsorship of this major inaugural conference of the foundation. Hans Eichel will be addressing you tonight. Good times and bad times have taught the German people the importance of stable money and a stable financial system. One may well ask whether, in the light of this, it is really necessary to underline that point yet again. However, history has also taught us that such stability can never be taken for granted.  Prior to the start of monetary union there were indeed fears that the end of the D-Mark might do harm to the stability culture. We took that worry seriously - as is shown by the Maastricht Treaty and as the ESCB's monetary policy makes clear.  Naturally the intellectual basis of such a policy has to be continually examined anew.  Time and again new challenges arise and new developments have to be taken into consideration. I wish to cite just a few examples. Since the 1960s attention worldwide had been directed primarily towards the fight against inflation. However, the past few years have shown just how seriously the dangers of deflation have to be taken as well.  The transformation process in the former Socialist countries has made us aware of just how important institutional frameworks are. We have now become more aware again of the importance of thinking about statutory frameworks, not least in the financial world. The academic debate about the correct strategy for monetary policy goes on and on. With the creation of the ECB the debate has actually become livelier again. I could cite many more examples to show that, even today, there is no automatic means of ensuring stable money and stable markets. It is an ongoing task. In the words of Goethe: “What you have inherited from your fathers / Earn over again for yourselves, in order to possess it.” In this sense it is the task of the Monetary Stability Foundation to encourage research in this area. And, what is more, on a broad basis. The funds which are already available for this purpose come from the issue of a DM 1 gold coin by the Bundesbank.  
 2 BIS Review 72/2002 Indeed, last summer we experienced an unusually heavy demand for this gold coin. Part of the net proceeds, DM 100 million (or € 51 million), forms the foundation's capital base. This link to the D-Mark once again underlines quite clearly how much the foundation is bound to monetary stability. By far the greatest part of the foundation's funds will be used to finance a research unit, which is to be linked to a university. This research is to be of an interdisciplinary nature. Monetary stability is to be studied from the point of view of economics, finance and law. It is our desire that this centre will pursue new avenues of academic study and policy consultation. Interested institutions are currently being asked to apply. Eighteen universities have expressed interest in the first round. However, it will take some time yet before the process can be finalised.  A small part of the foundation's income will be used in future to finance scholarships and conferences. And that brings me back to the point of our being here today: the inaugural conference of the new foundation. It is also my cue to hand you over to Professor Hermann Remsperger, Chairman of the Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation.  He will make a start to the conference, which I now declare open. I hope that all of you enjoy two interesting and informative days in Frankfurt. Thank you very much. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 1 Glenn Stevens: Inflation, deflation and all that Speech by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Australian Business Economists 2002 Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 4 December 2002. *      *      * Introduction In the formative years of the current generation of economists, inflation was considered to be one of the most pressing macroeconomic problems. That's not surprising, since most of the net rise in prices that has occurred in human history took place between the late 1940s and about 1990, as a plot of any price index in any industrial country would show.    In Australia's case, it was observable during the 1950s that, in periods of business cycle downturn, prices stopped rising but didn't actually fall. This was in contrast to the pre-World War II experience, where price levels did fall during recessions. By the second half of the 1960s, it was even clearer that the price level had acquired a persistent upward trend, and around that time it became normal to look at the price level in its first difference form (i.e. the inflation rate) rather than its level.1  As all of us here remember only too well, inflation reached nearly 20 per cent during the mid 1970s. Thereafter polices aimed at reducing it, with mixed success at first, but more lasting success in the aftermath of the early-1990s downturn. A number of other countries had more clearly broken the back of serious inflation in the early 1980s; we took a little longer. But in general it could be said that the period of really serious inflation in the western world lasted from the late 1960s until the early 1990s. The subsequent decade has been a period of low inflation almost everywhere. Most recently, with a global business cycle downturn, inflation globally has declined further, and is currently low to very low in most places. So it is natural to ask whether, after a generation worrying about inflation, we might be faced with deflation. Certainly the word 'deflation' is used with much greater frequency than it has been for a long time. Its use usually conjures up some vague notion of the Great Depression, which was the last time a widespread deflation occurred. So it is worth examining this in more detail. I want first to be clear what we mean by deflation, then to ask whether it is in fact occurring. Then I want to ask whether we should worry about it, and if so, what we might do to counter it.                                                        1  As a gauge of this I consulted successive RBA Annual Reports. Throughout the 1960s, the level of the CPI was plotted in charts. The first time it appeared in changes was in the Report for 1969/70. 
 2 BIS Review 71/2002 Let me be very clear at the outset, and I will repeat this more than once in what follows, that Australia is not experiencing deflation now, and is unlikely to do so any time soon. The issue is an international one much more than a domestic one, but given its prominence it is worth some consideration. 1.  What is deflation, and why would it be a problem? Deflation is a generalised and persistent decline in most, if not all, prices for goods and services. More likely than not this, if it occurred, would be accompanied by declines in prices for many real assets and pressure for, even if not the actuality of, declines in wage and salary incomes. A situation where we observe declines in the prices of some products does not qualify as deflation in this sense. It is nearly always the case that prices for some things are falling, while prices for other things are rising. Were we to look at the 100-odd expenditure classes in the Australian consumer price index, we would find that about 30 of them record a decline in any particular quarter. This has been a feature of the low inflation era since 1990. Even in the high inflation period of the 1970s and 1980s, it was normal to see 10 to 15 per cent of expenditure classes recording price declines in any given quarter.  This kind of relative price change is the price mechanism at work in the market economy, and is to be distinguished from general deflation where prices of most or all things decline. A simple but useful working definition of deflation, then, is when the prices of enough goods and services decline to cause aggregate price indexes like the CPI to record a fall. Deflation of that general nature was once a not-uncommon event. For example, in the nineteenth century, it was normal to think of a relatively stable average price level over fairly long periods, but with noticeable fluctuations around the mean over periods of some years – with periods of inflation being followed by periods of deflation. In Australia, up to 1914, deflation occurred in almost half the years for which we have data, an outcome not dissimilar to those seen in other countries (see following table). It was really only in the last few decades of the twentieth century that we became accustomed to the idea that the price level normally rises, even in times of peace, and almost never declines.  
 BIS Review 71/2002 3  Deflation Proportion of years in which CPI fell (year-average basis)  1870-1914 Inter-War Post War Australia 45.5 36.4 1.8 Canada 31.8 40.9 1.8 United Kingdom 38.6 36.4 0.0 United States 25.0 50.0 3.5 Austria 50.0 22.7 1.8 Belgium 43.2 31.8 7.0 Denmark 54.5 45.5 3.5 Finland 34.1 40.9 1.8 France 59.1 40.9 3.5 Germany 38.6 22.7 5.3 Italy 45.5 31.8 1.8 Japan 31.4 36.4 12.3  Netherlands 31.8 54.5 1.8 Norway 36.4 50.0 3.5 Sweden 43.2 50.0 1.8 Switzerland 31.8  50.0  8.8  Source: 1870-1980 from Angus Maddison (1991) Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development, Oxford University Press, Oxford.Subsequently, national sources. Deflation need not be harmful. In cases where exceptionally strong productivity growth accompanies very strong demand growth, the price level can fall even as incomes, profits and economic activity expand. This sort of 'good' deflation can, in principle, be seen in the aftermath of some sort of technology breakthrough, or perhaps the opening up of a previously over-regulated or closed economy to the incentives of the competitive market place. No-one is likely to worry much about this sort of deflation, as it will coincide with a feeling of increasing prosperity. Why might deflation be harmful? The main reason is because of fixed nominal contracting of wages, debts, etc. The real value of a dollar is higher after deflation than it was before. So if you owe a dollar, your debt burden is higher. If you are owed a dollar, or earning a dollar, your real wealth or income is higher. Price changes of this nature, if they are unanticipated, lead to a different distribution of wealth and income than people had banked on when they made their contracts. Usually, this is disruptive to the economy (not to mention unfair). This is a problem of exactly the same nature as those which arise with inflation, except in reverse. In time, of course, people learn that price changes are occurring, and adjust their behaviour accordingly. But adjusting incomes downward for deflation is typically harder to do than adjusting them upwards for inflation. So percentage point for percentage point, deflation is arguably a bit more painful than inflation. Harmful deflation typically occurs in parallel to developments in prices for assets and balance sheets. This is usually in the aftermath of a boom accommodated by a big run up in debt, involving a large increase in capacity in response to very optimistic expectations about future sales and profits. When the optimistic expectations cannot be met, it is apparent that firms are over-invested and over-leveraged. They are then under pressure to shore up their balance sheets. Asset prices fall, as firms seek to disinvest. Banks and other lenders find that the quality of their assets has deteriorated, and are tempted to reduce the flow of new credit in order to conserve their own capital. Aggregate demand in the economy declines, and prices for goods and services fall. This is the 'debt deflation' described by Irving Fisher many years ago. Depending on the size of the preceding boom, and on the policies pursued during the bust, this process can be exceedingly painful. 
 4 BIS Review 71/2002 In the case where expectations of ongoing deflation become strongly held, moreover, it is possible that some fairly serious problems of economic management can emerge. Expectations that prices will continually fall may lead people to postpone spending, which of course amplifies the deflationary pressure. The rate of deflation might, in extreme circumstances, also mean that attempts to boost growth by reducing interest rates run into the problem that the nominal interest rate cannot fall below zero, which might mean that the real interest rate is too high for the economy's needs. I return to this below. 2. Is deflation happening? Might it happen more widely? Deflation is certainly not happening in Australia. For the year just past, the CPI rose by about 3 per cent. Underlying measures rose slightly less than that. About 70 per cent of the items in the CPI basket recorded increases, while 30 per cent of them fell, which as I noted above is fairly typical of the experience of the past decade. In the part of the economy where prices are determined by market forces (as opposed to being subject to direct influence of government), prices for goods rose by about 2 per cent, while prices for services rose by nearly 5 per cent. In the period ahead, our forecast is that inflation will continue to be about where it is now.   Nor is deflation happening, by any normal definition, in North America or Europe. The US CPI rose by about 1½ per cent over the past year. Goods prices declined by about 1 per cent, partly as a result of the strength of the US dollar, but services prices rose by over 3½ per cent. In Europe, the CPI rose in core terms by a bit over 2 per cent, with goods prices up a little over 1 per cent, and services prices by over 3 per cent. The lowest rates of price increase are occurring in Germany and Belgium, with inflation of about 1 per cent in both cases. So there is no deflation here on average, or even in the lower tail of the distribution. Rates of price increase are, however, pretty low around the world. The chart shows some characteristics of the set of inflation outcomes for a group of countries, 48 in all, classified by the IMF as advanced industrial countries or emerging market countries. The median inflation rate here is about 2½ per cent, which is down from about 6½ per cent in 1990. The twentieth percentile inflation rate in this simple unweighted distribution is about 1½ per cent – i.e. one country in five in this sample has inflation of 1½ per cent or lower. The eightieth percentile inflation rate is about 5½ per cent, compared with about 25 per cent in 1990.  
 BIS Review 71/2002 5  Given the central tendency for inflation to be this low, it is not surprising that, when we look to the lower tail of the distribution for this broader group, we find that a handful of countries have deflation. Interestingly, they are all in Asia.2 The chart shows annual average inflation rates which hide some of the short-run dynamics. But one can count about five countries in Asia whose annual CPI inflation figures are now, or at some point within the past year have been, below zero. These are China, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan. One could debate in each individual case what the proximate causes of this are, and whether it is 'good' deflation or bad. China's deflation is arguably a candidate to be classified as 'good' deflation, since it seems to be associated with rapid overall growth and rising living standards. Hong Kong's deflation is partly necessitated by the peg to the strong US dollar, though of the cumulative decline of about 13 per cent in Hong Kong's CPI since mid 1998, about half is due to declining rents, which is more associated with the decline in housing values after the earlier boom there. Of course, Hong Kong has an impressive capacity to adjust to these shocks, but even so it is a painful process. There is no doubt that Japan's deflation is of the bad kind. Various factors are at work in the other countries. But standing back from the individual cases, there is something of a pattern. While this hardly amounts to widespread deflation, or a deflationary spiral, it is clear that instances of falling prices are now a little more common, and tend to be a little more persistent, than used to be the case. Nor is the process of declining inflation necessarily finished. According to IMF forecasts, the world economy grew by less than average in 2001 and is doing so again in 2002, while 2003 is forecast to see roughly average growth. In other words, crudely measured, global spare capacity is increasing, and will remain elevated next year. Short of some inflationary shock occurring on the supply side, it would not be unreasonable to expect global inflation on average to decline over the next year or two. So a year or two from now, average inflation could be very low indeed, and there could easily be more countries in the lower tail of the distribution of outcomes that experience deflation. For the major countries apart from Japan, deflation does not seem to be the most likely outcome, but a dip below zero for the inflation rate is, perhaps, within the distribution of possible outcomes in some cases. So even though this outlook could not be classed as general deflation in a global sense, there will probably be enough instances of deflation around that people will be talking about it for a year or two.                                                         2  Argentina was in deflation prior to the collapse of the currency board arrangement early this year, but that has now been followed by the rather more familiar problem of inflation, accompanied by a host of other serious difficulties. 
 6 BIS Review 71/2002  3. Should we worry about deflation? I have already said that it seems unlikely that anyone will worry much about 'good' deflation, given that it is part of a story of rising prosperity. It is obviously the other kind of deflation that people worry about. This is a symptom of a sick economy, where profits are poor and hence prospects for near-term growth are relatively weak, unless consumers or government can be induced to expand their spending more quickly than they have been doing to date. But to the extent that this kind of deflation is a symptom of a problem of weak demand, it is more that weakness which should worry us than the deflation per se. Imagine two scenarios. The first is one where inflation has been, and is expected to remain, at a steady 3 per cent. Everyone's behaviour is fully adjusted to that expectation. Then, as a result of a period of temporary demand weakness, inflation falls to 1 per cent. The second is one where inflation has been, and is expected to remain, at a steady 1 per cent, with everyone's behaviour fully adjusted to that expectation. Then, as a result of a period of temporary demand weakness of the same extent as that in the first scenario, inflation falls to -1 per cent. Apart from the absolute numbers, these two cases are identical. Should we worry about the latter more than the former, simply because the zero line has been crossed?3                                                          3  I am obviously abstracting here from Australian circumstances. If the target inflation rate is 2½ per cent, then were inflation to fall to -1 per cent, that would be a serious miss of the target. That would be reason for concern – every bit as big a concern as inflation going to 6 per cent – but it is mostly the deviation from the target rather than the negative sign which would be the worry. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 7 On a first pass, it is not clear that we should. Both outcomes are caused by weak demand, which should worry us equally in both cases. Both have inflation 2 percentage points lower than anticipated – which means that income and wealth are behaving differently to people's expectations. That is disruptive and is of equal concern in each case. In both cases, the outcome is, of course, cause for action to expand demand. There may be sufficient nominal rigidity around zero that the adjustment to a temporary period of unexpectedly low inflation is more awkward in the second case. If true, this is a reason not to aim at inflation of only 1 per cent to start with – but that's another story. But apart from that, a temporary drop below the zero line due to a cyclical period of demand weakness in an otherwise healthy economy is not obviously cause for much more concern than crossing the 2 per cent line would be in the other imaginary economy here.  At least, that is so provided that the drop is temporary, and that expectations about future price changes remain well-anchored at a bit above zero. But what happens when expectations about ongoing deflation take hold? That is different. Here is the scenario which I think people worry most about: not the kind of mild temporary deflation which is a symptom of a period of short-term economic weakness, but the kind of deflation which might itself be a cause of further economic weakness in future. The reason they get so concerned is the possibility that it may not be easy to escape from such a situation. To put this at its most stark, imagine an economy in which deflation is strongly expected to continue, at a rate which exceeds the natural real interest rate in the economy – that is the equilibrium return on real capital. In that situation, because nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero, the real interest rate set by the central bank cannot go below the natural or 'neutral' rate. Since conventional monetary policy works in an expansionary direction by lowering interest rates in the financial sector below the neutral rate, it follows that conventional monetary policy is rendered incapable of applying stimulus to an economy in this situation. The real interest rate is too high, which means that policy remains too contractionary, prolonging the deflationary pressure. There is a 'deflation trap', or what we learned about in undergraduate economics as a 'liquidity trap'. Some have argued that this is the right diagnosis of Japan's situation.4 The question is: how likely is it that other countries will get into this sort of problem? My view is that it is less likely to occur in most of the other more dynamic economies of Asia. These countries must have tremendous opportunities for profitable investment in future. On that assumption, the natural interest rate is almost certainly much higher than the present or likely future rate of deflation. So while deflation or very low inflation in these countries is probably a sign of temporarily weak demand, which is something that policymakers there presumably wish to address, it still does not seem all that likely that they will find themselves in a deflation trap of the kind sketched out above. What about the US? We have been told for years that returns to capital are high, associated with the stronger productivity growth. For most of the late 1990s, markets certainly behaved as though that was their expectation. If it were still thought that prospective returns are pretty good, then one would be unlikely to worry about getting into a deflation trap. It would take a pretty large, persistently expected deflation rate to spring such a trap. Of course, if there has been an excessive build-up of capital, then returns might be poor for a while, so that the natural rate might be very low during the period it takes for that excess to be worked off. That case can be made for some of the investment in information technology and communications made in the second half of the 1990s in the US and elsewhere. But large chunks of the 'old economy' probably have reasonable, even if not spectacular, prospects for returns, so it does not obviously follow that the US economy is in danger of the kind of deflationary experience which would be very awkward to stop. That is not to say, of course, that US monetary policy can necessarily work miracles to return the US economy to full health and strength in a hurry – that always takes time, even with policy effectiveness. The point is simply that we should not conclude that monetary policy has, as yet, lost all its potency. Perhaps the case is a little less clear cut in parts of Europe, where various economic rigidities may constrain business profitability in some countries. But many of the countries on the periphery of the euro area, or potential entrants to the common currency, would appear to have strong investment opportunities. If this is at the expense of investment in some of the core countries, that is a matter of                                                       4  I am going to skip the issue of whether 'quantitative'measures are of any help here. 
 8 BIS Review 71/2002 adjustment (including in relative price levels, as Charlie Bean5 recently pointed out). It does not look like a generalised deflation trap. Widening our perspective to a global one, while we can observe excess supply in many global industries, it is hard to believe that there is too much capital everywhere, or that where there is excess there will be no rationalisation. Is the US, for example, satiated with infrastructure in airports, roads, electricity generation, to name a few? Are all the world's emerging markets so satiated? And has the process of innovation and development of new products and markets ground to a halt? That's unlikely. It's more likely that the medium term holds many opportunities for profitable deployment of capital, just in different places to those which were the rage in the late 1990s. 4. What to do if deflation does occur? To summarise the above discussion: • Deflation is a widespread, persistent decline in the level of prices.  • It is not happening in Australia, nor is it likely to do so in the foreseeable future. It has been happening in Japan for several years. It is not happening in the other major countries, though inflation rates are quite low there now, and deflation is a little more common internationally than it has been in the past few decades. It is quite possible that more countries will experience a mild degree of deflation at some point in the next few years, and not entirely inconceivable that one or two of the major countries might be among them.  • In the majority of cases deflation clearly is a symptom of weakness of demand and output, or would be if it occurred, and is a matter of concern for that reason.  • In relatively few cases is it likely that expected deflation will itself cause further economic weakness. Japan is arguably in that position, but few if any of the other countries currently experiencing deflation seem likely to find that the natural rate of interest is so low that policy rates cannot get below it. Whether or not one thinks the zero interest rate constraint is likely to bind in the US or the euro area, were they to experience deflation, hinges on one's view about the outlook for returns to capital. These might be poor in some sectors, but it does not follow that they are that poor across the board.  Having said all that, Japan's experience shows that deflation can happen, and so we should still ask: what should be the response of policymakers given the possibility, or the reality, of deflation? The first thing to say is that, for most countries, deflation is an outcome which is to be avoided, just like inflation is to be avoided. Stability in the general level of prices, interpreted in practice as a low but positive rate of price increase, is the appropriate goal. Forward-looking monetary policies should be seeking to maintain inflation above zero, just as actively as they look to keep it below some maximum rate. So, to state the obvious, the first order of business is: set out to avoid deflation. Second, if some deflation occurs unexpectedly, it is not the end of the world. Don't panic. But in most countries it would probably signify insufficient aggregate demand relative to supply. Demand management policies, if they could not pre-empt this situation, should respond forcefully to it ex post.  Third, the thing to be avoided most strenuously is a persistent deflation which becomes embodied in expectations. It is in this situation where questions of deflation traps become relevant, particularly in countries where the natural interest rate has come down to very low levels. Policy must work at keeping price expectations from falling too far, just as hard as it worked to get expectations down from excessive levels in earlier times, by articulating goals clearly, and being seen to take action consistent with achieving those goals. Fourth, if, despite the efforts of monetary policy, persistent deflation does become embodied in expectations and the zero interest rate does become, or threaten to become, a binding constraint, there will be a role for other policies. If there are structural rigidities which reduce the returns to capital,                                                       5  See 'The MPC and UK Economy: Should we fear the D-words?', speech by Charles Bean, Chief Economist, Bank of England, to The Emmanuel Society, London, 25 November 2002 - available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches/speech182.pdf 
 BIS Review 71/2002 9 for example, in a deflationary environment, these things will hamper macro policy's efforts to engender recovery. So policies which address any such problems would be important. These would include making sure that excess capacity is rationalised by allowing the failure of the weakest suppliers, so that the most efficient surviving producers can expect to earn a reasonable return. Further, the active use of fiscal policy to promote recovery would be quite in order in the case of an entrenched deflation, especially in countries where fiscal consolidation had been achieved during the good times. In a situation where investors saw little return to private investment, it is hard to believe there would not be good economic and social returns to various forms of public investment. Hence there would be, in this scenario, a strong case on short-term stabilisation grounds for the government to borrow and invest. Conclusion I am not sure there is any more one can sensibly say about deflation at present. The fact that we are talking about the possibility of it at all is a remarkable change from only a few years ago. Insofar as that means that the 'great inflation'is well and truly finished, that is a good thing, provided of course that we are alert to the new sorts of risks which can emerge. There is probably a bit too much emotive baggage which is carried about with the word 'deflation'. For the average country, a short-lived experience with mild deflation, if it occurred, would be not the end of the world, nor even unprecedented. It would just be a sign that there is a problem of insufficient aggregate demand which ideally should have been avoided, but which, failing that, should be addressed quickly. The observed deflation would be telling us the same thing as various real activity indicators: things are weak and the economy needs encouragement to grow. The bigger concern would be the possibility of a ‘deflation trap’ where conventional monetary policy would become largely ineffective. It seems to me that in most countries this is not all that likely an outcome anyway, but good policies all round should be able to lessen the probability of it further. Even were a country to find itself in such a situation unexpectedly, it should not be beyond the capacity of policymakers to devise ways of getting out of it, although they would want to have the full armoury of policies at their disposal. Australia would be one of the last economies in the world where deflation would be expected. In the remote possibility that it did occur here, we could expect that there would still be plenty of investment possibilities. So unless the corporate and financial sectors' financial structures had become seriously flawed – something of which there is no sign at present – there would be ample scope for monetary policy stimulus to be effective. In the (even more unlikely) event that that were not enough, a government sector with an exceptionally strong balance sheet would be well-positioned to use fiscal policy to assist the economy, in this extreme situation.  I hope that this has helped us to have a realistic and balanced assessment about deflation, in what ways we should be concerned about it and how it should affect our thinking about policies. Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS Review 71/2002 1 Willem F Duisenberg: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 3 December 2002. *      *      * It is my pleasure to continue today our regular dialogue. I will start my opening remarks with an explanation of the European Central Bank's assessment of economic and monetary developments. Subsequently, I will address some issues related to the EU arrangements for financial regulation, supervision and stability. Economic and monetary developments Already at the time of our last meeting in October, the expectation had faded that economic activity in the euro area would reach growth rates in line with trend potential by the end of 2002. In the course of the summer, the downside risks to economic growth had become evident, reducing the likelihood that upward risks to price stability would materialise. This development was mainly related to the episodes of turbulence in financial markets and to the persistence of geopolitical tensions, which created uncertainty and affected the outlook for economic activity in the euro area and at the global level.  Starting with the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, since our last meeting monetary growth has remained rather strong in the euro area. However, recent monetary data need to be interpreted with caution, as the dynamics in M3 over recent months have been considerably boosted by high uncertainty in financial markets, which has favoured portfolio shifts to the more liquid instruments included in M3. At the same time, the persisting strong monetary growth and the resulting ample liquidity have also been driven by the low level of short-term interest rates, which stimulates demand for the most liquid assets which are included in the narrow aggregate M1. Loans to the private sector have stabilised at growth rates between 5 and 5 ½% in the most recent past. These are levels which, in real terms, are not low given the cyclical situation. Overall, more liquidity is available than would be needed to finance sustainable, non-inflationary growth. At the same time, in the current economic environment, we do not see the risks of this excess liquidity translating into inflationary pressures in the near future. Turning to the second pillar of the ECB's monetary policy strategy, and starting with economic activity, the available evidence indicates that economic activity has most likely continued to grow only moderately in the third quarter of this year. As already noted, the hesitant pace of economic activity, as compared with our expectations in early 2002, together with lacklustre confidence, reflects the significant degree of uncertainty that has been building up over recent months. Early indications for the fourth quarter of 2002 suggest that the pace of economic growth has remained broadly unchanged. For the time being, the main scenario for the euro area remains that economic growth should return to rates close to potential in the course of 2003. This expectation is consistent with forecasts published by international organisations and private institutions. In addition, financial markets have shown signs of stabilisation in recent weeks, although volatility in the stock markets has remained high by historical standards. The expectation of an improvement in economic activity in the euro area is contingent on the unwinding of the current high level of uncertainty and on a recovery of growth in private consumption, which has shown signs of resilience in the recent past. In addition, this expectation is also based on a gradual recovery of world demand which, together with the low levels of interest rates, should help to strengthen investment.  However, there are several downside risks to this scenario. They relate to the persistence of macroeconomic imbalances in the global economy, geopolitical tensions and the uncertainty about the size of the adverse effects of the past sharp declines in stock prices on aggregate demand in the euro area and in the other major regions of the world. Moreover, risks also stem from the fact that structural rigidities in the euro area economy do not facilitate the process of price and wage adjustments to external shocks. Thus, overall, it remains difficult to predict at this juncture the timing and strength of the acceleration of economic activity.  
 2 BIS Review 71/2002 Regarding price developments, annual HICP inflation rates have been slightly above 2% in recent months. These annual HICP inflation rates are likely to increase in the remainder of 2002 and stay above 2% in the early months of next year, mainly on account of base effects and increases in indirect taxes and administered prices in a number of countries. Subsequently, however, HICP inflation rates should fall again, and provided that oil prices do not increase significantly and wage moderation prevails, reach levels in line with our definition of price stability in the course of 2003. Looking further ahead, both the strengthening of the euro exchange rate this year and the subdued economic activity continue to contribute towards reducing inflationary pressures. Furthermore, for price pressures to be contained, it is crucial that the upward trend in labour cost indicators observed in recent years does not continue. The notable inertia in wages despite the subdued economic expansion has been of some concern, although recent developments may suggest that wage costs have not accelerated further in the course of this year. At our last monetary policy meeting on 7 November we discussed extensively whether or not to reduce the key ECB interest rates, in view of the high uncertainty surrounding future economic growth and its implications for medium-term inflationary pressures. Summing up, there were elements in favour and against both alternatives. On the one hand, the subdued trends in economic activity and the stronger exchange rate of the euro supported the view that inflationary pressures should decline. On the other hand, the stubbornly persistent rate of inflation excluding the volatile components of energy and food prices as well as monetary and wage trends, argued for caution. Overall, on that occasion the view to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged prevailed. However, we also indicated that we needed to monitor the downside risks to economic growth for their impact on medium term inflationary pressures.  Since our last meeting, the evidence has strengthened that inflationary pressures are easing somewhat and downside risks to economic growth have not vanished. Regarding fiscal policy in the euro area, I would like to reiterate that budgetary discipline is indispensable for the success of EMU. Fiscal discipline strengthens the conditions for strong sustainable growth conducive to employment. Sound fiscal positions also provide scope for dealing with the expected fiscal challenges caused by population ageing. Clearly, therefore, sound public finances, as enshrined in the Treaty and further developed in the Stability and Growth Pact, are in the interest of all Member States.  I want to stress that the current fiscal framework strikes the right balance between discipline and flexibility. By prescribing a medium-term objective of budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus, the Stability and Growth Pact guarantees that fiscal policies will preserve the sustainability of public finances while providing sufficient flexibility for automatic fiscal stabilisers to operate.  While it is clear that, for many – partly formal – reasons, annual budgetary targets always need to be set in nominal terms, the assessment of fiscal policies naturally must take into account cyclical developments. Though the discussion surrounding this issue may, at times, appear confusing, it does not reflect a flaw in the Pact as some critics claim.  In this context, it is worth recalling that most Member States have reached budget positions which are "close to balance or in surplus". Current fiscal problems in other countries have arisen not because the rules are inflexible, but because countries have not honoured their commitments to make progress in fiscal consolidation, particularly during good times. It is now high time for the countries with deficits approaching or even exceeding 3% of GDP to honour their commitment to respect the rules. We very much support the Eurogroup agreement that all countries with remaining imbalances should undertake to fulfil their commitments by implementing a clear consolidation strategy. And we very much believe that a growth-oriented consolidation policy – which aims at strengthening the productive forces of the economy – will be an important means to strengthen the economic prospects for the euro area at this juncture. Additional efforts regarding transparency and timeliness in the implementation of the procedures of the Pact are also necessary. They will help convince the public that the current framework is fully successful in preserving discipline and providing flexibility. In this context, the Commission recently issued a communication which aims to clarify certain aspects of the fiscal framework while strengthening its main principles and objectives. The ECB considers this a good starting-point for rebuilding confidence in the budgetary policy framework. Finally, neither the discussion on monetary or fiscal policy, nor the current economic outlook should divert attention from the need to implement decisively the structural reform agenda. We note with some concern that progress is slow in many countries of the euro area. I should like to emphasise that 
 BIS Review 71/2002 3 the benefits of these reforms for the economic growth potential of the euro area are likely to be substantial. While these benefits will only be fully reaped over the medium term, I believe that reforms would be particularly important at the current juncture. Indeed, determined structural reforms in labour, product and financial markets should make a significant contribution to strengthening confidence, making the euro area more attractive for investors. In the end, this will also support economic growth in the short term. Issues related to the EU arrangements for financial regulation, supervision and stability Today, the ECOFIN Council is considering adapting the EU structures for financial regulation, supervision and stability. The ECB keenly supports the basic thrust of such proposals, namely to reduce barriers to further financial integration and to maintain systemic stability in financial markets, which have become increasingly interconnected in a single currency area. Against this background, the respect of the subsidiarity principle in supervisory matters necessitates enhanced co-operation between national authorities.  The ECB has repeatedly stressed that in the banking sector close and effective co-operation between central banks and supervisory authorities is crucial for the promotion of financial stability, a point that I am glad to see strongly backed also in recent resolutions of the European Parliament. The ECB has also emphasised that technical authorities need to be represented in regulatory committees and that any new arrangements for financial stability should draw on the technical expertise at central banks and supervisory agencies. All these points are reflected in the proposals endorsed by the ECOFIN Council in October.  Now the crucial phase is beginning when the ability of the new arrangements to meet the high expectations they are raising will be tested in practice. The measure of success will be whether the overall rulebook, with which financial institutions operating throughout the EU have to comply, becomes more homogeneous across countries. This will require a fine re-balancing of primary and secondary Community legislation and national rulebooks, which should be conducted in a transparent manner by the committees to be set up under the new supervisory regime, paying careful attention to the costs of compliance. The review of the new arrangements that was requested by the European Parliament will offer an appropriate tool for checking the progress made. Let me conclude by highlighting that supervisory authorities and central banks should step up information sharing and develop joint assessments. This will also allow the effectiveness of the new arrangements in supporting financial stability in the Single Market to be tested. 
 BIS Review 70/2002 1 Martin Feldstein: Deflation Speech by Mr Martin Feldstein, Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of Economic Research. These remarks were prepared for presentation at the BIS Central Bankers dinner in Mexico City on 11 November 2002. *      *      * I am pleased to be here and honored by the opportunity to talk to this distinguished group.  When Andrew Crockett called about 10 days ago and invited me to make these remarks, he suggested that I discuss the subject of price deflation and asked that I try to do so in a way that provokes discussion.  I’m very happy to do so. Deflation is certainly an important issue. It is a real problem in Japan. I’m frequently asked by people in business and in the general public whether the US is now experiencing deflation or is heading into deflation and, if so, what should be done about it. Similar concerns have been raised in Europe, especially with respect to Germany. And if deflation does occur in the US or Europe, and if that contributes to economic weakness in either region, that would have important consequences for every country here tonight. I will deal briefly with four questions: First, is the US or Germany now experiencing deflation - a persistent decline in the overall price level - as some of my American business friends assert? Second, would deflation be a bad thing? And, if deflation is undesirable, what should be done to prevent it and, if it occurs, what can be done to reverse it? I’ll try to deal with all four questions in the 15 minutes that Andrew suggested I talk - so you know I won’t examine any of these issues as fully as I might do or should do. That in itself should be enough to provoke discussion. Let me begin by summarizing my overall conclusion.  Neither the United States nor Germany is now in deflation but deflation is a potential problem that should be avoided. The best environment for household and business decision-makers is one of price stability. Deflation, as well as inflation, interferes with the smooth running of the economy.  In some ways, moderate deflation can be more damaging than moderate inflation, although moderate inflation is more likely to get out of hand and lead to rapid inflation. Nevertheless I believe that it would be a mistake to allow a fear of deflation to provide a rationale for policies that could lead to unwanted price inflation or to asset price bubbles. Are the US and Germany experiencing deflation? I’ll start with the question of whether the US or Germany is actually experiencing deflation. For the US the answer by any official statistical measure is no. The GDP price index has been increasing at 1.2% this year and the corresponding index for personal consumer expenditures is up at 1.9%. The consumer price index has been rising at a rate of 2.6% in the first 9 months of 2002 and the core CPI (excluding food and energy) is up at a 2.1% rate. I believe the situation is roughly similar in Germany and in the Euro area more generally. Consumer prices in Germany are now rising at about 1.5% and in the wider Euro area the increase is faster. The reason that so many American businessmen believe that we are in a period of deflation is that the prices of the products that they sell are in fact falling. The producer price index for finished goods in September was 1.9% lower than a year ago. And the prices of consumer goods and investment goods in the GDP index have fallen in each quarter this year. 
 2 BIS Review 70/2002 This decline in the producer prices for finished goods is an inevitable consequence of the success that central banks have had in achieving virtual price stability. To see why, think about an economy in which there is literally no inflation. Since rising productivity translates into an equal rate of increase of real wages, such price stability implies that nominal wages must rise at the same rate as productivity. For a service like hair cutting, where there is no productivity gain, the price of the service must rise with the level of nominal wages. Achieving overall price stability therefore requires balancing the inflation of service prices with declines in the prices of goods. Although the US has not achieved zero inflation, the general wage gains driven by productivity have caused service prices to rise at 3% this year while the overall consumer prices in GDP rose only 1.9%. Price declines for goods, especially at the producer level before distribution costs, balance the increase in the prices of services.  Some analysts argue that the current low inflation rates may continue to decline and eventually become negative because of the excess capacity in labor and product markets. While that cannot be ruled out for the future, there is no supporting evidence now. In spite of the US recession that began in early 2001, the rate of wage and salary increase in the last 12 months is 3.2%, the same as it was in the corresponding period in 1999.  One further issue about whether the US is experiencing deflation is the accuracy of measuring price movements. Although the US price indices have been improved in the past few years, I believe that the official price indices still overstate inflation because of an inability to deal adequately with quality change and new products. Our measured inflation rate of 1.2% may correspond to a true inflation rate (if I may use that term) of zero or even –1%.  The significant fact, however, is that even if true inflation is zero or slightly negative, nominal wages are rising and nominal interest rates are positive. Thus deflation, if it exists, is too limited to cause problems in either wages or interest rates, a subject to which I turn next. Would deflation be a bad thing? That brings me to the question of whether deflation - as evidenced by a decline in the measured price level - would be a bad thing. In my judgement, it would be. To repeat what I said before: price stability - rather than either inflation or deflation - is the best environment for households and businesses to make decisions.  The experience of price stability also creates confidence that it will persist. One of the problems with inflation or deflation is that it creates uncertainty about the future path of prices, an uncertainty that is itself harmful. Before talking about the adverse effects of deflation, let me deal with the interaction of inflation and tax rules. Because taxes in the US and most other countries are based on nominal capital income and expenses, a higher rate of inflation raises effective tax rates on capital income and thereby increases the distorting effect of capital taxation. Reducing inflation therefore reduces tax distortions and raises real national incomes. Although the logic of this analysis implies that a small negative inflation rate would reduce tax distortions even more than price stability, I believe that the uncertainty and other adverse effects of deflation would outweigh the gains from reduced tax distortion.  The adverse effect of deflation depends on whether it is anticipated or unanticipated and on whether it is small or large. A small, persistent and therefore anticipated deflation can be least damaging. But like any mild chronic disease, we’d rather not have it.  Before I talk about such an anticipated deflation, consider first an unanticipated shift from a low inflation rate of say 2% to a permanent deflation rate of –2%. The nominal interest rate on new bonds and new mortgages would eventually decline by about 4%, more or less maintaining the initial real rate on such obligations. But the unanticipated shift to deflation would cause the real interest rate on existing debt to rise by four percentage points. In the United States, this would not create a problem for home owners since they would generally be able to pay off their mortgages without penalty and refinance them at the new lower nominal interest rate.  The more serious problem would be for companies with long term debt. The real value of their annual debt service would rise over time and the ratio of their debt to real capital would also increase. For highly leveraged companies and for financial firms with a substantial mismatch of assets and liabilities, 
 BIS Review 70/2002 3 this unanticipated shift to deflation could be a serious problem. Obviously, the greater the unanticipated rate of deflation, the more damage that would be done.  What about the long-term effect of a mild permanent and fully anticipated deflation at, say, a 2% rate? In many ways, the economy could - at least in principle - adjust to this just as it does now to a 2% positive rate of inflation. Real interest rates on marketable securities and mortgages would remain unchanged with nominal mortgage rates and bond interest rates declining by the fall in anticipated inflation. If productivity growth is raising real wages at 2.5% year, nominal wages would rise at 0.5%.  There are however potential problems even with such a mild anticipated deflation. When inflation is positive, some individuals’ real wages can be reduced without the difficulty of actually cutting their nominal wages. But with deflation of just 2%, wages that have to decline relative to the average would often have to be cut in nominal terms. If that cannot occur, the result would be a rise in unemployment until the market finally adjusts to the need for nominal wage cuts. Deflation would also create a problem for implementing a traditional monetary policy based on the short-term rate of interest since with a zero nominal interest rate floor there would be no way to drive the real rate below zero to stimulate a weak economy.1 Deflation would pose special problems within the euro area. To the extent that the euro area is an integrated market for goods and services, different rates of inflation or deflation cannot persist indefinitely. But the combination of relative price level adjustments among countries and overall price stability for the euro area as a whole can cause a period of deflation in some countries. Moreover, since the interest rate on euro bonds must be the same in all countries, the real interest rates will rise in the deflating country. In this way, deflation within part of the euro area can cause a contractionary monetary environment in that part of the euro area that leads to even further deflation.  The problems caused by anticipated deflation - whether in the US or in Europe - are substantially worse if the sustained rate of deflation is greater than the rate of productivity growth and than the real rate of interest on risk free securities. Nominal wages would have to fall2 and the real rate of return on riskless securities would be at least equal to the rate of deflation. Securities with greater risk or less liquidity would have to offer higher real returns. This upward shift in the yield on the entire range of private debt and equity instruments would raise the cost of capital to business, reducing investment and productivity.3 The problem is more acute for manufacturing firms since the rate of change of their output prices would be even more negative than the overall rate of deflation. There is now a gap of more than 3% between the overall GDP inflation rate and the rate of change of producer prices. If the GDP prices as a whole were deflating at 2%, the producer prices might be falling at 5%. For manufacturing firms, the real cost of funds (in terms of their own product prices) would exceed the nominal interest rate by five percentage points. Such high real interest rates in this part of the economy (where so much of the inventory and equipment investment is concentrated) could have a contractionary effect and a long-term adverse effect on investment and productivity.  Preventing deflation and reversing deflation if it occurs Although neither the United States nor the countries of Europe are currently in deflation, the low inflation rates make a slip into deflation a clear possibility. Japan’s persistent deflation shows that deflation can certainly happen in a modern industrial economy. I’ll conclude therefore by following Andrew’s request that I be provocative by asking what should be done to reduce the risk of deflation and to deal with it if it occurs?                                                       1  The real Federal Funds rate averaged 2% over the past decade. With 2% deflation, a 2% real Funds rate would require a nominal rate of zero. In practice, therefore, the average real rate would have to be above 2% and there would be no way to drive the real rate below zero to stimulate a weak economy.  2  For example, the combination of deflation at 6% a year and productivity gains that raise real wages at 3% a year would require nominal wages to fall on average by 3%. While achieving such wage declines could in principle occur, it is hard to believe that it could be achieved without a long period of increased unemployment.  3  The 6% rate of deflation would imply a real return of 6% on cash. Riskier securities would require a higher real yield, thus raising the cost of capital.  
 4 BIS Review 70/2002 Some people argue that it would be better to abandon the goal of price stability and accept a low but significant inflation rate - say 4% - to provide a good margin of safety from actual deflation. I disagree with that suggestion but I would be interested to know whether anyone here thinks that is the right advice. Some economists, including the authors of a widely cited Federal Reserve staff study, have suggested that an unusually vigorous expansionary policy - both monetary and fiscal - be pursued when the economy is in danger of slipping into deflation. I take it that would mean a more expansionary policy when measured inflation is 1% than when it is 2% - even if either inflation rate would be acceptable as such and even if the real economy shows no particular sign of weakness. Such a strategy may be desirable but it also runs the risk of causing an unwanted increase in inflation and an unwarranted rise in the prices of financial assets and real estate.  It is also difficult to know just when such a policy should be pursued. The specific context suggested in the Federal Reserve staff study was Japan in the years just before 1995. With the benefit of hindsight that looks like desirable policy. But at the time Japan appeared to be experiencing accelerating real GDP and a positive inflation rate. How would one know whether an expansionary monetary policy in such a context would prevent deflation or would lead to unwanted inflation and a return of the Japanese asset bubble? The recent easing by the Federal Reserve seems to me to be an appropriate action because of the weakness and uncertainty of the real economy. I believe it would have been appropriate even if the inflation rate were 1% higher, especially given the Fed’s well deserved anti-inflation reputation.  The extent to which risks should be taken to avoid deflation depends in part on how difficult it is to reverse deflationary price movements. The obvious problem in doing so, to which I already referred, is that the combination of deflation and a zero floor on nominal interest rates makes it impossible to reduce real short term interest rates as a countercyclical strategy. Would increasing the stock of money or of the monetary base provide a way of reversing deflation even if short term nominal interest rates are already at zero? Would other more unusual monetary policies - including purchasing longer term financial assets or even equities be effective and suitable?  My own inclination would be to look also to fiscal policy. Although substantial experience indicates that discretionary fiscal policy is not useful in dealing with the typical short recession downturn, a discretionary fiscal stimulus may be appropriate when faced with a long-term weakness of the type experienced now in Japan or with anticipated deflation. Contrary to the usual assumption, a fiscal stimulus need not involve increased budget deficits, an especially important point in countries like Japan where an even larger national debt would be a very serious long-term problem and possibly would outweigh the direct expansionary effect of the fiscal stimulus. A structural tax change that stimulates incentives to spend by changing relative prices - for example a temporary investment tax credit financed with a temporary corporate tax surcharge - could stimulate spending without raising the budget deficit and national debt. An analogous structural tax policy could be used to stimulate consumer spending in Japan or in any other country with a value added tax.4 Great progress has been made in recent years in bringing inflation down and achieving essential price stability. It is important in my judgement not to allow price stability to deteriorate into deflation. But it is also important that the fear of deflation not lead central banks to give up the progress against inflation.                                                       4  See my “The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment,” NBER Working Paper 9203 (www.nber.org/papers/w9203), forthcoming in the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City annual Jackson Hole conference volume for 2002. 
 BIS Review 70/2002 1 Kristina Persson: Sweden and the Euro  Speech by Ms Kristina Persson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish Chamber of Commerce for Germany, Frankfurt, 27 November 2002. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me begin by thanking the Swedish Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to this conference on a subject of immediate importance to Sweden and of course to the Riksbank. This is also a subject in which I have taken a strong interest for many years, as a Member of the Riksdag and also briefly as a Member of the European Parliament. We live in a challenging time for the euro area, facing both the present downturn of the global economy, and the future enlargement to include the new EU members from Central and Eastern Europe. It is also a decisive period for Sweden, as the issue of EMU participation is now coming to the fore. Given that we are approaching a decision on a euro referendum in Sweden the Riksbank will naturally step up its preparations to ensure a smooth and rapid transformation of Sweden and the Riksbank to the Eurosystem. I will here today share with you some views on the development so far of the euro area and on the possible Swedish membership. My presentation will naturally focus on the economic aspects of EMU, but let me nevertheless emphasize that I personally think that the political arguments for European cooperation remain crucial, especially at times when nationalism is on the rise on our continent. The day after tomorrow, the Swedish Prime Minister will hold consultations with fellow party leaders to come to an agreement on setting a date for a referendum on EMU. It now looks as if the referendum will be held in autumn next year. If the outcome of the referendum is a yes, the Government will propose the Swedish Riksdag that Sweden should seek an end to the derogation from full participation the Stage Three of the Monetary Union. The Riksbank will of course play a central role in this process, I will just briefly mention two aspects:  On the one hand there is the less spectacular but no less important preparatory work for a transition to the euro. The Riksbank has held consultations with the financial sector and with tax and social security administrations. We have estimated that at least 18 months will be required to achieve the transition, if the introduction of banknotes and coins would come later. Another, more publicised role of the Riksbank, is that of the Swedish participation in ERM2. The exchange rate regime in Sweden is today decided by the Government, while the Riksbank decides on issues concerning its implementation. If the Government decides to join ERM2, the Swedish finance minister and the Riksbank governor will be parties to a common accord with euro area finance ministers and the ECB on a central rate between the Swedish krona and the euro in ERM2. And it is on this occasion the important step is taken, meaning a modification of the monetary regime. There are no simple criteria for determining the most appropriate central parity rate. What the Riksbank can do is to use the various models at our disposal and combine their results with expert knowledge and good judgement to try to narrow down a reasonable interval and analyse the consequences of different choices. All models and forecasts at the Riksbank's disposal now suggest that the real exchange rate will appreciate in the coming years. The question is by how much. The different models give a wide range of estimates for the real appreciation, ranging from a few per cent up to 10 per cent from the current level. With the realistic assumption that inflation will be about the same in Sweden as in the euro area in coming years, this implies an interval for the nominal SEK/EUR rate that extends from approximately 8.20 to a little more than 9 kronor. Even if the Riksbank thus participates actively in the preparations for euro introduction it will not, as an independent and non-political institution, be actively involved in the referendum debate. In 1997, The Riksbank's governing board took a decision in favour of early participation in the EMU as a response to the government report on EMU membership chaired by Professor Lars Calmfors. However the present Executive Board has not taken any common position ahead of the referendum, although the personal views of several board members on EMU are well publicised, including my own pro-euro stance. 
 2 BIS Review 70/2002 The euro area performance since 1999 and Sweden’s situation So what can we say about the state of the Monetary Union, some three years after its inception?  Let me first emphasize that three years is a very short time span to evaluate a project of this scale, not nearly enough for anyone to make an authoritative judgement. But, undoubtedly, for those who had great expectations regarding convergence, increased competition and higher productivity during these first three years the euro will have been a disappointment in some respects. Many were hoping that the creation of the euro, with the integration of financial markets, increased cross-border competition and the reduced transactions costs, would usher in a period of higher growth and productivity gains for the euro area. Instead, we have seen a slowdown in productivity and an economic performance steadily below that of the US, and also slightly below that of Sweden and other pre-in countries. Since 1999 GDP growth has on average been 2.3 percent in the euro area against 2.9 percent in Sweden, while overall productivity in the euro-economy according to the OECD has been only 0.6 percent in the euro area 1999-2001, against 1.0 percent in Sweden. So, at least superficially, it does not appear to be the case that Sweden has underperformed because of its non-participation in the euro area.  During the economic boom in 1999 and 2000 the euro area lagged behind the US and Sweden in productivity increases. And during the downturn of 2001 and 2002 Europe still underperformed the US and Sweden.  This is the reality, and of course on a very simplistic level it makes poor publicity for EMU prior to the Swedish referendum. Yet I believe that it would be a mistake to blame monetary policy or indeed EMU itself for this disappointing performance. On closer inspection EMU as such has achieved its major objectives during the first three and a half years of existence. Most importantly price stability has been successfully achieved. Headline HICP inflation was below the stated maximum target level of 2 percent in 1999 and slightly above in the following years. However this was achieved under rather adverse conditions: during 2001 and the beginning of 2002 prices were very much affected by the triple impact of animal disease (affecting meat prices), oil prices and the changeover to euro coins and notes. Core inflation, excluding the most volatile food prices and energy, has been reasonably close to the 2 percent level 1999-2002. Inflation expectations also appear to have been firmly anchored close to 2 percent. Now there has of course also been quite a high degree of divergence inside the area, with inflation ranging from over 5 % in the Netherlands to 1.8 % in France in 2001 (and even lower figures in Germany during 2002). This has created differences in real interest rates, but not wide enough to explain the overall lag in productivity or growth. None of those caveats can explain the euro area's poor performance. The overall macroeconomic climate is not the problem, in fact it has been rather favourable. I might add that the macroeconomic environment has been rather favourable in Sweden too. The period from 1999 has underlined that confidence can be achieved outside EMU. HICP inflation in Sweden has actually been lower than in the euro area, our price developments have also been in line with our inflation target, as have inflation expectations. The interest rate differential between Swedish and German bonds has been firmly in the low decimals and has even for a short period of time been negative. If overall macroeconomic conditions have been favourable, both in the euro area and in Sweden, the real issues and problems are not in macroeconomic policy, but on the structural side, in product markets and in labour markets. In the euro area the recent fall in productivity in the business sector and increase in unit labour costs seem to reflect a high degree of labour hoarding, that is to say a refusal to cut staff when faced with lower demand, and thus poor reallocation of employment. There might be good reasons for this, such as high costs for finding and training the right personnel in a competence driven economy, but it nevertheless indicates that wage flexibility needs to increase. And despite this overstaffing, wage growth has not slowed down.  Similarly, studies from the OECD and recently published research highlight that the important differential in growth between the US and Europe is the poor employment growth in Europe. The US certainly has the advantage of having a young and growing population, but Europe has large numbers of unemployed or underemployed people who could become mobilized for increased growth of the 
 BIS Review 70/2002 3 economy, This need not imply that Europe must adopt US hiring and firing practices, there are other ways of achieving this, with economic incentives, labour market policies and education.  Challenges for Sweden ahead of a possible EMU participation Wage formation is also an important challenge for Sweden prior to a possible EMU participation.  The main issue after a possible participation in the euro zone will be the loss of the exchange rate and an independent monetary policy as stabilisation tools. If Sweden, within EMU, is out of step with the business cycle in the euro area, neither an exchange rate, nor Swedish interest rates are available to adjust for this. In reality, the exchange rate may in fact be a less efficient stabiliser than expected. It is quite apparent that macroeconomic fundamentals and Sweden's position in the business cycle have not been the only, sometimes not even the major, factors affecting exchange rate developments. If the weakening of the krona in 2001 did indeed cushion the blow from global recession, earlier periods of weakness have run counter to the overall improved relative growth performance. Personally, I believe that there might be a tendency in the Swedish debate to overstate the gains from having a flexible exchange rate in the longer run. Our recent experience shows that a small currency on the highly volatile financial markets risk being more affected than the bigger currencies by factors out of its control and with no direct relevance to their economic performance. One such example was the reaction on the currency markets in the days following the 11 September events. It is also quite apparent that the present strengthening of the krona was influenced by the Prime Minister raising the issue of a referendum on EMU.  Furthermore, recent experience implies that the deviations from the euro average growth should not be very large in the normal case. Even if Swedish growth and productivity have been somewhat higher than those of the euro area since 1999, recent evaluations show that that the business cycles in the euro area and Sweden are fairly synchronised, despite the asymmetric shocks due to the crises in the mobile telecommunications and IT sectors.  However, it cannot be ruled out that Sweden can become subject to serious asymmetric shocks, i.e. disturbances affecting Sweden differently from the rest of the euro area. On those occasions it is important that Sweden has an alternative way of stabilising the economy. One possible instrument is of course to use fiscal policy. The Riksbank recently presented its views on the government report "Stabilisation policy in the Monetary Union" where we elaborate on the possibility of using fiscal policy to stabilise inflation in a similar way as monetary policy does today. This implies that fiscal policy is given a clear mandate, with clear targets, strong institutional arrangements and a high degree of openness. Of course, using fiscal policy as an effective tool additionally implies a strong budgetary position over the cycle - which is also important given the present demographic trends which point to increased costs for supporting an ageing population. I believe this discussion could also be of some interest in relation to the present debate on the Stability and Growth Pact, as it stresses the importance of strengthening the institutional framework and the long term goals for national stabilisation policies in the monetary union, as opposed to a more passive policy simply letting automatic stabilisers take their course. And, like Sweden, the euro area needs a strong fiscal stance in order to cope with the future fiscal burden of ageing populations. Even more important than the alternatives for stabilising the economy are the structural reforms which are needed to increase potential growth and contribute to an economy more responsive to changing circumstances. If this is done successfully the problems of instability will probably not arise or will be of less significance.  As we analyse Sweden's labour markets it is worrying that unit labour costs have increased slightly more rapidly in Sweden than in the Euro area recently. As the possibility to conduct an independent economic policy decreases, the need for functioning adjustment mechanisms increases which implies greater flexibility in factor and product markets in Sweden. This flexibility in the labour market could apply both to increased variability in nominal wage increases and to increased professional and geographical mobility of the labour force.  
 4 BIS Review 70/2002 Potential gains from euro membership So far I have concentrated on some of the disadvantages of joining Monetary Union. But let there be no mistake, there will certainly be important gains from EMU for Sweden. While large Swedish corporations already enjoy many of the advantages of using the euro, being already well integrated into the European market, joining the euro area may be essential for small and medium sized enterprises, which are too small to use advanced methods of handling exchange rate volatility. A recent survey revealed that 80 percent of the larger corporations in Sweden already invoice in euros, compared to only 15 percent of the small and medium-sized enterprises. Our overall macroeconomic models do not always capture the strength of these microeconomic forces at play at company level when transaction costs are reduced and barriers for trade and investment lowered. Some of the recent research, such as the gravitation models presented by Professor Andrew K. Rose and others, which compare wide sets of countries, give very significant increases in trade and growth from currency unions. Similarly, comparisons of the remarkably high price differentials between comparable and neighbouring areas in the US and Canada indicate that the existence of price transparency affects prices. Today we focus very much on the price increases on some services after the introduction of euro coins and notes, but let us bear in mind that prices on durable goods that are more subject to cross border comparisons, have indeed increased less than the average or even decreased. There are already signs of a convergence of prices on such durables and there is also area-wide euro pricing from some firms, which reflects increased price competition across borders. To conclude, the Monetary union presents an attractive proposition for Sweden, given that we continue to improve the functioning of wage formation and labour markets and that we ensure a solid institutional foundation for fiscal policy to stabilise the economy. The same could in fact be said about the euro area countries: With structural reforms and more solid foundations for fiscal policy, the present EMU-countries would have much better possibilities for employment growth and productivity gains. Monetary Union is putting pressure on both industry and politicians to improve their performance in the years to come.  
 BIS Review 70/2002 1 Svein Gjedrem: Transatlantic economic partnership - Nordic and American perspectives Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Nordic Investment Bank Economic Colloquium, New York, 19 November 2002. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. *      *      * The Nordic countries and the US have long historic ties. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the number of Norwegians and their descendants living in the US today is larger than the population of Norway. I think similar numbers can be found for the other Scandinavian countries. I will attempt to show here today that even in economic terms, the ties have never been closer. I will mainly concentrate on the Nordic perspective, but I also have few specific remarks about Norway.  SG 240802GNI per capita2000. PPP0500010000150002000025000300003500040000USNorwayIcelandDenmarkFinlandSwedenSource:  World DevelopmentIndicatorsdatabase, World Bank, 7/16/01Internationaldollars The Nordic economies are small, open and mature economies. At least, Norway, Iceland and Denmark compare roughly with US income levels. In the case of Norway, the income differential against the US is mainly explained by shorter working hours. SG 24080290100110120130140199019921994199619982000200290100110120130140Labour productivity in the US1)and Norway2)Index. 1990=100USNorwaySource: Bureau of LaborStatistics and Norges Bank1)Business sector2)Mainland Norwayexclpublicsector Business productivity growth has been high throughout the 1990s. The chart shows development of productivity per working hour in Norway and the US. Unfortunately, I don’t have comparable figures for the other Nordic countries. I do, however, believe that they all, with the possible exception of Iceland, have had stronger productivity growth than the US over the period.  
 2 BIS Review 70/2002 SG 240802Government employment and revenues.Per cent of total employment and GDP2001010203040010203040506070Source: OECD USIcelandFinlandDenmarkNorwaySwedenGovernmentemploymentCurrenttaxand non-taxreceipts Most Nordic countries have large public sectors, reflecting the fact that many services such as health and education are produced within the public sector. This is especially the case in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. SG 240802General government financial balance and currentaccount balance. Percent of GDP. 2001-505101520IcelandUSDenmarkSwedenFinlandNorwayGovernment financial balanceCurrent accountSource: OECD  Another prominent feature is that, except for Iceland, the Nordic countries have a twin surplus in the public sector and on the current account. This implies a net outflow of capital from the region.  The facts I have mentioned may lead outsiders to regard the Nordic region as one group, made up of similar economies. However, there are also some striking differences.  SG 240802Nordic countries –institutional differencesInflation target of 2½ per centNo(EEA-agreement)NorwayInflation target of 2½ per centNo(EEA-agreement)IcelandMember of EMUYesFinlandERM IIYesDenmarkInflation target of 2 per cent(+/-1 percentage points)YesSwedenMonetary policy regimeEU-membership 
 BIS Review 70/2002 3 We differ in our relations to the EU and with respect to monetary policy regimes. Sweden, Denmark and Finland are members of the EU. Finland is also a member of EMU. The Danish krone is linked to the euro through a fixed exchange rate, while Sweden, Iceland and Norway have inflation targets and a floating exchange rate.  Our financial markets differ in size and structure. SG 240802Bonds outstanding, March 2002.      Per cent of GDPSource: BIS, IMF050100150200250USIcelandDenmarkSwedenFinlandNorwayGovernmentPrivate Government bond markets are generally small, even in relation to GDP. There is, however, a relatively large market for private bonds, especially in Denmark. The bond market in Denmark is twice the size of the stock market. SG 240802Stock market values. Per cent of GDPSource: NationalCentralBanks, IMF050100150200250300FinlandIcelandDenmarkEnd 1999Sep 2002 Finland has the largest stock market relative to the economy. This reflects, I believe, the rise of Nokia as the world’s leading mobile phone company. We see that the Finnish and Swedish markets have followed the US market more closely than the other Nordic markets. This also reflects differences in industry structure. The sector composition of the three Scandinavian stock exchanges provides an illustration. The Oslo Stock Exchange is heavily dominated by the energy sector, which is practically absent on the other Nordic exchanges. Norway has small traditional industries, but the IT and telecom sector is comparable to the other countries’ in relative size. The different sector composition of the stock exchanges also illustrates the potential for diversification by investing across the Nordic countries. The difference in sectoral composition may in part explain the differences in correlation of Nordic stock exchanges with the world economy. 
 4 BIS Review 70/2002 SG 240802Sector composition of NOREX exchanges.September 20020 %10 %20 %30 %40 %50 %60 %70 %80 %90 %100 %StockholmCopenhagenOsloIndustrials and materialsIT/TelecomConsumer goods and servicesFinancial servicesEnergyOtherSource: NOREX   SG 240802Correlation with world index.USD based price indexesSource: EcoWin / FinancialTimes0,20,40,60,81DenmarkFinlandNorwaySwedenDec 93 - 971998-2002   SG 240802FDI to/from the US. Total at end 2001.      Per cent of GDPSource: NationalCentralBanks, IMF024681012SwedenDenmarkFinlandNorwayto USfrom US 
 BIS Review 70/2002 5 The links with the US economy are many and complex. The US is one of our major trading partners. But the ties are perhaps even more evident in the capital markets. All the Nordic countries have relatively large direct investments in the US economy. In addition, US capital markets today have a decisive impact on developments around the globe. American capital has also been important for investments in the Nordic economies. SG 240802US directinvestmentsin Norway. End ofyear2000.Mining and extraction incl. oil and gasManufacturingRetail trade, hotels and restaurantsFinancial enterprises, real estate and business activitiesOther67%12%13%7%1%Source: Norges Bank US companies have been pioneers in developing the Norwegian petroleum sector, which is crucial for us. Last year, Norway was the world’s third largest exporter of oil. Even today, two thirds of US direct investments in Norway are linked to our petroleum sector. SG 240802The Government Petroleum Fund Market value in billions of USD1). End of June 2002Source: NationalCentralBanks, IMF05101520253035404550EuropeUSAsia andOceaniaAmerica exUSStocksBonds1)Bond figurefor US incl. USD 3 bndollar-denominatedissuedby non-USentities SG 240802Total capital in the Government Petroleum Fund. End of year. Per cent of GDP02040608010095969798990001020304050607080910020406080100Source: Ministry of Finance. National Budget 2003  
 6 BIS Review 70/2002 Revenues from the petroleum sector have generated an annual fiscal surplus of some 10-15 per cent over the last few years. Since 1995, the fiscal surplus has been invested in the Government Petroleum Fund. The Fund invests only in foreign markets. Investments – all portfolio investments - are spread between equities and fixed income instruments, as well as across countries.  Approximately 29 per cent of the fund is invested directly in the US stock market and in dollar-denominated bonds. The size of the fund has increased rapidly over the last few years, and will reach approximately 90 per cent of GDP by the end of this decade, according to estimates from the Ministry of Finance. This implies further investments of considerable amounts, also in the US market. While the US economy has always been an important trading partner, our investments abroad and the globalisation of the financial system will further increase our interest in the US economy in the years ahead. The links, already important, will expand further. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 1 Ilmars Rimsevics: General economic developments and banking in Latvia Speech by Mr Ilmars Rimsevics, Governor of the Bank of Latvia, Riga, November 2002. *      *      * With Latvia's economic indicators confirming sustained stability in the national economy, economic growth is likely to be balanced in 2002. Amidst somewhat weak economic activity in the external sector and downward adjustments of global economic growth projections for 2003, Latvia continues to report economic growth that is largely driven by domestic demand.  The performance of the Latvian economy has also been recognized internationally: in November, the rating agency Moody's Investors Service upgraded Latvia's credit rating. In its Regular Report on Latvia's Progress Towards Accession, the European Commission has acknowledged Latvia's macroeconomic stability and positively evaluated reforms undertaken to enhance the country's competitiveness. The European Commission has nominated Latvia among the ten countries ready for accession to the European Union in 2004.  Inflation remains low: in October, consumer prices rose 1.6% year-on-year and 0.8% month-on-month. The pick-up in consumer prices was largely a result of seasonal increases in food, and clothing and footwear prices. Core inflation was 1.3% in October. The inflation rate is projected to be around 2% in 2002.  Increasing economic growth rates observed in the third quarter can be attributed to the sustained high level of domestic demand and new orders from external markets. Strong production indicators in some of the sectors, marked growth in the retail trade sector, and increases in non-financial investment and lending are all evidence to this.  With more orders placed with the manufacturing sector, its real output rose in July and August (8.1% and 3.1%, respectively). The most pronounced growth of non-financial investment and loans was observed in the manufacturing and construction sectors, as well as some areas of the service sector, mostly in trade, the financial sector, commercial and other services.  Retail trade turnover continued to increase at a rapid pace in August (by 22.5% year-on-year), as population's income and loans granted grew and the size of the shadow economy in the retail trade sector declined.  Although growth in oil product transit by rail accounted for the September increase in cargo traffic by rail, oil transportation by oil main to the Ventspils port continued to decline. Thus declining transit of oil and oil products restrained a more rapid economic growth. In September, cargo turnover at the Ventspils port decreased, while the other ports of Latvia performed well.  Vibrant economic activity allows us to project that GDP growth will be higher in the latter half of 2002 (5.5%-5.7%) than it was in the first half of the year; and therefore, real GDP is expected to grow by 5% in 2002.  The year-on-year growth of 10.0% in Latvia's exports that was observed in the first nine months of 2002 despite weak global economic growth should be noted as a positive development. In the country breakdown, exports grew in all groups, with most rapid growth reported in exports to the United States, Sweden, Russia and Lithuania. Exports to the principal trading partner, the European Union, rose 6.9%. The principal contributors to the growth were exports of prepared foodstuffs, wood, furniture, machinery and mechanical appliances, electrical equipment, and base metals and articles of base metals. With domestic demand remaining high, imports were up by 12.6%.  As Latvia's exports rose more markedly, deficit in the balance of payments current account decreased substantially in July and August. In September, the current account deficit increased again, as imports of goods rose.  In the first nine months of 2002, the services surplus was 12.0 million lats higher than the year before. The increase in the services surplus resulted from rising exports of travel and other services and lower imports of other services. The transportation services surplus declined largely because of a low cargo turnover at the Ventspils port. In the first nine months of 2002, the services surplus covered 40.5% of the goods deficit.  
 2 BIS Review 69/2002 The current account deficit continued to be adequately covered with foreign direct investment (in the amount of 75.5% in the first nine months of 2002). If the external and internal economic environment does not deteriorate at the end of the year, the current account deficit for 2002 is likely to remain at 8.5% of GDP.  The country's fiscal position was still better than the year before. In the first nine months of 2002, fiscal deficit in the general government consolidated budget was 19.8 million lats (2.2 times higher than the year before, when the deficit amounted to 43.6 million lats). The general government consolidated budget was affected by an increase in the local government consolidated budget fiscal deficit, which amounted to 20.3 million lats. Nevertheless, according to the preliminary data released by the State Treasury, the fiscal position continued to improve also in October: the central government basic budget reported the highest monthly revenues this year. As tax and non-tax revenues have exceeded projections and expenditures are likely to remain lower than projected until the end of the year, the budget deficit for 2002 is expected to be below 2.0% of GDP.  Developments in the banking system  In October, liquidity conditions in the Latvian money market tightened slightly. In the interbank market, interest rates on transactions of shorter maturity (up to three months) rose, owing to stricter monetary policy followed by the Bank of Latvia in the latter half of the month and the end of the reserve maintenance period. However, the behaviour of interest rates on lats interbank market transactions of longer maturity (over six months) – they continue to drop, reaching historical lows – confirm that the tightening of liquidity conditions is only temporary.  At the end of October, the overnight RIGIBOR rose to 4.0%, while the six-month RIGIBOR, to which interest rates on lats loans to domestic enterprises and private persons are usually fixed, dropped to 4.2%, promoting further decreases in interest rates on lats loans.  Falling money market rates and escalating bank competition fostered a decline in interest rates on lats transactions by domestic enterprises and private persons. In September, interest rates on loans in lats fell to a record low. The weighted average interest rate of short-term loans in lats dropped to 6.52%, below that of short-term loans in the OECD currencies, which was at 7.89%. Likewise, the weighted average interest rate of long-term loans in lats fell (to 8.13%), though it still remained higher than that of long-term loans in the OECD currencies (6.30%).  The weighted average interest rates of short-term and long-term deposits made in lats declined, down to 2.71% and 4.53%, respectively. The weighted average interest rate of short-term deposits in the OECD currencies decreased to 2.05%, whereas that of such long-term deposits rose to 5.19%.  The downward trend of lending rates and several sizeable loan projects in the trade, wood processing and transport sector promoted lending in September. Higher growth rates, however, have not impaired loan quality. The share of non-performing loans in total shrank to 2.2% at end-September.  In September, loans to domestic enterprises and private persons rose 4.3%, reaching 1 664.2 million lats. This was the most rapid monthly increase in loans this year (annual growth was 43.0%). Loans to enterprises grew in excess of loans to private persons (increases of 49.7 million lats and 19.5 million lats, respectively). An increase of 73.3 million lats was recorded in long-term loans, whereas short-term loans declined slightly.  The increase of 19.4 million lats in mortgage loans was the largest increase in loans. This can be attributed to the fact that the real estate market deepens and people increasingly start construction of housing and repairs of dwelling they own. Commercial and industrial credit, which are related with the development of the trade and industrial sectors, increased considerably (by 18.9 million lats and 9.6 million lats, respectively). The most rapid annual increase was recorded in mortgage loans (95.2%).  At the end of September, loans granted by banks totalled 1 909.7 million lats (a month-on-month increase of 3.7%).  In September, total deposits decreased by 2.8% (to 2 702.1 million lats), but deposits received from domestic enterprises and private persons (1 234.6 million lats) rose 0.5% over August and 23.0% over September 2001.  In September, banks' assets (excluding trust assets) grew by 0.6% (a year-on-year increase of 26.4%), reaching 3 963.4 million lats.  
 BIS Review 69/2002 3 Banks' equity increased by 1.8% in September, totalling 365.9 million lats at the end of September (a year-on-year increase of 37.8%). Banks' profit for the first nine months of 2002 was 39.3 million lats (a year-on-year increase of 35.8%).  The most significant event in the Latvian securities market was the new issue of 10-year mortgage bonds by the state joint-stock company Latvijas Hipotēku un zemes banka. These securities have the longest maturity of all Latvian securities. Mortgage bonds were successfully auctioned on the Riga Stock Exchange and all bonds supplied (3 million lats) were sold at the average yield of 5.98%.  In September, broad money M2X grew by 0.5% month-on-month and 18.8% year-on-year, totalling 1 736.2 million lats.  As in the past months repayments were made under currency swap arrangements, in October the Bank of Latvia's net foreign assets declined by 47.0 million lats, while the backing of the national currency with the Bank's net foreign assets remained high at the end of October, at 110.2%.  In October, the demand for cash continued to increase, and currency in circulation grew by 7.2 million lats (by 6.5 million lats in September), reaching 576.2 million lats. At the same time, no major changes were observed in banks' deposits with the Bank of Latvia. Hence, the monetary base rose 7.6 million lats over its September level (to 665.5 million lats).  At the end of October, the exchange rate of the US dollar against the lats, 0.606, was unchanged from end-September, while the exchange rate of the euro, 0.595, was up slightly. At the end of October, exchange rates of the above currencies as quoted by banks equalled official rates set by the Bank of Latvia.  Bank of Latvia  The main objective of the Bank of Latvia, as defined by the Law "On the Bank of Latvia", is to implement monetary policy by controlling the amount of money in circulation with the aim of maintaining price stability.  The independence of the Bank of Latvia is guaranteed by the Law "On the Bank of Latvia" and ensured in practice. The Bank also meets all prerequisites, as established by the European Monetary Institute, for independence of the central bank. No institution or person can influence the Bank's decisions. The Governor is appointed by the Saeima of the Republic of Latvia. Likewise, upon the Governor's recommendation, it appoints members of the Board of Governors. All the above officials are appointed for a six-year term. The Governor, the Deputy Governor and members of the Board of Governors may be discharged before their term of office only if they have tendered their resignation, if a court decision on sentencing any of them for a deliberate crime has taken legal effect, or the Governor, the Deputy Governor or a member of the Board of Governors is not able to officiate for a period exceeding six successive months because of illness or some other reason.  The Law prohibits the Bank of Latvia from granting direct credit to the Government for the needs of covering budget deficit. In addition, the Bank of Latvia does not have the right to buy government securities on the primary market.  The Bank of Latvia has developed and is using the full set of the same indirect, market based monetary policy instruments that are used by the European Central Bank.  On May 18, 2000, the Bank of Latvia was assigned quality management ISO 9002 certification.  Movement of capital  Both current and capital account transactions have been fully liberalised in Latvia. There are virtually no restrictions on cash and capital flows to and from Latvia. The Bank of Latvia ensures the convertibility of the lats by buying and selling unlimited amounts of the SDR basket currencies to banks at their request.  In 2000, the Bank of Latvia introduced the interbank automated payment system (SAMS), which is a real-time gross settlement system. It conforms to the relevant requirements of the European Central Bank and may be joined in the TARGET system.  
 4 BIS Review 69/2002 Brief description of the banking sector  Currently, financial services are provided by 22 banks and one branch of a foreign bank (Riga Branch of Nordea Bank Finland Plc). A representative office of Dresdner Bank AG (Germany) operates in Latvia, but it has no right to render financial services.  According to the Financial and Capital Market Commission, foreign shareholders owned 67.8% of total share capital in Latvian banks at the end of 2001. In 10 banks, foreign shareholders held over 50% of share capital.  The restructuring of the banking sector has been completed: the industry is almost entirely in private hands (the state owned only 4.5% of banks' total share capital as at 31 December 2001). The state is the owner of only one bank, the state joint-stock company Latvijas Hipoteku un zemes banka, and holds 32% of interest in the joint-stock company Latvijas Krajbanka.  Banking legislation  General. The legislative framework for banking meets the EU requirements in full, and in some areas the requirements are even more rigorous. International Accounting Standards (IAS) have been fully introduced; banks' annual reports are prepared in accordance with IAS and audited by internationally recognised auditing firms. Practical supervision is very tight and bank inspections are conducted more frequently than in the EU member states.  Licensing. The required minimum initial capital to establish a bank is 5 million euros. Foreign banks that want to establish representative offices or branches in Latvia face no restrictions. The prudential requirements that they must meet are the same as for domestic banks.  Legislation. The principal relevant law, the "Law on Credit Institutions", has been in force since October 24, 1995, and it has been amended on several occasions. The regulations of the Financial and Capital Market Commission and the Bank of Latvia detail the requirements set by the Law. The whole set of regulations normally used by a supervisory authority is in place and corresponds with the EU standards.  The Law "On the Prevention of Laundering of Proceeds Derived from Criminal Activity" came into effect on June 1, 1998. The Law fully conforms with the relevant EU directive: it requires customer identification and keeping records on all transactions, defines suspicious transactions and obliges banks to report them to a special control institution (Disclosures Office).  The Law "On Natural Person Deposit Guarantees" came into effect on October 1, 1998. From January 1, 2002 until December 31, 2003, deposits will be guaranteed up to the level of 3 000 lats. This applies to all deposits made with banks that are subject to this Law, regardless of the day a deposit was made. The Law prescribes a schedule for increasing this amount to the level required by the EU directive (13 000 lats) in six years. As of 2003, the guarantees will also be applied to deposits of legal persons.  As of July 1, 2001, the financial sector is supervised by a single supervisory authority, the Financial and Capital Market Commission, the successor, in this area, to the Bank of Latvia. Hence, the financial sector will continue to benefit from the supervision framework that is among the strictest in Central and Eastern Europe.  Latvia's integration in the European Union and the introduction of the Euro The Bank of Latvia's policy responses are based on this country's strategic goal, which is accession to the EU, and the task of the Bank of Latvia is to prepare the country for joining the Economic and Monetary Union. In light of its commitment to joining the EU, Latvia is aiming towards both nominal and real convergence with the EU member states. Real convergence is a long-term objective, but Latvia is well on its way of achieving it.  Since 1996 real GDP growth in Latvia has exceeded GDP growth in the EU (except in 1999), thus narrowing per capita income differences.  The structure of Latvian GDP is in line with that of the developed countries: the shares of agriculture and manufacturing in total value added declined from 10% in 1995 to 4% in 2001 and from 22% to 13%, respectively, while the share of services increased from 56% to 63%.  
 BIS Review 69/2002 5 Latvia's export structure by trade partner indicates expansion in the share of exports to the EU: 61.2% of total exports in 2001 went to the EU member states.  Although accession countries are not required to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria, we have set fulfilling the Maastricht convergence criteria as a medium-term target in the area of nominal convergence. Already now Latvia complies or is close to complying with most of them.  – In October, consumer price inflation was 1.6%. – Gross government debt was only 15.0% of GDP at the end of 2001. –  There was no budget deficit in 1997 and 1998. In 2000 and 2001, the budget deficit was below the Maastricht ceiling, i.e., 3% of GDP. –  Yields on government bonds, while still higher (5.54% for 5-year Treasury bonds in July 2002) than the Maastricht criteria, are on a downward trend and their maturity continues to increase. We expect to be able to meet the requirements in the medium term.  –  The lats has been pegged to the SDR basket of currencies at a constant exchange rate since 1994. Latvia has thereby shown that it is ready and able to meet the currency stability criterion.  During the pre-accession period, the exchange rate peg of the lats to the SDR will be maintained. This peg has served the Bank well and has ensured narrower exchange rate fluctuations than a possible peg to any single currency. In addition, the composition of Latvia's foreign trade by settlement currencies closely resembles the composition of the SDR basket, with the US dollar and the euro being the major component in both.  The Bank of Latvia will be prepared to join the European System of Central Banks at the time of Latvia's accession to the EU. The structure and objectives of the Bank of Latvia, the degree of its independence and its set of monetary policy instruments are fully in line with those defined for the European System of Central Banks. 
 BIS Review 69/2002 1 David Dodge: Promoting Canada's economic and financial welfare Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Calgary Chamber of Commerce, Calgary, 18 November 2002. *      *      * Good afternoon, and thank you for inviting me here today. It's been a difficult year for many sectors of the Alberta economy. Certainly, the severe drought hurt many western farmers, and investment in the energy sector was held back by low oil and gas prices. In addition, the slump in the telecom sector has affected Calgary. This said, we believe that the outlook is positive for the province's economy, and I would be very interested to hear your views about this in our discussion later.  In a few minutes, I will spend some time talking about the Canadian economy and its prospects. But first, I want to discuss something that has preoccupied business leaders and public officials for most of this year – the need to restore trust in financial markets, in corporations that raise funds in these markets, and in the financial professionals who monitor them.  Restoring confidence in financial markets  Let me tell you why the Bank of Canada is concerned about these issues. The Bank is not a regulator of financial institutions or markets. But we do have a responsibility to promote financial stability and to oversee systemically important clearing and settlement systems. And we are the fiscal agent of the government, so we are actively involved in the functioning of fixed-income markets. Therefore, we have a keen interest in the efficiency with which financial markets operate.  Confidence is key to the efficient operation of financial markets. In the United States, that confidence has been shaken by Enron, WorldCom, and other corporate and accounting scandals. Despite the fact that problems of that magnitude have not emerged in Canada, confidence in Canadian markets, and markets worldwide, has been affected by events in the United States. That is why we are watching closely the current efforts to restore confidence and trust in corporate reporting and in financial markets more generally. It seems that there have not been exactly the right incentives in place for corporate management, boards, and their auditors and investment bankers to disclose all relevant information and to always act in a manner that is fully conducive to fair and open markets.  The market itself will provide some of the solutions to the problems currently undermining investor confidence. But others may best be dealt with by regulation.  The market does impose its own discipline. It rewards firms that successfully maintain investor confidence, and punishes those that have abused investor trust or are not sufficiently transparent. I have been impressed by how seriously the private sector has responded to the challenges raised by the events of this year. Accounting bodies and regulatory agencies are also seeking ways to improve practices and restore confidence. They are re-examining the role and the responsibilities of external auditors to boards and shareholders – and how these can differ from other duties that auditors are sometimes asked to carry out by management. And they are asking if shareholders and boards have the tools and the power to hold management accountable.  It's important that we continue to work on these issues and, moreover, that we are seen to be working on them. We live in a world where impressions matter and where capital markets are increasingly global. Canadian issuers will be judged not only against our own standards, but also against the worldwide standards for accounting, disclosure, and governance.  At the same time, we must be careful not to impose an overly onerous burden of processes and paper on businesses, particularly on smaller firms, given their importance to the Canadian economy. Let me be clear: the same principles must apply to all public companies. While all businesses must abide by the spirit of the new standards, it may well be appropriate that larger, more widely held firms should face more detailed requirements than smaller firms whose shares are not as widely held.  The challenge of developing an appropriate Canadian formula is made more difficult because we do not have a single lead securities regulator, as do the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia. I'm not here to argue whether or not Canada should have a single lead regulator. The point is we need to improve our current system, and we need to do it now. If we don't, we risk damaging our reputation in world capital markets.  
 2 BIS Review 69/2002 In sum, the best way to restore investor confidence is to put in place a system of incentives that encourages managers and boards to always act in the best interests of shareholders. Disclosure is key. In every case, shareholders are best protected with full, fair, and accurate disclosure of information. To quote a recent C.D. Howe report, "if reforms cannot help investors distinguish good and bad investment prospects, there is no avenue for improving confidence."  This brings me to an important issue for the Bank. We have a shared responsibility to promote a sound financial system – together with the Department of Finance, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation, as well as provincial and other regulatory bodies. For years, the Bank has been conducting analysis and research related to the Canadian financial system, much of which has been published in the Bank of Canada Review, and in technical reports and working papers. We are now prepared to take a further step in the interest of making the information about our financial system more widely available. I am pleased to announce that the Bank of Canada will introduce a new semi-annual publication, The Financial System Review (FSR). We are planning for the first issue to be available late next month. In it, we will publish some of the Bank's ongoing work in monitoring financial system developments and analyzing the direction of financial sector policy. The FSR aims to promote knowledge of, and discussion about, changes and developments in the Canadian financial system. I would point out that we are not the only central bank to publish such a document. For example, the Bank of England, the Swedish Riksbank, and the International Monetary Fund also produce similar reports.  Promoting economic welfare through inflation control  While we work to promote financial stability in conjunction with other agencies, we alone are responsible for monetary policy. The foundation for that policy is the inflation-targeting system. How this system works may be familiar ground for some of you, but it is worth discussing again, especially during these uncertain economic times.  The Bank of Canada Act calls on us "to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." We want strong and sustainable economic and employment growth. The best way we can help to achieve that is to promote confidence among Canadians in the future purchasing power of their currency. In other words, we want Canadians to be confident that inflation will remain low, stable, and predictable.  For over a decade, following a joint agreement with the federal government, the Bank has operated with a system of inflation-control targets. Under the current terms of the agreement, the Bank aims to keep the trend of consumer price inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range.  Since we instituted the agreement, inflation expectations have become firmly anchored on our 2 per cent target. Well-anchored expectations promote economic growth and stability. Why? Investors can better assess the future value of their investments. Savers can be more confident that their future purchasing power will not be unexpectedly eroded by inflation. Debtors can better assess the real burden of their interest payments. Wage and financial contracts can be set for longer terms. All of this is possible because people are confident that inflation will stay around 2 per cent over the medium term.  Inflation and the "Output Gap"  Our inflation-targeting system also helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle and to avoid the boom-and-bust pattern seen in earlier decades. We do this by acting in a symmetrical manner; that is, we pay equal attention to any significant movement in inflation away from the 2 per cent target, whether above or below.  The crucial task in controlling inflation is to judge how the economy is performing relative to its economic potential. Economic potential is a very important concept, so I want to take a minute to describe it. Potential output, or production capacity, is the amount of goods and services that can be produced without putting pressure – in either direction – on inflation. When the economy is producing less than its potential, economists say there is an output gap. That gap tends to put downward pressure on inflation, so the Bank will ease monetary policy to stimulate growth. We do this by lowering our target for the overnight interest rate. When the economy is operating above its potential, excess demand builds. This puts upward pressure on inflation, and the Bank will tighten monetary policy to try to cool the economy, bring it back down to its level of production potential, and return inflation to the target.  
 BIS Review 69/2002 3 Keep in mind that changes in our policy rate work their way through the economy slowly. It takes up to two years for a change in interest rates to have its full impact on demand, output, and ultimately, on prices and inflation. So we have to be forward-looking in our interest rate decisions. At our fixed announcement dates, we are not trying to affect today's inflation. What we are aiming at is future inflation and acting pre-emptively to achieve a balance in supply and demand going forward.  This may sound easy in theory, but the reality is complicated. For one thing, it is impossible to measure the economy's potential with precision. All economists can do is to make their best estimate – a highly educated estimate, I might add, but an estimate nonetheless – of the level of economic activity that represents full capacity. And since one cannot measure potential with precision, it is impossible to measure the exact size of the output gap or the amount of excess demand.  So the Bank looks at a wide variety of indicators to assess how much pressure there is on capacity. We monitor Statistics Canada reports on how closely factories are operating relative to their capacity. We survey businesses across the country to see where firms are feeling production constraints. We look at data from the labour market, as well as figures on input costs and wages. We look at real estate market indicators. And, of course, we pay careful attention to financial market developments.  We also measure inflation and inflation expectations. One key indicator is core inflation, which strips out the eight most volatile components of the consumer price index, along with the effects of changes in indirect taxes on the remaining components. We have found that this measure gives a good indication of the trend of future inflation. Indeed, it has done a better job of predicting the path of total inflation than the CPI itself. All of this gives us a comprehensive view of how the economy is operating relative to its capacity, now and in the future. And I should point out that on the Bank's Web site, you can now find the latest data on the indicators that we look at when we assess capacity pressures.  Canada's current growth prospects  Let me now turn to our economic outlook, and tell you how our views have evolved over the year. In last April's Monetary Policy Report, we projected that economic growth would be in a range of 3 to 4 per cent, at annual rates, from the second half of this year to the end of next year. Excess capacity in the economy was expected to be eliminated in the second half of 2003. And we noted that since we had taken our policy interest rates down to historically low levels in 2001, we would have to raise interest rates in a timely and measured way. So we began to tighten monetary policy, raising our target for the overnight rate three times between April and July, by a total of three-quarters of a percentage point.  By late summer, however, uncertainties stemming from beyond our borders were beginning to mount. We noted that slower growth in demand in the United States was likely to hurt our exports in the short run. We also noted that global financial headwinds could affect spending by Canadian businesses and households. Finally, we said that concerns about corporate governance and the unsettled geopolitical situation could cause some firms and households to delay their spending.  By October, the cumulative impact of slower global growth and the financial headwinds led us to reduce our near-term growth projection for Canada. In our latest Monetary Policy Report, we say that we expect growth to average slightly less than 3 per cent, at annual rates, through to the middle of 2003. But assuming that the financial headwinds and geopolitical concerns dissipate in the second half of next year, we should see a strengthening of domestic and foreign demand and the resumption of above-potential growth in Canada.  It is interesting to note that our current view on the level of economic activity in Canada by the middle of next year is not far from where it was back in April, although the quarterly growth profile has changed. We still project that the small amount of excess supply remaining in the economy should be taken up as output growth moves above potential growth in the second half of 2003.  Finally, let me say a few words on inflation. In our October Monetary Policy Report, we noted that core inflation over the next few months would likely be higher than had been previously anticipated. We cited some specific, one-off movements in relative prices, including insurance premiums and the effects of changes in the structure of Ontario's electricity market. We also said that core inflation would likely move still higher in the fourth quarter of this year, because of the "echo effect" of the price discounting that took place in 2001 following the 11 September terrorist attacks. But we said that core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the second half of next year. We are still of that view. However, 
 4 BIS Review 69/2002 because of the change in electricity pricing in Ontario, the monthly pattern of price movements will likely be different than earlier expected.  In October, we had indicated that higher crude oil prices could continue to push total CPI significantly above the target range at the end of this year. But crude oil prices have moderated in recent weeks. Should this moderation continue, total CPI will likely peak at a lower level than we thought in October.  We also continue to expect that the total CPI will converge with the core rate, around 2 per cent, in the second half of next year. However, we will continue to watch this closely, to make sure that the one-off influences I mentioned earlier do not feed into prices more generally.  To conclude, let me repeat what we said in our last Monetary Policy Report. As we go forward, we will need to remove some of the monetary stimulus now in place before the economy reaches its level of full potential. The pace of this action will continue to depend on the balance of domestic and external developments and on their implications for pressures on capacity and inflation in Canada.  
 BIS Review 68/2002 1 Ben S Bernanke: Deflation - making sure "it" doesn’t happen here Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the National Economists Club, Washington, DC, 21 November 2002. The references for the speech can be found on the website of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System. *      *      * Since World War II, inflation--the apparently inexorable rise in the prices of goods and services--has been the bane of central bankers. Economists of various stripes have argued that inflation is the inevitable result of (pick your favorite) the abandonment of metallic monetary standards, a lack of fiscal discipline, shocks to the price of oil and other commodities, struggles over the distribution of income, excessive money creation, self-confirming inflation expectations, an “inflation bias” in the policies of central banks, and still others. Despite widespread “inflation pessimism,” however, during the 1980s and 1990s most industrial-country central banks were able to cage, if not entirely tame, the inflation dragon. Although a number of factors converged to make this happy outcome possible, an essential element was the heightened understanding by central bankers and, equally as important, by political leaders and the public at large of the very high costs of allowing the economy to stray too far from price stability. With inflation rates now quite low in the United States, however, some have expressed concern that we may soon face a new problem--the danger of deflation, or falling prices. That this concern is not purely hypothetical is brought home to us whenever we read newspaper reports about Japan, where what seems to be a relatively moderate deflation--a decline in consumer prices of about 1 percent per year--has been associated with years of painfully slow growth, rising joblessness, and apparently intractable financial problems in the banking and corporate sectors. While it is difficult to sort out cause from effect, the consensus view is that deflation has been an important negative factor in the Japanese slump. So, is deflation a threat to the economic health of the United States? Not to leave you in suspense, I believe that the chance of significant deflation in the United States in the foreseeable future is extremely small, for two principal reasons. The first is the resilience and structural stability of the U.S. economy itself. Over the years, the U.S. economy has shown a remarkable ability to absorb shocks of all kinds, to recover, and to continue to grow. Flexible and efficient markets for labor and capital, an entrepreneurial tradition, and a general willingness to tolerate and even embrace technological and economic change all contribute to this resiliency. A particularly important protective factor in the current environment is the strength of our financial system: Despite the adverse shocks of the past year, our banking system remains healthy and well-regulated, and firm and household balance sheets are for the most part in good shape. Also helpful is that inflation has recently been not only low but quite stable, with one result being that inflation expectations seem well anchored. For example, according to the University of Michigan survey that underlies the index of consumer sentiment, the median expected rate of inflation during the next five to ten years among those interviewed was 2.9 percent in October 2002, as compared with 2.7 percent a year earlier and 3.0 percent two years earlier--a stable record indeed. The second bulwark against deflation in the United States, and the one that will be the focus of my remarks today, is the Federal Reserve System itself. The Congress has given the Fed the responsibility of preserving price stability (among other objectives), which most definitely implies avoiding deflation as well as inflation. I am confident that the Fed would take whatever means necessary to prevent significant deflation in the United States and, moreover, that the U.S. central bank, in cooperation with other parts of the government as needed, has sufficient policy instruments to ensure that any deflation that might occur would be both mild and brief. Of course, we must take care lest confidence become over-confidence. Deflationary episodes are rare, and generalization about them is difficult. Indeed, a recent Federal Reserve study of the Japanese experience concluded that the deflation there was almost entirely unexpected, by both foreign and Japanese observers alike (Ahearne et al., 2002). So, having said that deflation in the United States is highly unlikely, I would be imprudent to rule out the possibility altogether. Accordingly, I want to turn to a further exploration of the causes of deflation, its economic effects, and the policy instruments that can be deployed against it. Before going further I should say that my comments today 
 2 BIS Review 68/2002 reflect my own views only and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Deflation: its causes and effects Deflation is defined as a general decline in prices, with emphasis on the word “general.” At any given time, especially in a low-inflation economy like that of our recent experience, prices of some goods and services will be falling. Price declines in a specific sector may occur because productivity is rising and costs are falling more quickly in that sector than elsewhere or because the demand for the output of that sector is weak relative to the demand for other goods and services. Sector-specific price declines, uncomfortable as they may be for producers in that sector, are generally not a problem for the economy as a whole and do not constitute deflation. Deflation per se occurs only when price declines are so widespread that broad-based indexes of prices, such as the consumer price index, register ongoing declines. The sources of deflation are not a mystery. Deflation is in almost all cases a side effect of a collapse of aggregate demand--a drop in spending so severe that producers must cut prices on an ongoing basis in order to find buyers.1 Likewise, the economic effects of a deflationary episode, for the most part, are similar to those of any other sharp decline in aggregate spending--namely, recession, rising unemployment, and financial stress. However, a deflationary recession may differ in one respect from “normal” recessions in which the inflation rate is at least modestly positive: Deflation of sufficient magnitude may result in the nominal interest rate declining to zero or very close to zero.2 Once the nominal interest rate is at zero, no further downward adjustment in the rate can occur, since lenders generally will not accept a negative nominal interest rate when it is possible instead to hold cash. At this point, the nominal interest rate is said to have hit the “zero bound.” Deflation great enough to bring the nominal interest rate close to zero poses special problems for the economy and for policy. First, when the nominal interest rate has been reduced to zero, the real interest rate paid by borrowers equals the expected rate of deflation, however large that may be.3 To take what might seem like an extreme example (though in fact it occurred in the United States in the early 1930s), suppose that deflation is proceeding at a clip of 10 percent per year. Then someone who borrows for a year at a nominal interest rate of zero actually faces a 10 percent real cost of funds, as the loan must be repaid in dollars whose purchasing power is 10 percent greater than that of the dollars borrowed originally. In a period of sufficiently severe deflation, the real cost of borrowing becomes prohibitive. Capital investment, purchases of new homes, and other types of spending decline accordingly, worsening the economic downturn. Although deflation and the zero bound on nominal interest rates create a significant problem for those seeking to borrow, they impose an even greater burden on households and firms that had accumulated substantial debt before the onset of the deflation. This burden arises because, even if debtors are able to refinance their existing obligations at low nominal interest rates, with prices falling they must still repay the principal in dollars of increasing (perhaps rapidly increasing) real value. When William Jennings Bryan made his famous “cross of gold” speech in his 1896 presidential campaign, he was speaking on behalf of heavily mortgaged farmers whose debt burdens were growing ever larger in real terms, the result of a sustained deflation that followed America’s post-Civil-War return to the gold                                                       1 Conceivably, deflation could also be caused by a sudden, large expansion in aggregate supply arising, for example, from rapid gains in productivity and broadly declining costs. I don’t know of any unambiguous example of a supply-side deflation, although China in recent years is a possible case. Note that a supply-side deflation would be associated with an economic boom rather than a recession. 2 The nominal interest rate is the sum of the real interest rate and expected inflation. If expected inflation moves with actual inflation, and the real interest rate is not too variable, then the nominal interest rate declines when inflation declines--an effect known as the Fisher effect, after the early twentieth-century economist Irving Fisher. If the rate of deflation is equal to or greater than the real interest rate, the Fisher effect predicts that the nominal interest rate will equal zero. 3 The real interest rate equals the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate of inflation (see the previous footnote). The real interest rate measures the real (that is, inflation-adjusted) cost of borrowing or lending. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 3 standard.4 The financial distress of debtors can, in turn, increase the fragility of the nation’s financial system--for example, by leading to a rapid increase in the share of bank loans that are delinquent or in default. Japan in recent years has certainly faced the problem of “debt-deflation”--the deflation-induced, ever-increasing real value of debts. Closer to home, massive financial problems, including defaults, bankruptcies, and bank failures, were endemic in America’s worst encounter with deflation, in the years 1930-33--a period in which (as I mentioned) the U.S. price level fell about 10 percent per year. Beyond its adverse effects in financial markets and on borrowers, the zero bound on the nominal interest rate raises another concern--the limitation that it places on conventional monetary policy. Under normal conditions, the Fed and most other central banks implement policy by setting a target for a short-term interest rate--the overnight federal funds rate in the United States--and enforcing that target by buying and selling securities in open capital markets. When the short-term interest rate hits zero, the central bank can no longer ease policy by lowering its usual interest-rate target.5 Because central banks conventionally conduct monetary policy by manipulating the short-term nominal interest rate, some observers have concluded that when that key rate stands at or near zero, the central bank has “run out of ammunition”--that is, it no longer has the power to expand aggregate demand and hence economic activity. It is true that once the policy rate has been driven down to zero, a central bank can no longer use its traditional means of stimulating aggregate demand and thus will be operating in less familiar territory. The central bank’s inability to use its traditional methods may complicate the policymaking process and introduce uncertainty in the size and timing of the economy’s response to policy actions. Hence I agree that the situation is one to be avoided if possible. However, a principal message of my talk today is that a central bank whose accustomed policy rate has been forced down to zero has most definitely not run out of ammunition. As I will discuss, a central bank, either alone or in cooperation with other parts of the government, retains considerable power to expand aggregate demand and economic activity even when its accustomed policy rate is at zero. In the remainder of my talk, I will first discuss measures for preventing deflation--the preferable option if feasible. I will then turn to policy measures that the Fed and other government authorities can take if prevention efforts fail and deflation appears to be gaining a foothold in the economy. Preventing deflation As I have already emphasized, deflation is generally the result of low and falling aggregate demand. The basic prescription for preventing deflation is therefore straightforward, at least in principle: Use monetary and fiscal policy as needed to support aggregate spending, in a manner as nearly consistent as possible with full utilization of economic resources and low and stable inflation. In other words, the best way to get out of trouble is not to get into it in the first place. Beyond this commonsense injunction, however, there are several measures that the Fed (or any central bank) can take to reduce the risk of falling into deflation. First, the Fed should try to preserve a buffer zone for the inflation rate, that is, during normal times it should not try to push inflation down all the way to zero.6 Most central banks seem to understand the need for a buffer zone. For example, central banks with explicit inflation targets almost invariably set their target for inflation above zero, generally between 1 and 3 percent per year. Maintaining an inflation buffer zone reduces the risk that a large, unanticipated drop in aggregate demand will drive the economy far enough into deflationary territory to lower the nominal interest rate to zero. Of course,                                                       4 Throughout the latter part of the nineteenth century, a worldwide gold shortage was forcing down prices in all countries tied to the gold standard. Ironically, however, by the time that Bryan made his famous speech, a new cyanide-based method for extracting gold from ore had greatly increased world gold supplies, ending the deflationary pressure. 5 A rather different, but historically important, problem associated with the zero bound is the possibility that policymakers may mistakenly interpret the zero nominal interest rate as signaling conditions of “easy money.” The Federal Reserve apparently made this error in the 1930s. In fact, when prices are falling, the real interest rate may be high and monetary policy tight, despite a nominal interest rate at or near zero. 6 Several studies have concluded that the measured rate of inflation overstates the “true” rate of inflation, because of several biases in standard price indexes that are difficult to eliminate in practice. The upward bias in the measurement of true inflation is another reason to aim for a measured inflation rate above zero. 
 4 BIS Review 68/2002 this benefit of having a buffer zone for inflation must be weighed against the costs associated with allowing a higher inflation rate in normal times. Second, the Fed should take most seriously--as of course it does--its responsibility to ensure financial stability in the economy. Irving Fisher (1933) was perhaps the first economist to emphasize the potential connections between violent financial crises, which lead to “fire sales” of assets and falling asset prices, with general declines in aggregate demand and the price level. A healthy, well capitalized banking system and smoothly functioning capital markets are an important line of defense against deflationary shocks. The Fed should and does use its regulatory and supervisory powers to ensure that the financial system will remain resilient if financial conditions change rapidly. And at times of extreme threat to financial stability, the Federal Reserve stands ready to use the discount window and other tools to protect the financial system, as it did during the 1987 stock market crash and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Third, as suggested by a number of studies, when inflation is already low and the fundamentals of the economy suddenly deteriorate, the central bank should act more preemptively and more aggressively than usual in cutting rates (Orphanides and Wieland, 2000; Reifschneider and Williams, 2000; Ahearne et al., 2002). By moving decisively and early, the Fed may be able to prevent the economy from slipping into deflation, with the special problems that entails. As I have indicated, I believe that the combination of strong economic fundamentals and policymakers that are attentive to downside as well as upside risks to inflation make significant deflation in the United States in the foreseeable future quite unlikely. But suppose that, despite all precautions, deflation were to take hold in the U.S. economy and, moreover, that the Fed’s policy instrument--the federal funds rate--were to fall to zero. What then? In the remainder of my talk I will discuss some possible options for stopping a deflation once it has gotten under way. I should emphasize that my comments on this topic are necessarily speculative, as the modern Federal Reserve has never faced this situation nor has it pre-committed itself formally to any specific course of action should deflation arise. Furthermore, the specific responses the Fed would undertake would presumably depend on a number of factors, including its assessment of the whole range of risks to the economy and any complementary policies being undertaken by other parts of the U.S. government.7 Curing deflation Let me start with some general observations about monetary policy at the zero bound, sweeping under the rug for the moment some technical and operational issues. As I have mentioned, some observers have concluded that when the central bank’s policy rate falls to zero--its practical minimum--monetary policy loses its ability to further stimulate aggregate demand and the economy. At a broad conceptual level, and in my view in practice as well, this conclusion is clearly mistaken. Indeed, under a fiat (that is, paper) money system, a government (in practice, the central bank in cooperation with other agencies) should always be able to generate increased nominal spending and inflation, even when the short-term nominal interest rate is at zero. The conclusion that deflation is always reversible under a fiat money system follows from basic economic reasoning. A little parable may prove useful: Today an ounce of gold sells for $300, more or less. Now suppose that a modern alchemist solves his subject’s oldest problem by finding a way to produce unlimited amounts of new gold at essentially no cost. Moreover, his invention is widely publicized and scientifically verified, and he announces his intention to begin massive production of gold within days. What would happen to the price of gold? Presumably, the potentially unlimited supply of cheap gold would cause the market price of gold to plummet. Indeed, if the market for gold is to any degree efficient, the price of gold would collapse immediately after the announcement of the invention, before the alchemist had produced and marketed a single ounce of yellow metal. What has this got to do with monetary policy? Like gold, U.S. dollars have value only to the extent that they are strictly limited in supply. But the U.S. government has a technology, called a printing press (or, today, its electronic equivalent), that allows it to produce as many U.S. dollars as it wishes at                                                       7 See Clouse et al. (2000) for a more detailed discussion of monetary policy options when the nominal short-term interest rate is zero. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 5 essentially no cost. By increasing the number of U.S. dollars in circulation, or even by credibly threatening to do so, the U.S. government can also reduce the value of a dollar in terms of goods and services, which is equivalent to raising the prices in dollars of those goods and services. We conclude that, under a paper-money system, a determined government can always generate higher spending and hence positive inflation. Of course, the U.S. government is not going to print money and distribute it willy-nilly (although as we will see later, there are practical policies that approximate this behavior).8 Normally, money is injected into the economy through asset purchases by the Federal Reserve. To stimulate aggregate spending when short-term interest rates have reached zero, the Fed must expand the scale of its asset purchases or, possibly, expand the menu of assets that it buys. Alternatively, the Fed could find other ways of injecting money into the system--for example, by making low-interest-rate loans to banks or cooperating with the fiscal authorities. Each method of adding money to the economy has advantages and drawbacks, both technical and economic. One important concern in practice is that calibrating the economic effects of nonstandard means of injecting money may be difficult, given our relative lack of experience with such policies. Thus, as I have stressed already, prevention of deflation remains preferable to having to cure it. If we do fall into deflation, however, we can take comfort that the logic of the printing press example must assert itself, and sufficient injections of money will ultimately always reverse a deflation. So what then might the Fed do if its target interest rate, the overnight federal funds rate, fell to zero? One relatively straightforward extension of current procedures would be to try to stimulate spending by lowering rates further out along the Treasury term structure--that is, rates on government bonds of longer maturities.9 There are at least two ways of bringing down longer-term rates, which are complementary and could be employed separately or in combination. One approach, similar to an action taken in the past couple of years by the Bank of Japan, would be for the Fed to commit to holding the overnight rate at zero for some specified period. Because long-term interest rates represent averages of current and expected future short-term rates, plus a term premium, a commitment to keep short-term rates at zero for some time--if it were credible--would induce a decline in longer-term rates. A more direct method, which I personally prefer, would be for the Fed to begin announcing explicit ceilings for yields on longer-maturity Treasury debt (say, bonds maturing within the next two years). The Fed could enforce these interest-rate ceilings by committing to make unlimited purchases of securities up to two years from maturity at prices consistent with the targeted yields. If this program were successful, not only would yields on medium-term Treasury securities fall, but (because of links operating through expectations of future interest rates) yields on longer-term public and private debt (such as mortgages) would likely fall as well. Lower rates over the maturity spectrum of public and private securities should strengthen aggregate demand in the usual ways and thus help to end deflation. Of course, if operating in relatively short-dated Treasury debt proved insufficient, the Fed could also attempt to cap yields of Treasury securities at still longer maturities, say three to six years. Yet another option would be for the Fed to use its existing authority to operate in the markets for agency debt (for example, mortgage-backed securities issued by Ginnie Mae, the Government National Mortgage Association). Historical experience tends to support the proposition that a sufficiently determined Fed can peg or cap Treasury bond prices and yields at other than the shortest maturities. The most striking episode of bond-price pegging occurred during the years before the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of 1951.10 Prior to that agreement, which freed the Fed from its responsibility to fix yields on government debt, the Fed maintained a ceiling of 2-1/2 percent on long-term Treasury bonds for nearly a decade. Moreover, it simultaneously established a ceiling on the twelve-month Treasury certificate of between 7/8 percent to 1-1/4 percent and, during the first half of that period, a rate of 3/8 percent on the 90-day Treasury bill. The Fed was able to achieve these low interest rates despite a level of outstanding government debt (relative to GDP) significantly greater than we have today, as well as inflation rates                                                       8 Keynes, however, once semi-seriously proposed, as an anti-deflationary measure, that the government fill bottles with currency and bury them in mine shafts to be dug up by the public. 9 Because the term structure is normally upward sloping, especially during periods of economic weakness, longer-term rates could be significantly above zero even when the overnight rate is at the zero bound. 10 See Hetzel and Leach (2001) for a fascinating account of the events leading to the Accord. 
 6 BIS Review 68/2002 substantially more variable. At times, in order to enforce these low rates, the Fed had actually to purchase the bulk of outstanding 90-day bills. Interestingly, though, the Fed enforced the 2-1/2 percent ceiling on long-term bond yields for nearly a decade without ever holding a substantial share of long-maturity bonds outstanding.11 For example, the Fed held 7.0 percent of outstanding Treasury securities in 1945 and 9.2 percent in 1951 (the year of the Accord), almost entirely in the form of 90-day bills. For comparison, in 2001 the Fed held 9.7 percent of the stock of outstanding Treasury debt. To repeat, I suspect that operating on rates on longer-term Treasuries would provide sufficient leverage for the Fed to achieve its goals in most plausible scenarios. If lowering yields on longer-dated Treasury securities proved insufficient to restart spending, however, the Fed might next consider attempting to influence directly the yields on privately issued securities. Unlike some central banks, and barring changes to current law, the Fed is relatively restricted in its ability to buy private securities directly.12 However, the Fed does have broad powers to lend to the private sector indirectly via banks, through the discount window.13 Therefore a second policy option, complementary to operating in the markets for Treasury and agency debt, would be for the Fed to offer fixed-term loans to banks at low or zero interest, with a wide range of private assets (including, among others, corporate bonds, commercial paper, bank loans, and mortgages) deemed eligible as collateral.14 For example, the Fed might make 90-day or 180-day zero-interest loans to banks, taking corporate commercial paper of the same maturity as collateral. Pursued aggressively, such a program could significantly reduce liquidity and term premiums on the assets used as collateral. Reductions in these premiums would lower the cost of capital both to banks and the nonbank private sector, over and above the beneficial effect already conferred by lower interest rates on government securities.15 The Fed can inject money into the economy in still other ways. For example, the Fed has the authority to buy foreign government debt, as well as domestic government debt. Potentially, this class of assets offers huge scope for Fed operations, as the quantity of foreign assets eligible for purchase by the Fed is several times the stock of U.S. government debt.16 I need to tread carefully here. Because the economy is a complex and interconnected system, Fed purchases of the liabilities of foreign governments have the potential to affect a number of financial markets, including the market for foreign exchange. In the United States, the Department of the                                                       11 See Eichengreen and Garber (1991) and Toma (1992) for descriptions and analyses of the pre-Accord period. Both articles conclude that the Fed’s commitment to low inflation helped convince investors to hold long-term bonds at low rates in the 1940s and 1950s. (A similar dynamic would work in the Fed’s favor today.) The rate-pegging policy finally collapsed because the money creation associated with buying Treasury securities was generating inflationary pressures. Of course, in a deflationary situation, generating inflationary pressure is precisely what the policy is trying to accomplish.  An episode apparently less favorable to the view that the Fed can manipulate Treasury yields was the so-called Operation Twist of the 1960s, during which an attempt was made to raise short-term yields and lower long-term yields simultaneously by selling at the short end and buying at the long end. Academic opinion on the effectiveness of Operation Twist is divided. In any case, this episode was rather small in scale, did not involve explicit announcement of target rates, and occurred when interest rates were not close to zero. 12 The Fed is allowed to buy certain short-term private instruments, such as bankers’ acceptances, that are not much used today. It is also permitted to make IPC (individual, partnership, and corporation) loans directly to the private sector, but only under stringent criteria. This latter power has not been used since the Great Depression but could be invoked in an emergency deemed sufficiently serious by the Board of Governors. 13 Effective January 9, 2003, the discount window will be restructured into a so-called Lombard facility, from which well-capitalized banks will be able to borrow freely at a rate above the federal funds rate. These changes have no important bearing on the present discussion. 14 By statute, the Fed has considerable leeway to determine what assets to accept as collateral. 15 In carrying out normal discount window operations, the Fed absorbs virtually no credit risk because the borrowing bank remains responsible for repaying the discount window loan even if the issuer of the asset used as collateral defaults. Hence both the private issuer of the asset and the bank itself would have to fail nearly simultaneously for the Fed to take a loss. The fact that the Fed bears no credit risk places a limit on how far down the Fed can drive the cost of capital to private nonbank borrowers. For various reasons the Fed might well be reluctant to incur credit risk, as would happen if it bought assets directly from the private nonbank sector. However, should this additional measure become necessary, the Fed could of course always go to the Congress to ask for the requisite powers to buy private assets. The Fed also has emergency powers to make loans to the private sector (see footnote 12), which could be brought to bear if necessary. 16 The Fed has committed to the Congress that it will not use this power to “bail out” foreign governments; hence in practice it would purchase only highly rated foreign government debt. 
 BIS Review 68/2002 7 Treasury, not the Federal Reserve, is the lead agency for making international economic policy, including policy toward the dollar; and the Secretary of the Treasury has expressed the view that the determination of the value of the U.S. dollar should be left to free market forces. Moreover, since the United States is a large, relatively closed economy, manipulating the exchange value of the dollar would not be a particularly desirable way to fight domestic deflation, particularly given the range of other options available. Thus, I want to be absolutely clear that I am today neither forecasting nor recommending any attempt by U.S. policymakers to target the international value of the dollar. Although a policy of intervening to affect the exchange value of the dollar is nowhere on the horizon today, it’s worth noting that there have been times when exchange rate policy has been an effective weapon against deflation. A striking example from U.S. history is Franklin Roosevelt’s 40 percent devaluation of the dollar against gold in 1933-34, enforced by a program of gold purchases and domestic money creation. The devaluation and the rapid increase in money supply it permitted ended the U.S. deflation remarkably quickly. Indeed, consumer price inflation in the United States, year on year, went from –10.3 percent in 1932 to –5.1 percent in 1933 to 3.4 percent in 1934.17 The economy grew strongly, and by the way, 1934 was one of the best years of the century for the stock market. If nothing else, the episode illustrates that monetary actions can have powerful effects on the economy, even when the nominal interest rate is at or near zero, as was the case at the time of Roosevelt’s devaluation. Fiscal policy Each of the policy options I have discussed so far involves the Fed’s acting on its own. In practice, the effectiveness of anti-deflation policy could be significantly enhanced by cooperation between the monetary and fiscal authorities. A broad-based tax cut, for example, accommodated by a program of open-market purchases to alleviate any tendency for interest rates to increase, would almost certainly be an effective stimulant to consumption and hence to prices. Even if households decided not to increase consumption but instead re-balanced their portfolios by using their extra cash to acquire real and financial assets, the resulting increase in asset values would lower the cost of capital and improve the balance sheet positions of potential borrowers. A money-financed tax cut is essentially equivalent to Milton Friedman’s famous “helicopter drop” of money.18 Of course, in lieu of tax cuts or increases in transfers the government could increase spending on current goods and services or even acquire existing real or financial assets. If the Treasury issued debt to purchase private assets and the Fed then purchased an equal amount of Treasury debt with newly created money, the whole operation would be the economic equivalent of direct open-market operations in private assets. Japan The claim that deflation can be ended by sufficiently strong action has no doubt led you to wonder, if that is the case, why has Japan not ended its deflation? The Japanese situation is a complex one that I cannot fully discuss today. I will just make two brief, general points. First, as you know, Japan’s economy faces some significant barriers to growth besides deflation, including massive financial problems in the banking and corporate sectors and a large overhang of                                                       17 U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Washington, D.C.: 1976. 18 A tax cut financed by money creation is the equivalent of a bond-financed tax cut plus an open-market operation in bonds by the Fed, and so arguably no explicit coordination is needed. However, a pledge by the Fed to keep the Treasury’s borrowing costs low, as would be the case under my preferred alternative of fixing portions of the Treasury yield curve, might increase the willingness of the fiscal authorities to cut taxes.  Some have argued (on theoretical rather than empirical grounds) that a money-financed tax cut might not stimulate people to spend more because the public might fear that future tax increases will just “take back” the money they have received. Eggertson (2002) provides a theoretical analysis showing that, if government bonds are not indexed to inflation and certain other conditions apply, a money-financed tax cut will in fact raise spending and inflation. In brief, the reason is that people know that inflation erodes the real value of the government’s debt and, therefore, that it is in the interest of the government to create some inflation. Hence they will believe the government’s promise not to “take back” in future taxes the money distributed by means of the tax cut. 
 8 BIS Review 68/2002 government debt. Plausibly, private-sector financial problems have muted the effects of the monetary policies that have been tried in Japan, even as the heavy overhang of government debt has made Japanese policymakers more reluctant to use aggressive fiscal policies (for evidence see, for example, Posen, 1998). Fortunately, the U.S. economy does not share these problems, at least not to anything like the same degree, suggesting that anti-deflationary monetary and fiscal policies would be more potent here than they have been in Japan. Second, and more important, I believe that, when all is said and done, the failure to end deflation in Japan does not necessarily reflect any technical infeasibility of achieving that goal. Rather, it is a byproduct of a longstanding political debate about how best to address Japan’s overall economic problems. As the Japanese certainly realize, both restoring banks and corporations to solvency and implementing significant structural change are necessary for Japan’s long-run economic health. But in the short run, comprehensive economic reform will likely impose large costs on many, for example, in the form of unemployment or bankruptcy. As a natural result, politicians, economists, businesspeople, and the general public in Japan have sharply disagreed about competing proposals for reform. In the resulting political deadlock, strong policy actions are discouraged, and cooperation among policymakers is difficult to achieve. In short, Japan’s deflation problem is real and serious; but, in my view, political constraints, rather than a lack of policy instruments, explain why its deflation has persisted for as long as it has. Thus, I do not view the Japanese experience as evidence against the general conclusion that U.S. policymakers have the tools they need to prevent, and, if necessary, to cure a deflationary recession in the United States. Conclusion Sustained deflation can be highly destructive to a modern economy and should be strongly resisted. Fortunately, for the foreseeable future, the chances of a serious deflation in the United States appear remote indeed, in large part because of our economy’s underlying strengths but also because of the determination of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. policymakers to act preemptively against deflationary pressures. Moreover, as I have discussed today, a variety of policy responses are available should deflation appear to be taking hold. Because some of these alternative policy tools are relatively less familiar, they may raise practical problems of implementation and of calibration of their likely economic effects. For this reason, as I have emphasized, prevention of deflation is preferable to cure. Nevertheless, I hope to have persuaded you that the Federal Reserve and other economic policymakers would be far from helpless in the face of deflation, even should the federal funds rate hit its zero bound.19                                                       19 Some recent academic literature has warned of the possibility of an “uncontrolled deflationary spiral,” in which deflation feeds on itself and becomes inevitably more severe. To the best of my knowledge, none of these analyses consider feasible policies of the type that I have described today. I have argued here that these policies would eliminate the possibility of uncontrollable deflation. 
  Alan Bollard: The evolution of monetary policy Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Rotary Club of Wellington, Wellington, 25 November 2002. *      *      * As a new central bank governor, what I would like to do first is to give you an overall perspective on the role of the Reserve Bank in the New Zealand economy. I will then focus in on the role of monetary policy, and the implications of the new Policy Targets Agreement, and conclude by discussing how all this relates to achieving strong and sustained economic growth. Monetary policy formulation is a key function of the Reserve Bank, and it is often in the news. But the public attention obscures the other important tasks that the Reserve Bank undertakes. In the hubbub, the fact that monetary policy is part of a larger picture is often lost. The overall purpose of the Bank, as I see it, is to maintain the stability and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system. By the financial system, I mean the tools with which New Zealanders make transactions with each other and with the rest of the world. For very simple transactions, New Zealanders use notes and coins issued by the Reserve Bank. As you may know, nowadays our bank notes are made out of a polymer material that lasts much longer than in the days of paper money. This reduces the Reserve Bank’s costs. A side effect is that you’ll be seeing Dr Brash’s signature around the place for a while yet. Polymer notes are also very difficult to forge, because of their modern security features. That relates to our goal of an efficient financial system. A banknote that is easy to forge would make transactions difficult. Imagine having to check every twenty dollar note that came out of an EFTPOS machine. Of course, nowadays most significant payments are made using electronic means of transferring funds provided by the financial system. These are much cheaper, faster, and more secure than using large volumes of cash, particularly over long distances. The financial system also facilitates transactions that involve borrowing and lending. For example, individuals accumulate savings in our financial system, and invest those savings in assets like shares and term deposits. These funds then often find their way to New Zealand corporations and households, and are used to build New Zealand’s infrastructure. Typically, the individual investor receives a return on those investments, and is able later on to draw on the originally invested funds. We often take this system for granted, yet its smooth operation is essential to the wellbeing of the New Zealand economy. Banks play a key role in directing funds from individuals who wish to save to individuals who wish to borrow. The system works because people have confidence that funds deposited in banks will be available to them in the future, and that those funds will retain their buying power through time. The Reserve Bank has a central role in providing the regulatory framework for institutions that wish to describe themselves as “banks”. We register banks and we monitor their compliance with a comprehensive financial disclosure regime, required minimum capital adequacy ratios, and limits on the loans they can make to related parties. Our framework emphasises the role of bank directors in ensuring that banks effectively manage their risks, and on the role of the market in strengthening incentives for prudent management. This helps to promote a sound banking system. However, no banking system is without risk. Depositors still need to make their decisions carefully. Banks in New Zealand are not guaranteed by the Government or the Reserve Bank. There is no mandatory deposit insurance in New Zealand. I mentioned that an efficient financial system needs to have mechanisms by which money can be stored. This is so people can access their money when they need it, without their savings having eroded in value. Ensuring that money holds its value is the primary purpose of monetary policy. Indeed, by statute the Governor of the Reserve Bank is required to use monetary policy to keep the buying power of the New Zealand dollar broadly stable over time. Maintaining price stability does not mean keeping the price of each and every item the same. I am charged to maintain a stable overall level of prices, but individual prices are always changing. Some things, like computers, will probably continue to get cheaper, while some other things may continue to get more expensive, like Martinborough Pinot Noir. But the overall buying power of people’s savings is intended to remain broadly constant over time. In the current Policy Targets Agreement, I am specifically directed to attempt to achieve trend inflation outcomes between 1 and 3 percent. 
  Why is this the primary objective of monetary policy? Both economic theory and hard experience suggests that money holding its value over time helps an economy achieving its potential. Stable money is not a silver bullet, and on its own it can achieve little. However, stable money is one of the building blocks of a successful economy. Yes, I could use monetary policy to engineer temporary economic growth. By lowering interest rates I could encourage people to borrow and spend for a period. As firms saw increased demand for their products, they would seek to expand output to meet that demand. They would invest in new capital and hire more workers, and this would create even more demand in the economy. At first this would look like a virtuous circle, one which could lead to an extended period of economic growth. The problem is that lowering interest rates for a period can not create out of thin air the resources needed for growth. Firms that tried to employ more labour and buy more capital goods would quickly run into shortages. That would lead to cost increases for them, and also lead them to put prices up themselves. Eventually, rising costs would make people realise that their increased activity was not profitable. Then the boom would turn into a bust, and firms would be forced to retrench. Moreover, during the boom period, inflation would rise beyond the price stability target, and the perverse incentives that inflation causes in investment and planning decisions would begin to weaken the economy. To be sure, if I allowed inflation to climb to just 4 or 5 per cent, the effect would be more subtle than the damage done when we had much higher inflation back in the 1970s and 1980s. But 4 to 5 per cent inflation would add nothing to New Zealand’s enduring growth rate and it might well trigger a larger inflation problem later on. So I have committed to deliver a trend rate of inflation consistent with the 1 to 3 percent range in the new Policy Targets Agreement. In other words, I plan to deliver a similar inflation rate to the one New Zealand has seen over the last decade. But it is also important to make clear that monetary policy in the 21st century involves more than just fighting inflation. I’ve described our over-arching goal as maintaining the stability and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system. Thus, the Reserve Bank cannot afford to be, in the words of Bank of England Governor Eddie George, “Inflation nutters”. We are not permitted to cure the patient by killing it. Let me explain how flexible monetary policy avoids such a result. By its nature, the New Zealand economy is often hit by economic disturbances - for example, changing conditions in the world economy, El Nino and La Nina periods in the weather and fluctuations in the number of people moving to and from New Zealand. All these things can have major impacts on the New Zealand business cycle. They frequently also have consequences for the inflation rate, which are sometimes temporary in nature. One example likely to have only a temporary effect is a drought, which in the short term typically pushes up the prices of agricultural products like fruit and vegetables, generating inflation. However, increases in the prices of things like fresh fruit and vegetables generally would not be seen by the public as the start of a general inflation problem. So it is unlikely that the inflationary consequences of this sort of disturbance would be long lasting. That is particularly true because overall spending in the economy would be reduced by a drought, because farm incomes would be down. So if monetary policy is excessively focused on price stability and we attempt to stop inflation caused by temporary climatic shocks, we could end up exacerbating a recession. By contrast, a policy which looks through short-term inflation fluctuations is much less disruptive to the real economy, and, of course, that’s what we do. In addition, the challenges that central banks face change over time. Look at other developed countries over the past decade or so. Having successfully eliminated the inflation problems of the 1970s and 1980s, central banks could be forgiven for expecting the late 1990s and this decade to be an easy ride. In reality, many central banks face arguably greater challenges. For example, in Japan, despite interest rates falling to very near zero, weakness in private sector demand has persisted for the best part of a decade. Monetary policy in Japan has been unable to prevent deflation - that is, persistent falls in the overall level of prices. In the United States, the challenge has been running monetary policy in a period where many people believed the economy was moving through a technological revolution that would lead to a prolonged inflation-free, economic boom. That belief translated into very high asset prices, which helped to underpin a long period of strong consumption and investment spending. A key question policy makers faced was whether the asset prices represented fair value, or were a bubble that reflected a collective over-optimism about the future. 
  Finally, many central banks, including New Zealand, have struggled with the consequences of volatile nominal exchange rates. For example, both the Norwegian and British currencies have persisted at high levels which have been very tough for their exporters. There has been little scope for monetary policy in those countries to solve this problem without generating inflation that would be equally damaging to their exporters. In my view New Zealand is not about to undergo any of these scenarios. But the world that we face now has moved on from the world of 1989, when the Reserve Bank Act was passed into law. Maintaining price stability, as I am required to do, is different from firstly having to achieve it, as was required then. As you know, before becoming Governor, I signed a new Policy Targets Agreement with the Minister of Finance. This new agreement offers monetary policy a bit more scope to take evolving circumstances into account. In particular, the new agreement makes clearer that the Reserve Bank should maintain price stability in a flexible way that does not unnecessarily disrupt the real economy. The key change in the agreement is that the inflation target has been explicitly defined in terms of “future inflation ... on average over the medium term”. This implies that monetary policy should be forward-looking, and avoid getting distracted by transitory fluctuations in the inflation rate. In typical circumstances, we expect to give most attention to the outlook for CPI inflation over the next three or so years. If the outlook for trend inflation over that period is inconsistent with the target, we will adjust the Official Cash Rate. Our intention will be that projected inflation will be comfortably within the target range in the latter half of the three year period. This means we will set policy so that inflation will be within the target range in the medium term, unless we are hit by a major surprise event. If a major surprise does occur, we will explain what has caused inflation to be higher or lower than we wanted, and what steps we will take to ensure that it goes back comfortably within the band. I said the new Policy Targets Agreement offers us a little more flexibility, but it’s a flexibility that needs to be applied with care. The language of the new agreement makes clear that inflation should not be persistently outside either end of the band. This is because a sustained breach of the target could affect people’s perceptions of the trend inflation rate. That in itself could create a major inflationary problem. Thus, if one of the disturbances I mentioned earlier appeared to be strongly stimulating or weakening activity in New Zealand - suppose there was a sharp and persistent increase in tourist numbers for example - then the inflationary consequences might not be transitory. So, to keep inflation from rising and activity from going through a boom-bust cycle, monetary policy still needs to act to counteract the impact of these disturbances. And monetary policy still needs to respond particularly assertively when inflation is expected to be well outside the target range, or persistently outside it. But, at other times, if inflation is fairly stable and if we do not see pressures that have the potential to get out of control, then we have a mandate to be a little more flexible in our response. Is this increased flexibility justified? In other words, can we be a little more flexible than in the past without taking risks with price stability? I think we can, because keeping prices stable gets easier when prices have already been stable over an extended period. If inflation suddenly rises just after a period, like in the 1980s, when it was out of control, then there is a risk it will spark a self-fulfilling belief that it is out of control once again. In other words, if people believe that inflation is out of the bag, they may translate that into higher prices for the goods and services that they sell and higher demands for increased salaries and wages. By contrast, after inflation has been low and stable for a long time, people are much less likely to see price fluctuations as the start of something serious. Then a self-fulfilling prophecy is much less likely. Our freedom to be more flexible without compromising our price stability goal is thus a consequence of the hard-won achievement, during my predecessor’s tenure, of an environment where prices are expected to be broadly stable over time. In operating monetary policy, we will continue to carefully monitor people’s perceptions of the inflation outlook, to confirm that their confidence in price stability remains strong. What then of New Zealand’s current economic situation? As you know, the New Zealand economy has been going through a strong period, stimulated by international conditions favourable for us. We have had record tourist numbers, and excellent returns on dairy products and many other agricultural commodities. We’ve also had a very quick turnaround from a net outflow of migrants a year or so ago to a very strong net inflow, which has more than doubled New Zealand’s population growth. In combination, these factors have led to pressure on New Zealand’s resources. For example, many firms have seen strong demand for their products. This particularly applies to firms in sectors like 
  retailing and construction that supply New Zealand households. When they’ve tried to expand to meet that demand, employers have reported difficulty finding additional staff. This tends to create pressure on prices, and indeed, at present, inflation is near our price stability ceiling. But we run policy looking forward, and it has not been clear how long the effects of that offshore stimulus will last. In the United States the long expansion has given way to recession, and the recovery from that recession appears to have faltered. The Australian economy is experiencing the effects of a drought and, like us, deteriorating trading conditions offshore. Moreover, the New Zealand dollar has been rising off the low levels seen a year or so ago. For these reasons, over the next couple of years we expect economic growth in New Zealand to slow from its present high rate. We expect that this will constrain much of the inflationary pressure that we see now in some sectors of the economy. At the same time, the rising dollar means that New Zealand dollar prices of imports have fallen. As a result, we expect New Zealand’s overall inflation rate to slow quite quickly over the next year. In terms of monetary policy, in this situation I see good grounds for waiting and seeing how things evolve. Interest rates are at a level in New Zealand where, in our view, they are not significantly stimulating or restraining the economy. If the world economy picks up and the New Zealand expansion continues, we will probably need more contractionary policy settings during 2003. On the other hand, further deterioration offshore and signs that it is catching up with New Zealand could require stimulatory monetary policy settings. So we are keeping our options open. Finally, let’s go back to the broader context for the Reserve Bank’s task. I have described how the Bank is focused on helping deliver a stable and efficient financial system to the New Zealand public, and how low and stable inflation is an important part of that. I have suggested that doing this contributes to sustainable and balanced economic development. I’ve also said that price stability is a contribution but not a solution to the economic challenge facing New Zealand. How do I see this challenge? Recall that New Zealand’s standard of living, as measured by GDP per capita, barely improved at all between 1975 and the early 1990s. It is only in the last decade or so that the New Zealand economy has managed to achieve a sustained lift in growth. The projections I released last week suggest that this growth will continue, but not at a pace sufficient to close the gap that has developed between our GDP per capita and the OECD average. To do that, over the next 20 years our rate of growth in GDP per capita would have to rise from 2.2 per cent over the last decade to almost 3 per cent over the following twenty years. That’s presuming the rest of the OECD grows at the same rate as in the last decade. Achieving this sort of productivity improvement is a worthy challenge. It is only by meeting that challenge that we will get more of the things we need: greater after tax income, improving standards of health care, education, and environmental protection, and faster and faster boats to keep defending the America’s Cup. I hope I have made clear today that the Reserve Bank will be working to achieve continued price stability without standing in the way of sustainable economic growth. Indeed, I think sound, flexible monetary policy contributes to the strong, balanced economic growth that, we all agree, New Zealand needs. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 1 Bank of Japan’s November report of recent economic and financial developments1 Bank of Japan, 20 November 2002 *      *      * The Bank’s view2 Japan’s economy has stabilized as a whole, but there is greater uncertainty toward recovery. With regard to final demand, while the decline in business fixed investment has almost come to a halt, private consumption continues to be weak. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish and public investment is declining. While signs of recovery are still not observed in domestic demand, exports are losing their momentum. The completion of the cutbacks in inventory stocks still underpins the increase in industrial production, but the pace of increase has become slower as exports are not rising anymore. As for the employment situation, the overtime hours worked continue to increase and the number of employees, which widely covers various non-regular employees such as temporary workers, appears to have stopped declining. However, as firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses, household income continues to decrease noticeably due to, among other factors, an ongoing decline in wages. Thus, the employment and income situation of households overall remains severe. Turning to the economic outlook, a widely shared prospect for overseas economies throughout next year is that they will follow a gradual recovery path. However, an increasing number of economic indicators are softening in some countries, particularly in the United States. Based on this development, the recovery in overseas economies is likely to be anemic at least for the time being. Therefore, exports and industrial production are expected to be more or less unchanged for the immediate future. With respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend and private consumption is likely to remain weak for some time due to the severe employment and income situation. Business fixed investment is expected to be supported by the improvement in corporate profits to date, but a distinct recovery is unlikely for the time being due to, among other things, greater uncertainty regarding overseas economies. Overall, assuming that overseas economies will recover next year even at a moderate pace, the increase in exports and production will resume, making the foundations of Japan’s economic recovery gradually firmer. However, the economy is unlikely to show clear signs of recovery for some time, since exports and production are expected to be virtually unchanged for the time being while restraining forces such as excessive labor input and debt persist. Furthermore, the uncertainty regarding the outlook for the U.S. and other overseas economies, including geopolitical factors and their effects on the economies, is becoming greater. On the domestic side, stock prices have fallen to a considerably low level. Hence, the progress in the disposal of non-performing loans of financial institutions and its effects on stock prices, corporate finance, and the economy, should be carefully monitored. On the price front, import prices are starting to turn up reflecting the rise in oil prices during the summer and into the fall, and the depreciation of the yen. Domestic wholesale prices are virtually level since the rise in import prices and the improvement in the balance of supply and demand in the materials industries have almost been offset by the decline in machinery prices and electricity charges. However, consumer prices remain on a gradual downtrend and corporate services prices continue to decline.                                                       1 This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 18 and 19, 2002. 2 The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 18 and 19 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
 2 BIS Review 67/2002 Looking at the conditions influencing price developments, import prices are projected to continue firming up for the time being as the effects from the rise in oil prices will remain. However, the overall supply-demand condition is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on prices for a while amid persistently weak domestic demand, although the completion of inventory adjustment and the rise in capacity utilization rates will support prices to some degree. Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain prices. Under these circumstances, domestic wholesale prices are expected to remain virtually level for a while. Consumer prices are expected to stay on a declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. While the slower growth in imports of consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline in prices, especially for services prices. As for the financial market, the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan is recently moving at around 17-18 trillion yen, as the Bank provides further ample liquidity following the guideline for money market operations decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 30. Under these circumstances, in the short-term money markets, the overnight call rate continues to move at very close to zero percent. Meanwhile, TB and FB rates, which declined temporarily after the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 30, have inched up since mid-November as banks have held off buying TB and FB in response to a drop in bank stock prices. Yields on long-term government bonds declined below 1.0 percent for the first time since November 1998 as banks and institutional investors increased investment in bonds, and are moving around 1.0 percent recently. Yield spreads between private bonds (bank bonds and corporate bonds) and government bonds remain virtually unchanged. Meanwhile, stock prices declined and are recently moving around 8,000-8,500 yen due to rising uncertainty about the economic outlook. In the foreign exchange market, the U.S. dollar is weakening again on the whole reflecting the strained situation in the Middle East and the deterioration in the U.S. economic indicators. The yen is currently being traded in the range of 119-122 yen to the U.S. dollar. With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming more cautious in extending loans to firms with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming slightly more severe. In the corporate bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with high credit ratings is accommodative, but the environment for firms with low credit ratings is severe. Credit demand in the private sector continues to follow a downtrend mainly because firms’ business fixed investment remains sluggish while continuously reducing their debts. Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. Growth rates of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP issued are on a declining trend and the amount outstanding dropped slightly below the previous year’s level in October. Meanwhile, according to business surveys, the financial position of firms, particularly that of small firms, remains severe. The monetary base exhibits a high year-on-year growth rate of around 20 percent. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock is around 3.0-3.5 percent. Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. Against the above background, the financial developments are summarized as follows. Money market conditions as a whole continues to be extremely easy partly due to the additional monetary easing by the Bank. Long-term interest rates are low. The money stock and the monetary base maintain high growth rates relative to that of the economic activity as a whole. However, stock prices remain unstable. In corporate finance, the fund-raising environment of firms with low credit risks is accommodative on the whole, but with regard to firms with high credit risks, the stance of investors remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Under these circumstances, the government released the “Comprehensive Measures to Accelerate Reforms” which includes policies to accelerate the disposal of non-performing loans. Including the effects arising from these measures, developments in the financial and capital markets including stock prices, the behavior of financial institutions, and the situation of corporate finance require closer monitoring. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 1 Klaus Liebscher: International institutions and financial market stability Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Centre for the Study of International Institutions (CSI) Conference 2002, Innsbruck University, Innsbruck, 22 November 2002. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, today’s liberalized and universal character of financial markets and capital flows has made it impossible for even the strongest national states to handle the governance of global finance on their own. Thus, various networks of intergovernmental consultation and cooperation have developed in parallel with the accelerated globalization of finance during recent decades. Ensuring financial market stability can, therefore, be regarded as a global public good. This rests on the simple observation that banks and other financial institutions operate in many different jurisdictions very often without due cognizance of the consequences they may create. This requires that international agreements, cooperation and coordination ensure international public control, so that negative externalities such as systemic risk or the possible negative impact on economic growth due to financial instability are prevented as far as possible. In addition, international cooperation helps to ensure that a regulatory “level playing-field” exists such that the possibility of regulatory arbitrage is avoided. International financial integration and its governance thus implies that central banks and other national authorities have to develop policies that foster financial stability not only on a domestic but also on an international level. Let me give you an example to underline my point by referring to the tragic events of 9/11. Without cooperation between the Eurosystem of Central Banks, the Federal Reserve and other international central banks, we may, indeed, have had a very negative impact upon the international financial system and even worse repercussions on global growth. In the past decades, an impressing number of policy measures and initiatives have been made on the European and the international level to govern issues of financial market stability and - in a broader context - of economic policy. On an international level we witnessed efforts to achieve global convergence in what are considered “good economic policy measures”; on a European level Monetary Union represents a very successful model of inter alia instilling stability into the financial system; hard work has been put into forward-looking measures to prevent crisis in the financial system like Basle II or the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs). Let me outline a few of these international efforts in coordination and cooperation in more detail to you. Convergence of economic policy measures The meetings of international economic policy makers in the various institutions and fora have produced a remarkable convergence of ideas concerning domestic economic management. The general approach to economic management within developing, emerging, and transition economies as well as within the industrial world can perhaps be summed up as “macro-economic stability and supply-side flexibility”. These objectives pertaining to both monetary and fiscal policy were agreed to at the 1994 Annual Meeting of the IMF in Madrid. The emphasis since then is on price stability as the immediate goal of macro-economic policy. This is not simply an end in itself but measures the balance between aggregate demand and underlying supply in the economy as a whole. In effect the aim of monetary policy in particular is to moderate, rather than aggravate, the economic cycle, and so to provide the basis for sustainable growth at around the underlying rate of potential growth. In relation to fiscal policy, the emphasis is to limit public sector borrowing, and the outstanding level of public sector debt, to levels that can be sustained into the medium and longer term without the need for increasing taxes or the imposition of rising real interest rates. You will have noticed that these principles, already formalized before the Madrid Declaration, are also the ones underlying European Monetary Union. This aim of macro-economic stability brings into sharper focus the structural, supply side, of the economy. Here, too, there has been a strengthening international presumption in favor of open markets and free competition - both domestically and internationally - with a continuing strong presumption against predatory trade or the use of competitive devaluation. The justification is that undistorted competition contributes to potential global economic growth through increased efficiency 
 2 BIS Review 67/2002 and the more effective allocation of productive resources. Faster growth in turn provides a more favorable context for addressing social concerns, including the issue of poverty. Monetary Union: the European dimension With the introduction of the euro, the economic weight of the single market has risen to a level matching that of the USA. And the single currency has gained an important international dimension: The euro segment of the global money market has risen to about 25%. In the bond market, too, the euro plays a crucial role in fostering a deeper and more liquid market. The introduction of the euro paved the way for issuers to access a broader base of investors. Investors too have gained access to a wider spectrum of investment opportunities. The euro’s share in net issuance currently amounts to 39%. Regarding its use as an official reserve currency, the euro has already attained the same weight as its predecessors. Within the euro area, Monetary Union has kept member countries from being exposed to harmful intra-European exchange rate tensions of the type that many countries used to suffer when external shocks occurred. It has become quite obvious that Austria’s inclusion in the stability-oriented Economic and Monetary Union has protected our country from negative shocks much more adequately than was possible under past regimes. Moreover, the almost four years of EMU bear impressive testimony to the fact that the stability-oriented interplay between monetary and fiscal policy provides a solid foundation which was well suited to weathering the economic policy challenges of this period. With the euro the EU successfully supplies an important international public good in the form of a stability anchor with deep and attractive financial markets. This is especially relevant with a view to enlargement of the EU. European integration will only be truly successful if it reaches out to the whole of Europe. If the EU manages the enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to the Eurosystem´s goal to guarantee stability for the whole euro area. Such a mutual improvement is desirable in a very broad sense: political stability, financial market stability, macroeconomic and - in the particular interest of the Eurosystem - price stability. Already today, the euro is a key currency in Central and Eastern Europe. In most of the CEECs’ monetary policy strategies, exchange rates play a vital role and, wherever they are not a formal or informal intermediate target, they are at least a key monetary policy indicator. It is the euro upon which the CEECs’ currencies are oriented, or to which they are formally linked. Thus, EMU and the euro are already an anchor for stability for CEECs. Moreover, enlargement will thus extend the zone of stability in Europe, strengthen Europe’s international competitive position and will contribute substantially to prosperity, security and peace in the long term. Integration of financial services markets in the EU Beyond Monetary Union a huge amount of work has been undertaken in the EU to improve the functioning of the single market and the international financial system. By abolishing national boundaries and harmonizing different legislations, European integration has fostered the development of a single financial market in Europe. But the current regulatory and supervisory framework still strongly relies on national responsibilities. The EU’s Brouwer Report found that there is a need to enhance arrangements for cross-border and cross-sectional co-operation, to improve the alignment of supervisory practices and to reinforce the collaboration between supervisory and central banking functions. The EU’s regulatory roadmap to integration is the Financial Services Action Plan. It contains more than 40 legislative and non-legislative measures. The deadline agreed by the European Council for implementing the entire Plan is 2005, with an earlier deadline of 2003 for the securities and risk capital markets. Moreover, considerable progress has been made in recent attempts to implement the Lamfalussy recommendations in the field of security market regulation. Consistent and efficient implementation of regulatory rules has been promoted by new institutional arrangements delegating rule-making powers to a committee or regulators whereas implementation at the national level is undertaken through a committee of supervisors. These two examples illustrate that initiatives are under way and debate is ongoing. However, not all of the recommendations of the Brouwer Report have been implemented and many other issues still need further investigation and debate. But developments show that we are heading in the right direction. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 3 The increasing integration of the European financial markets is only one further example that economic policy has become a subject of common interest in the European Union. It also requires putting financial stability in an EU-wide perspective alongside the still important national point of view. Accordingly, enhanced cooperation in the field of financial supervision, both nationally and between EMU Member States, can minimize the risks involved in deepening of financial market integration so that its indisputable advantages can take effect. At the national level we have been observing various proposals to reorganize and restructure financial markets supervision. In Austria, the legal foundations as well as the practice of supervision have been evolving rapidly to respond to developments in the financial sector, to implement the EU financial sector directives, and to introduce ongoing improvements in international best practice. The most visible change in supervision and regulation has been the establishment of a single financial supervisory agency. Since April 1st, 2002, the Financial Market Authority performs banking, securities, insurance and pension fund supervision. The Financial Market Authority is autonomous. It operates independently and is not bound by any instructions. The restructuring was aimed at establishing a high-quality, effective and at the same time cost-efficient supervisory regime. Given the Oesterreichische Nationalbank’s far-reaching operational integration in banking and financial market supervision, the Austrian central bank can fulfill its manifold macroprudential tasks also within the Eurosystem and can thus contribute to safeguarding financial stability. The close involvement of central banks in the supervisory process has various advantages. It gives the central bank a much clearer picture of the economic reality that is behind the numbers visible in the books of banks. This information facilitates its role in safeguarding financial stability and creates a special advantage in spotting early warning indicators of financial crises and potential situations of economy-wide financial distress. Moreover, as a part of the Eurosystem central banks are integrated in an already functioning network of national and supranational institutions. Such a network is of decisive importance in the light of the structural change in European financial markets that already has taken place or is likely to come in the near future. International financial system: transparency and crisis prevention The integration of international financial markets is not a new phenomenon. What is unprecedented is the short-term nature, the high turnover and the many financial market agents. This evolution has been actively encouraged by public policymakers and academics, alike. In addition to an improved international allocation of capital, internationally integrated markets are thought to provide a welcome discipline to domestic policymakers. The stability of financial market rests, in essence, on three pillars: institutions, market participants and infrastructure. A financial system is only as strong as its governing practices, financial soundness of its institutions, and efficiency of its market infrastructure. Installing and using sound governance practices is a shared responsibility of the market participants and the regulatory agencies. Indeed, recent experiences with systemic or significant financial sector crises have underlined the importance of good governance on the part of regulatory agencies. In nearly all financial crises of the past decade - Venezuela, Mexico, East Asia, Russia, Ecuador and Turkey - political interference in the regulatory and supervisory process, weak regulations, inefficient supervision and lack of public sector accountability and transparency, have been identified as contributing factors to the depth and size of the systemic crises. Many of the major initiatives the international community had been taking, occured in reaction to financial crises in the 1990s. Based on this, policy-makers have been trying to become more forward-looking to avoid potential difficulties. In particular, three areas of concern have emerged: First, many of the international fora are issuing internationally applicable “Core Principles” or “Standards of Best Practice”. These should encourage improved practices in the economic and financial policies not only of emerging markets but industrial countries alike. Some noteworthy progress has been made in this area and many initiatives are emanating from the IMF. The main vehicle for evaluating regulatory governance practices in the overall context of macroeconomic stability is the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). Aimed at identifying the risks, vulnerabilities, and development needs in the financial system, one of the main principles underlying the FSAP is that quality and efficacy of regulatory governance impacts 
 4 BIS Review 67/2002 on the overall governance practices within a financial system, and hence on its functioning and stability. The FSAP provides an assessment framework that offers “peer review” of national financial systems, and a common platform for policy advice and technical assistance from the Bank and the Fund. The main instrument through which regulatory governance practices are assessed under the FSAP is through the assessment of the key international financial sector standards. Since the inception of the FSAP in 1999, public sector governance issues have been assessed in nearly 45 countries, through over 200 standards assessments. Given the positive impact FSAPs have made and the changes within Austrian supervisory structures with the establishment of the Financial Market Authority (FMA), the Austrian authorities decided to apply for such an assessment themselves. Second, transparency on the part of all economic agents is deemed to improve the functioning of international markets and lead to greater financial stability. Much has been said, and, more importantly, achieved in the area of transparency in recent years. Indeed, there has been an explosion of codes and standards on different aspects of economic and financial policy. So much so, that some countries are claiming that the process needs to slow down. We should realize that standards and codes cannot be universal to a certain extent since some of them may not be appropriate for countries at a certain stage of development. Therefore, standards and codes should reflect different stages of development. The IMF’s initiative on Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs) is a welcome step in this direction. I deem it critical that monitoring of the observance of standards and codes be fully integrated into IMF surveillance under Article IV. Third, and most important is how to turn principles of good behavior into good practice. The international fora and institutions that I have mentioned do not have the power to enforce those principles. Only the IMF has some leverage in monitoring compliance given its legitimacy and the Article IV consultation process but has only real bite in program countries. Peer pressure, internationally accepted codes, and market discipline seem viable ways forward. Yet in the end, enforcement and compliance is still at the discretion of nation states. International institutions and fora geared towards financial market stability The institutional architecture of the current governance of global finance is both multilayered and dispersed. It involves complex networks of state, suprastate, substate, and private-sector actors. The challenge ahead is certainly to coordinate this network more efficiently. Let me give you a few examples. The IMF due to its near universal membership of currently 184 countries is probably the only true international organization with legitimacy. Its mandate encompasses the promotion of macroeconomic stability and sustained noninflationary growth among its members. The Fund contributes to good governance through its policy advice, technical assistance, and program conditionality. It does so within its areas of expertise which covers the effective and transparent management of public resources, and the maintenance of a stable, economic, regulatory and legal environment.The Fund took a leading role in the management of the Third World debt crisis in the 1980s and the emerging market financial crises of the 1990s. Since 1996 the IMF has promoted data standards - the SDDS - that aim to make information on and for financial markets more reliable and accessible. Recently the Fund’s International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) has served as an important forum for intergovernmental consultations regarding the international financial architecture, drawing upon discussions in the FSF and the G20. At present, the IMFC is for example engaged in drawing up the fundaments for a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism (SDRM) which should allow for a better resolution of external sovereign debt crises. Central bank governors of the Group of Ten (G10) advanced industrial countries have met regularly at Basle at the BIS since 1962 to discuss monetary and financial matters of mutual concern. Unfortunately Austria is not a direct member of this group, but we surely have profited from their initiatives. Most important for international financial governance has been the Group of Seven (G7) summits, held annually since 1975. From time to time, G7 leaders have given orientation for important policy initiatives. The G10 and the G7 have from time to time set up working parties to explore specific issues related to global finance. The best-known example is the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), 
 BIS Review 67/2002 5 formed as a standing group of the G10 in 1975. Most significantly, the BCBS has formulated the Basle Capital Accord, a framework first issued in 1988 for assessing the capital position of international banks, which is now under revision (Basle II), and Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, published in 1997. On a more specific problem, the G7 created the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in 1989 to combat drug-related money laundering and more recently has been involved in the combat against the financing of terrorism. After the Asian and Russian financial crises, the G7 promoted the establishment of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which first convened in April 1999. The forum’s mandate was an important step towards better identification of vulnerabilities that affect the international financial system and for improvement of coordination and information exchange among the big authorities responsible for financial stability. While we greatly welcome the work of this important committee, we are not completely satisfied with the trend of moving important discussions out of the main International Financial Institutions, where all countries are represented, into special fora with a selective membership. Private sector initiatives The financial sector presents an outstanding example of another major trend in contemporary governance, namely, the turn to nonofficial mechanisms of regulation. A number of national securities and exchange commissions have lain in the private sector for some time, of course, and IOSCO also includes over fifty securities exchanges and dealers associations as Affiliate Members. Meanwhile several industry associations have promoted the international harmonization of standards and devised a number of self-regulatory instruments for bond and equity business in global financial markets. These bodies include the International Council of Securities Associations (ICSA), the International Federation of Stock Exchanges (FIBV), the International Primary Market Association (IPMA), and the International Securities Market Association (ISMA). The ISMA indeed describes its task as ‘regulation by the market, for the market’. In addition, private bond-rating agencies like Moody’s Investors Service and Standard & Poor’s - and the financial markets whose sentiments they reflect - have come to exercise considerable disciplining authority over many national governments. Private industry plays an important role as a disciplining device in the specific area of conduct of business in securities markets. This is probably due to the ability shown by the securities industry, until recently, to discipline itself effectively and in line with public objectives. However, this ability is being put into question by the increasing complexity of financial markets and instruments, as the Enron case shows. Indeed, a tendency to reinforce public authorities’ vis-à-vis self-regulatory organisations can be observed in Anglo-Saxon countries, in response to this concern. Private-sector inputs to the governance of global finance also figure outside the securities area. For example, nongovernmental groups like the Group of Thirty or the Derivatives Policy Group have taken a lead in developing rules for derivatives markets. Two other private-sector bodies, the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) and the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), have devised the main accountancy and auditing norms currently in use for global business. However, this past year has brought widespread questioning of the quality and integrity of the information available to markets - and the behavior of some corporate executives. Both the private as well as the public sector have a stake in the healthy functioning of financial markets. Therefore, we have to foster a new public/private partnership in the governance of financial markets. Moreover, we also need international public partnerships to avoid arbitrage of ‘standards’. Conclusion First, standard-setters have, by-and-large, passed the initial stage of establishing continuity and have created mutual recognition and trust among their members. There are, however, clear differences in the level of ambition across the standard-setters. Second, whenever market forces fail to remove relevant obstacles to integration, public authorities have to intervene either to remove the obstacles, or to act as a catalyst to complete the integration process. Moreover, they have to act to provide genuine public goods. Hence, public agents need to have a broad view of the necessary policies in support of integration, focus not just on lifting the 
 6 BIS Review 67/2002 remaining regulatory obstacles, but also on the cooperative arrangements among private agents and maintaining effective competition to the benefit of market participants. Third, the achievement of a public good can refer to the national jurisdiction of the public authorities, while the overall global optimum may not be achieved. Thus, national authorities have to take into account the externalities of their actions on an international level. Fourth, the euro and the European integration process have greatly enhanced our capacity to absorb shocks and to react quickly in situations of financial turmoil. There are still tasks and room for improvement ahead us, but we have done a lot in recent years to constantly optimize our financial infrastructure. On this way, we have kept our own European style and still have worked successfully on gaining a strong voice in international fora, which are proliferating all around in the process of constant buildup of an international financial governance system. A great deal of progress has already been made in strengthening the central pillars of the international financial system: institutions, markets and infrastructure. What is also clear is that further progress remains to be made in implementing internationally many practices already recognized as being desirable. Many years of effort, both at the domestic and at international levels, will be required on the part of central bankers as well as many others to ensure that the international financial system demonstrates the proper balance between efficiency and stability. 
 BIS Review 67/2002 1 Alan Greenspan: International financial risk management Speech by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, DC, 19 November 2002. *      *      * Today I would like to share with you some of the evolving international financial issues that have so engaged us at the Federal Reserve over the past year. I, particularly, have been focusing on innovations in the management of risk and some of the implications of those innovations for our global economic and financial system. Fostered by a lowering of trade barriers, cross-border exchange of goods and services over the past half century has increased far faster than world gross domestic product. But what is even more remarkable is how large the scale of cross-border finance has become, relative to the value of the trade that it finances. To be sure, much global finance reflects growing investment portfolios, some doubtless with a speculative component. But, at bottom, such finance is a central element of the systems that support the efficient international movement of goods and services. We strongly suspect, though we do not know for sure, that the accelerating expansion of global finance may be indispensable to the continued rapid growth of world trade in goods and services. It appears increasingly evident that many forms and layers of financial intermediation will be required if we are to capture the full benefit of our advances in technology and trade. Indeed, the seemingly outsized implicit compensation for risk associated with many investments worldwide suggests the potential for a far larger world financial system than currently exists. Among most of the large world trading economies the bias against investment in foreign assets is apparent in the still-high correlation between domestic savings and domestic investment. In decades past, risk was perceived to increase with distance. A paucity of information and surplus of regulation discouraged the cross-border movement of funds. Even today, with regulatory bars lowered and information and access much enhanced, bias against cross-border investment remains high. However, the continuous probing for enhanced returns, unless inhibited by governments, seems poised to create a much larger global presence of financial linkages in all our economies. As in all aspects of life, expansion of one’s activities beyond previously explored territory involves taking risks. And risk by its nature has carried, and always will carry with it, the possibility of adverse outcomes. Accordingly, for globalization to continue to foster expanding living standards, risk must be managed ever more effectively as the century unfolds. The development of our paradigms for containing risk has emphasized dispersion of risk to those willing, and presumably able, to bear it. If risk is properly dispersed, shocks to the overall economic system will be better absorbed and less likely to create cascading failures that could threaten financial stability. The broad success of that paradigm seemed to be most evident in the United States over the past two and one-half years. Despite the draining impact of a loss of $8 trillion of stock market wealth, a sharp contraction in capital investment and, of course, the tragic events of September 11, 2001, our economy is still growing. Importantly, despite significant losses, no major U.S. financial institution has been driven to default. Similar observations pertain to much of the rest of the world but to a somewhat lesser extent than to the United States. These episodes suggest a marked increase over the past two or three decades in the ability of modern economies to absorb unanticipated shocks. To be sure, the recent weakened pace of world economic activity has raised concerns that the full cycle of the past decade has yet to be definitively concluded. But the already clearly evident increased resiliency arguably supports the view that the world economy already has become more flexible irrespective of how events unfold in the weeks and months ahead. This favorable turn of events has doubtless been materially assisted by the recent financial innovations that have afforded lenders the opportunity to become considerably more diversified and borrowers to become far less dependent on specific institutions or markets for funds. The wide-ranging development of markets in securitized bank loans, credit card receivables, and commercial and residential mortgages has been a major contributor to the dispersion of risk in recent decades both domestically and internationally. These markets have tailored the risks associated with such assets to the preferences of a broader spectrum of investors. 
 2 BIS Review 67/2002 Especially important in the United States have been the flexibility and the size of the secondary mortgage market. Since early 2000, this market has facilitated the large debt-financed extraction of home equity that, in turn, has been so critical in supporting consumer outlays in the United States throughout the recent period of cyclical stress. This market’s flexibility has been particularly enhanced by extensive use of interest rate swaps and options to hedge maturity mismatches and prepayment risk. Financial derivatives, more generally, have grown at a phenomenal pace over the past fifteen years. Conceptual advances in pricing options and other complex financial products, along with improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs of, and expanded the opportunities for, hedging risks that were not readily deflected in earlier decades. Moreover, the counterparty credit risk associated with the use of derivative instruments has been mitigated by legally enforceable netting and through the growing use of collateral agreements. These increasingly complex financial instruments have especially contributed, particularly over the past couple of stressful years, to the development of a far more flexible, efficient, and resilient financial system than existed just a quarter-century ago. Greater resilience has been evident in many segments of the financial markets. One prominent example is the response of financial markets to a burgeoning and then deflating telecommunications sector. Worldwide borrowing by telecommunications firms in all currencies amounted to more than the equivalent of one trillion U.S. dollars during the years 1998 to 2001. The financing of the massive expansion of fiber-optic networks and heavy investments in third-generation mobile-phone licenses by European firms strained debt markets. At the time, the financing of these investments was widely seen as prudent because the telecommunication borrowers had very high valuations in equity markets, which could facilitate a stock issuance, if needed, to take down bank loans and other debt. In the event, of course, prices of telecommunication stocks collapsed, and many firms went bankrupt. In decades past, such a sequence would have been a recipe for creating severe distress in the wider financial system. However, compared with decades past, banks now have significantly more capital with which to absorb shocks, and they employ improved systems for managing credit risk. In conjunction with this improvement, both as cause and effect, banks have more tools at their disposal with which to transfer credit risk and, in so doing, to disperse credit risk more broadly through the financial system. Some of these tools, such as loan syndications, loan sales, and pooled asset securitizations, are relatively straightforward and transparent. More recently, instruments that are more complex and less transparent--such as credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and credit-linked notes--have been developed and their use has grown very rapidly in recent years. The result? Improved credit-risk management together with more and better risk-management tools appear to have significantly reduced loan concentrations in telecommunications and, indeed, other areas and the associated stress on banks and other financial institutions. More generally, such instruments appear to have effectively spread losses from defaults by Enron, Global Crossing, Railtrack, WorldCom, Swissair, and sovereign Argentinian credits over the past year to a wider set of banks than might previously have been the case in the past, and from banks, which have largely short-term leverage, to insurance firms, pension funds, or others with diffuse long-term liabilities or no liabilities at all. Many sellers of risk protection, as one might presume, have experienced large losses, but because of significant capital, they were able to avoid the widespread defaults of earlier periods of stress. It is noteworthy that payouts in the still relatively small but rapidly growing market in credit derivatives have been proceeding smoothly for the most part. Obviously, this market is still too new to have been tested in a widespread down-cycle for credit, but, to date, it appears to have functioned well. The market for credit derivatives has grown in prominence not only because of its ability to disperse risk but also because of the information it contributes to enhanced risk management by banks and other financial intermediaries. Credit default swaps, for example, are priced to reflect the probability of the net loss from the default of an ever-broadening array of borrowers, both financial and nonfinancial. As the market for credit default swaps expands and deepens, the collective knowledge held by market participants is exactly reflected in the prices of these derivative instruments. They offer significant supplementary information about credit risk to a bank’s loan officer, for example, who heretofore had to rely mainly on in-house credit analysis. To be sure, loan officers have always looked to the market prices of the stocks and bonds of a potential borrower for guidance, but none directly answered the key question for any prospective loan: What is the probable net loss in a given time frame? Credit 
 BIS Review 67/2002 3 default swaps, of course, do just that and presumably in the process embody all relevant market prices of the financial instruments issued by potential borrowers. Price trends of default swaps have been particularly sensitive to concerns about corporate governance in recent months. The perceived risk of default of both financial and nonfinancial firms has risen markedly in the wake of company-threatening scandals, though levels remain moderate for most. * * * Derivatives, by construction, are highly leveraged, a condition that is both a large benefit and an Achilles’ heel. The benefits of risk dispersion are accomplished without holding massive positions in the underlying financial instruments. Yet, too often in our financially checkered past, the access to such leverage has induced speculative excesses that have led to financial grief. We are scarcely likely to reform the underlying human traits that lead to excess, but we do need to buttress our risk-management capabilities as best we can to delimit such detours from the path of balanced growth. More fundamentally, we should recognize that if we choose to enjoy the advantages of a system of leveraged financial intermediaries, the burden of managing risk in the financial system will not lie with the private sector alone. Leveraging always carries with it the remote possibility of a chain reaction, a cascading sequence of defaults that will culminate in financial implosion if it proceeds unchecked. Only a central bank, with its unlimited power to create money, can with a high probability thwart such a process before it becomes destructive. Hence, central banks have, of necessity, been drawn into becoming lenders of last resort. But implicit in such a role is the assumption that the burden of risk arising from extreme outcomes will in some way be allocated between the public and private sectors. Thus, central banks are led to provide what essentially amounts to catastrophic financial insurance coverage. Such a public subsidy should be reserved for only the rarest of occasions. If the owners or managers of private financial institutions were to anticipate being propped up frequently by government support, it would only encourage reckless and irresponsible practices. In theory, the allocation of responsibility for risk bearing between the private sector and the central bank depends upon the private cost of capital. To attract capital, or at least retain it, a private financial institution must earn at minimum the overall economy’s rate of return, adjusted for risk. In competitive financial markets, the greater the leverage, the higher must be the rate of return on the invested capital before adjustment for risk. If private financial institutions have to absorb all financial risk, then the degree to which they can leverage will be limited, the financial sector smaller, and its contribution to the economy more limited. On the other hand, if central banks effectively insulate private institutions from the largest potential losses, however incurred, increased laxity could threaten a major drain on taxpayers, excess creation of money by the central bank, or both. In the end, we would be faced with a severe misallocation of real capital. In practice, the policy choice of how much, if any, extreme market risk should be absorbed by government authorities is complex. Yet central bankers make this decision every day, either explicitly, or implicitly through inadvertence. Moreover, we can never know for sure whether the decisions we make are appropriate. The question is not whether our actions are seen to have been necessary in retrospect; the absence of a fire does not mean that we should not have paid for fire insurance. Rather, the question is whether, ex ante, the probability of a systemic collapse was sufficient to warrant intervention. Often, we cannot wait to see whether, in hindsight, the problem will be judged to have been an isolated event and largely benign. Thus, governments, including central banks, must balance the responsibilities they have been given related to their banking and financial systems. We have the responsibility to prevent major financial market disruptions through development and enforcement of prudent regulatory standards and, if necessary in rare circumstances, through direct intervention in market events. But we also have the responsibility to ensure that the regulatory framework permits private-sector institutions to take prudent and appropriate risks, even though such risks will sometimes result in unanticipated bank losses or even bank failures. The inevitable rise in potential systemic risks as the international financial system inexorably expands can be contained by improvements in effective risk management in the private sector, improvements in domestic bank supervision and regulation, continued cooperation among financial authorities, and, should it be necessary, by central banks acting as lenders of last resort. In the past two decades, bank supervisors in developed countries have worked together, through the Basel Committee on Banking 
 4 BIS Review 67/2002 Supervision, to improve bank supervision and regulation. This effort is ongoing and places priority on encouraging banks to further improve their risk-management systems. Similar efforts toward shared objectives among individual central banks should also improve protection against systemic risk on an international level. Endeavors to synchronize individual countries’ regulatory systems are far more than a technical exercise. Differences are more cultural than economic. They largely reflect differing conventions of business behavior, especially attitudes toward competition. * * * Competition, of course, is the facilitator of innovation. And creative destruction, the process by which less-productive capital is displaced with innovative cutting-edge technologies, is the driving force of wealth creation. Thus, from the perspective of aggregate wealth creation, the more competition the better. But unfettered competitive capitalism is by no means fully accepted as the optimal economic paradigm, at least as yet. Some of those involved in public policy often see competition as too frenetic. This different perspective is captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago. He asked, “What is the market? It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature. And what is civilization? It is the struggle against nature.” A major determinant of regulatory regimes is how a rule of law is applied to strike a balance between the perceived benefits of wholly unfettered markets and the perceived societal costs of overly fierce competition. In most countries an uneasy balance remains between unleashing the forces of competition and reining them in when they are perceived to threaten the social order. With markets continuously evolving as technologies advance and the political perceptions of the proper extent of regulation also changeable, it is no wonder that our regulations always seem to be in flux. While regulation must change as financial structures do, such regulatory change must be kept to a minimum to avoid fostering uncertainty among innovators and investors. Moreover, shifting regulatory schemes unavoidably leave obsolescent regulations in their wake. Business people both here and abroad complain, perhaps with some exaggeration, that so many regulations are on the books that they are probably at all times unknowingly in violation of some of them. We at the Federal Reserve endeavor periodically to review all our existing regulations in order to revise or rescind those that are out-of-date. It has worked well for us, and is probably a good practice to apply to regulatory systems in general and to the Basel supervisory process in particular. * * * The extent of government intervention in markets to control risk-taking beyond the commonly practiced control of systemic risk is, at the end of the day, a trade off between economic growth with its associated potential instability and a more civil and less stressful way of life with a lower standard of living. Those of us who support market capitalism in its more-competitive forms might argue that unfettered markets create a degree of wealth that fosters a more civilized existence. I have always found that insight compelling. But the resistance by many to such arguments suggests a more deep-seated aversion to the distress that often accompanies the process of creative destruction. The choices that we make in our societies on these critical issues will importantly shape the opportunities for the unforeseen, but inevitable, innovations that have the capability to advance the econoic well-being of the citizens of the United States and our trading partners. 
