Seong-Tae Lee: Recent development of the Korean bond market Dinner speech by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Korea University/ BIS Conference on Asian Bond Market Research, Seoul, 22 March 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to speak here today at this Asian Bond Market Research Conference, co-hosted by Korea University and the BIS.  As you are well aware, over the past half century the Asian region has achieved unprecedentedly high economic growth, and it has now emerged as among the key players in the world economy. With this continuing remarkable economic growth, trade within the Asian region is growing rapidly, and there is also a greatly increasing demand for financial funds. However, regional financial markets have so far not developed sufficiently to meet this demand.  Asia’s bond markets, in particular, are in far less developed states than those of developed countries. According to IMF statistics, the amount outstanding of the primary bond markets of Asia’s nine emerging market economies combined totaled 1 trillion 473 billion dollars as of the end of 2002. This is only 8% the size of the U.S. primary bond market, 12% that of the 15 EU countries combined and 21% that of Japan. The ratio of Asia’s outstanding stock of bonds to GDP is a mere 43%, far lower than the figures of 182% in the U.S., 146% in the EU and 175% in Japan. In their secondary bond markets as well, almost all regional economies have much smaller ratios of turnover to average outstanding stocks compared with advanced nations.  There is an argument that the 1997 financial crisis was aggravated by these poorly developed regional bond markets. The argument goes that because the financial structures of Asian economies were overly reliant on banks and their bond markets were poorly developed, the Asian countries had to rely for investment on short-term foreign borrowings, which were inevitably drawn out in a hurry once the regional crisis hit.  Recently, the Asian countries have accumulated significant amounts of foreign assets, thanks to their continued current account surpluses. However, due to the underdeveloped bond markets here, some say that there have been some inefficiencies in both the raising and the managing of foreign funds in the region.  In the wake of the financial crisis, therefore, countries in the region came to realize the necessity of developing their bond markets and related infrastructure. This enlightenment has become the momentum driving the countries in the region to make the necessary efforts. Let me now share with you the efforts Korea has made since the financial crisis in order to develop its bond markets, and tell you what we have achieved so far.  Before the financial crisis, Korea did not have to issue large quantities of government bonds, due to observing its balanced budget principle. Once the crisis had broken out, however, the long-cherished principle of maintaining balanced budgets was abandoned, and the government began to actively issue bonds, as a means of financing the soaring fiscal deficit and supporting economic recovery. With technical support from the IMF and the World Bank, Korea also embarked, in a step-by-step manner, on a series of institutional improvements. These included the introduction of regular government bond auctions, the establishment of a primary dealer system, the integration of different types of government bonds, the opening of the Korea Government Bond futures market and the introduction of a fungible issue system.  For its part, the Bank of Korea has also made considerable efforts to help develop the country’s bond markets, including the government bond market.  Before the crisis, Korean government bond issuance was to some extent not carried out in accordance with the market mechanism. A portion of any bond issuance was discretionarily allocated for underwriting to certain financial institutions. The remaining part of the bonds was taken over by the Bank of Korea, the nation’s central bank. The government also sometimes financed its fiscal needs by relying on borrowings from the BOK rather than by issuing bonds. Since June 1998, however, the BOK has not accepted government requests to underwrite government bonds and has advised the government to issue all government bonds in the market, based on market interest rates. In addition, BIS Review 18/2004 1 
the BOK has improved the infrastructure related to bond transactions. It has introduced an electronic competitive bidding process for government bonds using BOK-Wire and adopted delivery-versus-payment system of government bonds.  As a result of these efforts, the outstanding volume of Korean government bonds has grown almost seven times since 1997, while the turnover ratio for these bonds has skyrocketed 23 times in the same period. In 2003 the issuance of five-year government bonds increased substantially thanks to the government’s efforts to meet growing demand for longer-term bonds on the part of institutional investors such as pension funds and insurance companies. The five-year Korea Government Bond Futures market was also set up in order to allow hedging against the associated risks. In line with these developments, the proportion of five-year government bonds in total bond issuance increased by 7 percentage points in 2003, to 36%.  Korea’s corporate bond markets are also in the process of becoming more advanced, through the introduction of new financial instruments and the establishment of relevant institutions that will support bond market development. Since 1999, new products such as ABSs (Asset-Backed Securities), MBSs (Mortgage-Backed Securities), ABCP (Asset-Backed CP), CLOs (Collateralized Loan Obligations) and CBOs (Collateralized Bond Obligations) have been introduced. After the financial crisis, the market structure for corporate bonds shifted to focus on secured bonds rather than unsecured bonds, and this change required more scientific analysis of issuers’ credit risk. In response to this need, the setting up of new credit rating agencies was allowed, and the fiercer competition among credit rating agencies has led to a significant development of credit risk analysis techniques.  There have also been many improvements in terms of market behavior. With the implementation of mark-to-market bond valuation, rates of return on fund management are now evaluated and disclosed in accordance with daily bond yields. The introduction of a system for interest rate risk management has also made institutional investors respond more sensitively to changes in bond rates. Accordingly, it is now becoming common practice for market participants to closely watch the BOK’s monetary policy, along with economic developments at home and abroad.  As I have just described it, Korea’s bond markets have gone through remarkable changes, in terms of both quality and quantity, since the financial crisis. The government bond market, in particular, has been totally reshaped across the primary and the secondary markets, as well as its infrastructure. We believe that Korea’s bond markets will develop further in the future by making continuous efforts to heighten bond market efficiency and to push on with corporate restructuring.  There is considerable discussion going on recently, in various international cooperative forums such as ASEAN+3 and the EMEAP (Executives’ Meeting of East Asia and Pacific Central Banks), over the development of regional bond markets. In ASEAN+3, in particular, views on securitization and credit guarantees have been discussed. In relation to this issue, Korea has put together a two-tier securitization draft proposal making the most of the securitization and credit guarantee mechanism. Other nations have also developed plausible draft proposals in these fields. Meanwhile, the EMEAP, comprising 11 central banks and monetary authorities in the East Asia and Pacific region, has raised a one-billion dollar fund and invested it in dollar-denominated bonds issued by countries in the region. Taking this arrangement one step further, the EMEAP is now actively discussing ways to expand the fund and invest it in local currency-denominated bonds in the region.  Under these circumstances, I think that this conference is very significant, in that it brings together distinguished scholars and experts from both at home and abroad, to diagnose the reasons why Asia's bond markets are not being developed sufficiently and to propose new visions and ideas on the ways to facilitate them.  I hope there will be as many active discussions tomorrow as there were today, through which a variety of epoch-making views will be advanced concerning the development of our regional bond markets.  Thank you for your attention, and I hope you all enjoy your dinner.  2 BIS Review 18/2004 
John Hurley: Euro area monetary policy and EU enlargement Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, to ACI Ireland, Dublin, 22 March 2004. *      *      * First, let me say how pleased I am to have the opportunity to share some thoughts with you this evening. I would like to begin by saying a little about the euro area monetary policy framework, which was reviewed and clarified last year, before going to outline how monetary policy in the euro area has been conducted in the first five years of EMU. I will then turn my attention to the current monetary policy environment and recent exchange rate developments, before looking at some broader structural and fiscal policy issues and, finally, speaking briefly about the imminent enlargement of the EU.  The euro area monetary policy framework Turning on to euro area monetary policy, for just over five years now the euro area has had a single currency and a single monetary policy conducted by the Governing Council of the ECB. The introduction of the single currency has been an historical landmark. In twelve countries, the euro has replaced the national currency and rapidly become part of everyday life. For the business community, intra-euro area exchange rate volatility and the uncertainty it caused for trade and investment have been eliminated. In the financial area, the role of the euro in global markets and the growth in the use of the new currency outside the euro area over the past five years have also been impressive. The euro has very quickly become an important part of the global financial system and the evidence of the past five years is that its role will continue to grow for some time yet.  Within the euro area, the key challenge has been to formulate and implement the single monetary policy. Since it is a “one size fits all” policy, many doubts were initially expressed about whether it was possible or not to formulate a common monetary policy for such a diverse area. I think our experience to date is that the policy is successful. In practice, the Governing Council formulates policy in much the same way as many other central banks, that is, it focuses on controlling inflation. There are significant benefits to be derived from keeping inflation low: it supports consumers purchasing power; it avoids the misallocation of resources associated with inflation or deflation; it serves to reduce uncertainty and risk premia in financial markets, ultimately facilitating lower medium and long-term interest rates, and it is an important anchor for wage developments and for the enhancement of competitiveness in the economy. In short, maintaining price stability is the key contribution that monetary policy can make to achieving sustainable growth and job creation. Being clear about its mandate, and how it fulfils it, helps a central bank to foster credibility. To ensure that monetary policy firmly anchors inflation expectations from the very start the Governing Council adopted a monetary policy strategy which is forward-looking, focussed on the medium-term and broadly based. To be successful in maintaining price stability it is also important that the rationale for decision-making is clearly understood. As I am sure you are aware, this is an area which had been the subject of some criticism in the past. Reflecting this, after four years of experience, the monetary policy strategy was reviewed and clarified in 2003.  Two important points of clarification emerged from this exercise, which address misunderstandings which had emerged. First, as regards the definition of price stability, it has been clarified that the objective is to maintain inflation, for the euro area as a whole, at a rate below but close to 2 per cent over the medium-term. Second, as regards the assessment of the risks to price stability, the review clarified the way in which the Governing Council integrates the signals coming from the economic analysis, on the one hand, and the monetary analysis, on the other. In particular, it is made clear that the monetary analysis mainly serves as a means of cross-checking, from a medium to long-term perspective, the short to medium-term indications for inflation coming from the economic analysis.  The conduct of monetary policy since 1999 Having outlined how the Governing Council formulates and implements euro area monetary policy, I would now like to make a short assessment of the conduct of that policy over the past five years. In its early years, the single monetary policy has been conducted in a very testing environment, BIS Review 18/2004 1 
characterised by a series of shocks. At various times in the past five years there have been periods of exceptional economic, financial and geopolitical uncertainty. The first 18 months witnessed a tripling of oil prices, the peak of the dotcom boom and a significant fall in the value of the euro. The subsequent correction of the sizeable imbalances generated by the late 1990s boom, allied to heightened geopolitical tensions, then triggered the most critical and sustained period of economic and financial uncertainty witnessed in decades. This uncertainty persisted until last Spring, and while it has unwound considerably since then, some of its effects still linger. On top of all this, we have also seen a sharp appreciation of the euro, particularly against the dollar, which has taken it to a level that is higher than at its initial launch. From that short outline, it is clear that the economic and financial environment of the past five years has provided a stiff test of the single monetary policy.  Given this background, what has been the outcome? Over the past five years, the evidence indicates that both inflation and inflation expectations, which signal the rate of price increase anticipated in the future, have remained firmly under control. Since the beginning of 1999, indicators of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area have remained below but close to 2 per cent. This suggests that the new single monetary policy has been successful in anchoring long-term inflation expectations and that the public and the markets are convinced about the determination to maintain price stability over the medium-term. This has been a very significant achievement in a relatively short period of time and has been an important factor in permitting euro area interest rates to fall to their lowest levels in decades. It should also be recalled that, before the establishment of the euro and the single monetary policy, there were significant differences in long-term interest rate levels across countries. A key achievement, and also an indication of the credibility of European Monetary Union, has been the convergence of long-term interest rates to the lowest level prevailing in the area and not just to the average level. This has helped to improve financing conditions in many parts of the euro area. Allied to the fact that intra-euro area exchange rate volatility is also now a thing of the past, this has created a much more favourable environment for consumers, the business community and investors. Recent developments and background In recent years, the main influence on monetary policy, both in the euro area and globally, has been the heightened economic and financial uncertainty which persisted until mid-2003, and the after-effects of which have still not fully dissipated. Against this background, already exceptionally low global interest rates were reduced further. In the euro area, with inflation and inflation expectations under control, the Governing Council lowered interest rates on two occasions, March and June 2003, effectively bringing rates to levels equivalent to post-World War II lows. For the euro area, 2003 was the third successive year in which economic growth decelerated. For the year as a whole, the euro area economy grew by only 0.4 per cent, a most disappointing performance, considering that the economy had already registered below potential growth in both 2001 and 2002. However, these average figures mask the fact that, after several years of below par growth, a gradual recovery in activity has been underway since around the middle of last year. The main impetus to the euro area recovery has come from the improvement in the global economic performance, which, in turn, reflects a number of factors. Initially, there was the unwinding of geopolitical uncertainties, which facilitated a rebound in confidence, especially business confidence, over the second-half of last year. More fundamentally, however, the recovery, particularly in the US, has acquired considerable momentum from the sizeable policy stimulus put in place in recent years; indeed the scale of this stimulus itself poses some medium-term risk to the continuation of the recovery there. Further contributory factors were the performance of equity markets, which rallied considerably over the course of last year, and also the unwinding of the investment overhang created during the late 1990s boom, which removed an important headwind to growth. The improvement in the global economic environment, however, does not simply reflect developments in the US. Growth has also resumed in Japan, and accelerated in both the UK and East Asia, where, in both instances, the slowdown had been less pronounced. The current euro area monetary policy environment In the case of the euro area, the recovery clearly has lagged that of most of the other major economies. As was the case elsewhere, the strong gains in euro area business confidence, from last 2 BIS Review 18/2004 
summer onwards, suggested that growth was going to gather momentum. While third quarter data seemed to confirm that recovery was taking hold, activity was being driven by a solid pick-up in exports, with domestic demand remaining weak. Notwithstanding the rise in the value of the euro, the stimulus from a more strongly growing global economy was driving euro area growth. The scenario which appeared to be unfolding at that stage was one where stronger export growth would generate a recovery in production. This would stimulate investment and would be followed, in turn, by a pick-up in consumer spending. Although this recovery scenario remains broadly in place, progress has been slow. While we have seen an externally-led rebound which has boosted industrial production and helped generate some rebound in investment, the recovery has not yet become broadly based. In particular, domestic demand remains subdued. To a large extent, this reflects the weakness of consumer spending, which has yet to show much sign of improvement. There has been only a modest recovery in consumer confidence since the middle of last year. Continuing uncertainty about labour market prospects and job security have not helped and may be leading households to maintain savings at somewhat higher levels for precautionary motives. Moreover, more recently, the signals with regard to the nature of the recovery have become somewhat mixed. They continue to point to expansion, but at a gradual pace. For example, neither the level nor composition of recent fourth quarter GDP growth, where sluggish consumption and net trade were offset by a strong inventory build-up, suggest that the momentum of recovery is likely to accelerate in the near term.  Notwithstanding this, many of the conditions needed for a recovery in private demand are in place. Most of the headwinds that have held back economic activity in the past couple of years have dissipated. Real short-term and long-term interest rates are very low, making financing conditions very favourable. In addition, the strong global recovery should help offset some of the drag resulting from the strengthening of the euro.  However, while this should help ensure that the recovery continues, the pace of improvement seems set to be slow. Against this background, there is likely to be little upward pressure on inflation and the outlook for price stability in the medium-term is favourable. That the recovery is taking so long to gain traction reflects the fact that there are still uncertainties and risks to the outlook. In the near term, as I have mentioned already, these relate to the prospects for euro area consumer spending. Until there is some improvement on this front, the euro area recovery will continue to be unconvincing. The longer-term risks relate to concerns about the sustainability of economic growth at the global level given the persistence of, both internal and external, imbalances in some parts of the world. Both sets of risks suggest that a sustainable recovery cannot yet fully be taken for granted, though it still remains the most likely prospect. While our view is that the current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate, I can assure you that the Governing Council remains vigilant and will closely watch developments in coming months. Exchange rate developments I would now like to say a few words about exchange rate developments, which, of course, the Governing Council takes into account as part of the overall economic analysis. In the early years of EMU, the relatively weak exchange rate of the euro placed exporters to markets outside the euro area in a relatively favourable position. This is no longer the case. While exchange rate appreciation helps to dampen inflation and ultimately improve purchasing power, it also obviously impacts on the net trade position. So far, the positive effect of stronger global growth has outweighed the negative impact of exchange rate appreciation on euro area exports. More recently, however, there has been some evidence from sentiment indicators of a moderation in export orders, and industrial production fell in January. The euro has been trending upwards, both against the dollar and in overall terms, for just over two years now, and there have been sizeable movements in exchange rates over the past six months. In particular the appreciation of the euro accelerated considerably against the dollar and also Asian currencies in late 2003 and the first half of January 2004. These movements were linked with imbalances at the level of the global economy, such as the US current account deficit. They also reflected the fixity of some Asian currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar, which led them to depreciate in line with the US currency. The speed and strength of the appreciation of the euro over this period raised concerns and, while the gradual and smooth correction of global imbalances is an important medium-term issue for the global economy, it must be achieved in an appropriate manner. Viewed in BIS Review 18/2004 3 
this way, excess volatility and disorderly movements in exchange rates are undesirable. The G-7 statement issued in Florida on 7 February recognised this risk. The statement emphasised that greater flexibility in exchange rates is desirable for major countries or economic areas that lack such flexibility to promote smooth and widespread adjustment in the international financial system, based on market mechanisms. While I recognise that there have also been other factors at work, I am encouraged by the fact that since the recent G-7 meeting, we have seen greater stability in foreign exchange markets.  The importance of an appropriate policy mix I will now briefly touch on the issue of the euro area policy mix. There is sometimes a misconception that the single monetary policy is in some way anti-growth. I can assure you that the single monetary policy is not anti-growth. Not only has it had the positive effects I have described earlier - anchoring long-term inflation expectations, thus, facilitating low short and long-term interest rates - the ethos of the policy is not in any way opposed to growth. In fact the opposite is true. The aim is to support growth. The Maastricht Treaty makes it clear that, while the primary objective of monetary policy is price stability, the Eurosystem should, without prejudice to this objective, also take into account the broader economic goals of the European Community. Sometimes it is overlooked that monetary policy operates in tandem with other policies and there are strong complementarities between them. Monetary policy has been successful in ensuring price stability and delivering low short and long-term interest rates. However, other elements such as a sound fiscal policy, a stable macroeconomic framework and sufficiently flexible labour and product markets are also necessary to achieve strong and sustainable growth. Structural Reform Reflecting this, an important commitment of the Irish Presidency of the EU is to progress the structural reform agenda. As a member of the Governing Council, I welcome this initiative. Why is structural reform an issue for a central bank? There are a number of reasons. Increasing the efficiency with which markets operate raises potential growth. Importantly, also, a more efficiently functioning economy will utilise the resources available to a greater extent and, in doing so, will be less prone to inflation. This extends the boundaries within which all economic policies, including monetary policy, can operate without generating inflation. In effect, the economy will have a higher growth “speed limit” i.e. it will be able to grow faster before inflation is likely to become a problem. The structural reform agenda, set out in the Lisbon Strategy of 2000, aims to improve the functioning and flexibility of euro area product and labour markets. This is to be achieved through raising employment rates, education and skills levels and promoting technological innovation. While, in terms of time, we are nearly halfway through the Lisbon process, progress in meeting targets has been slow. While most EU countries have undertaken initiatives for labour market reforms in recent years, achieving the target employment rate of 70 per cent of the working age population is still far off. Moreover, further reforms are needed to allow wages to reflect more strongly regional and sectoral productivity differences and also to improve education and training systems. The emphasis placed on these issues is to be welcomed and their achievement has the potential to contribute materially to boosting the long run sustainable growth rate of the euro area. Stability and Growth Pact The link between monetary and fiscal policy is, I think, readily appreciated. The Stability and Growth Pact, together with the Maastricht deficit and debt objectives, constitutes the euro area’s fiscal framework. There are two main reasons why we need such a framework. First, given the divergent structure between centralised monetary and exchange rate policy, on the one hand, and decentralised fiscal policies (i.e. at the national level), on the other, a rule-based fiscal framework is necessary to avoid conflicts between monetary and fiscal policy. By adhering to fiscal rules, within a broad framework, divergent fiscal behaviour of individual Member States can be contained. This fiscal discipline, in turn, supports low interest rates, which is essential for good long-term economic performance. Secondly, and this will become increasingly important in the years ahead, low public debt will help Member States to prepare for the budgetary impact of ageing populations.  As you are aware, however, there have been difficulties in the application of these rules. The recent budgetary experiences of some large Eurozone countries demonstrate clearly the problems that can 4 BIS Review 18/2004 
arise in relation to the 3% deficit limit, especially when insufficient provision is made during economic upturns. The decision by ECOFIN on November 25th to “hold in abeyance for the time being” the excessive deficit procedure against these countries has given rise to much talk about the status of the Pact. Clearly the Governing Council is concerned about this situation, because of the impact such an action can have on the ECB’s core mandate to attain and maintain price stability, and it respects the Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity in this regard. But, it is important to emphasise that, while the Governing Council does not see a need for change in either the Treaty or the Pact, it does, however, agree that it is possible to improve its implemention in certain respects. For instance, the analysis of structural balances and the incentives to pursue sound fiscal policies in good times could be strengthened and improved. And there si also scope to enhance the clarity and enforcability of the framework overall. These are undoubtedely issues that will be considered in the future. Enlargement On 1 May, we look forward to having ten new members of the European Union. While the immediate contribution (5 pre cent) to the level of output may be relatively modest, at a stroke the area of the EU will expand by 25 per cent and its total population by 20 per cent. In due course, also, enlargement could have major implications for the governance of the ECB. Several acceding countries have signalled their intention to adopt the euro within the next few years, and, most, if not all, may well be part of the euro area by the end of this decade. In the meantime, there is much ground to be covered. The starting point for the acceding countries is that, once a country joins the EU, it is obliged to treat its exchange rate policy as a matter of common interest and it is in that context that the question of participation in the exchange rate mechanism arises. An acceding country is not obliged to participate in ERM II, but is expected to do so and it can join the mechanism at any point, subject to agreement on the central rate and fluctuation margins. Economic conditions among the acceding countries differ greatly, as far as nominal and real convergence are concerned: to give just one example, GDP per capita, as a percentage of the euro area average, ranges from 37% in Latvia to 80% in Cyprus; but there are also significant differences in unemployment, inflation rates, and fiscal positions. It, therefore, makes sense that, throughout the process leading to the adoption of the euro, assessment be carried out on a case-by-case basis.  Participation in ERM II is something to which we in the Governing Council attach considerable importance, as a preparation for the rigorous regime that lies ahead. For the acceding countries, however, the focus is on the adoption of the euro, which will bring considerable benefits in terms of greater policy credibility and the absence of exchange risk for much of their external trade. But, ultimately, in the interests of the acceding countries themselves and in the interests of a successful euro, the bottom line is that all those adopting the euro must be able to live with its constraints. Hence the need for adequate preparation before adopting the euro and, indeed, joining the exchange rate mechanism. We in Ireland may have something to offer from our experience. Some of you will recall in the early 1980s, we had 20% inflation and twin deficits well into double figures. We resolved these difficulties by the late 1980s, but still experienced pressure on exchange rate and monetary policy through most of the wide band period as we tried to achieve nominal convergence, while containing some of the pressures generated by real convergence. Some acceding countries are facing similar issues. Our experience underscores the need for policy makers to be aware of the changes needed to help them prepare for EMU. But, having said that, these are essentially short-term matters. Over the longer term, the positive impact of accession on the EU economy could be immense. In particular, I would expect the energy and dynamism released by the catching-up process to percolate through to the rest of the EU, not least as a catalyst in creating a more competitive environment and in hastening structural reform. Enlargement on this scale is unique, and we in Ireland, who currently occupy the presidency of the EU, are privileged to have enlargement on our agenda.  Conclusion The first five years of EMU can be considered a success. More than three hundred million consumers and investors in the euro area have enjoyed the benefits of price stability, low nominal interest rates in a single money market and the convenience of dealing in a single currency over a wide geographic area. By maintaining price stability, monetary policy provides the basis for sustainable growth in output and employment. But, for growth to materialise, the active support of fiscal policy and structural reform BIS Review 18/2004 5 
is also required. I believe that there is a growing awareness across the euro area of the need for both to play their part in addressing current problems and to prepare for the coming challenge, especially that of ageing populations. I expect these issues to be centre stage over the next five years.  6 BIS Review 18/2004 
Timothy F Geithner: Change and challenges facing the US financial system Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the New York Bankers Association’s Annual Financial Services Forum, New York, 25 March 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure to join you at the New York Bankers Association Financial Services Forum. The institutions represented in this room, together with the rest of the New York financial community, remain at the center of the U.S. and global financial systems.  Your meeting today takes place against the backdrop of a relatively favorable national and global economic outlook. The U.S. financial system is in reasonably strong shape. Financial innovation has enabled substantial improvements in the quality of risk management and in the capacity of the system to handle shocks. But the benefits of innovation have come with significant challenges to the people who run financial institutions and to those responsible for supervision and oversight. How effective we are in responding to these challenges will determine whether the U.S. financial system is as successful in the future as it has been in the past. The consensus forecast for the U.S. economy expects solid growth this year and next, somewhat above the upper bound of the range of most estimates of U.S. potential growth. Confidence in the sustainability of the U.S. expansion, as measured by changes in these forecasts, for example, seems to be increasing. The rate of economic growth outside the United States is also looking better. Although there are pockets of weakness and potential sources of vulnerability, the overall rate of global growth has accelerated significantly and looks as if it’s now running at the strongest levels in four years. The broad measures of U.S. consumer price inflation are very low. Inflation expectations as reflected in surveys and in the Treasury inflation-protected securities, although higher than current rates, still suggest an outlook of very modest future price increases. Deflation risks worldwide appear to have diminished, and there are some signs of accelerating price increases in some economies. Overall, however, despite the sharp increases in energy and commodity prices, the inflation outlook globally appears quite benign.  At the core of the U.S. economic experience of the past decade is a significant and sustained acceleration in productivity growth. This offers the prospect of more rapid growth in income over time, both for the United States and for the rest of the world.  In the economics profession, there is a debate about whether we are in the midst of a secular trend characterized by lower GDP volatility and general price stability, which some have called the “great moderation.” As important as the question of the extent of this moderation in macroeconomic volatility is the debate over its source. It’s undoubtedly the result of a combination of factors, including better economic policy, innovation and globalization, plus simple good fortune in the form of smaller shocks. But, the relative contribution of these factors is uncertain. Despite the uncertainty that exists about the sources and durability of this apparent moderation in some types of risks, financial market prices now reflect a very benign view of economic and credit fundamentals. Credit spreads generally and risk premia in many asset classes are at levels that are very low even in relation to previous periods of relative optimism.  The U.S. financial system, when judged by many conventional measures, looks reasonably healthy as well. Bank profitability is at the highest levels we have seen, depending on which measure you choose, in two to three decades. Capital positions for U.S. banks, which have been around 13 percent of assets over the past two years, are very strong, significantly above the regulatory standards required to be considered well capitalized. Asset quality also remains robust. Nonperforming loan ratios are now only 1.2 percent across the commercial banking industry. The financial markets are pricing financial institution risk at very favorable levels, with bank equity prices, subordinated debt spreads, and credit default swap spreads suggesting a high degree of investor and counterparty confidence in the financial health of the major banks and other financial institutions.  As these numbers suggest, the U.S. financial system came through the recent recession, the spate of corporate bankruptcies, the sharp adjustment in some asset prices, and the difficulties in some BIS Review 18/2004 1 
emerging market economies in reasonably strong financial shape. This apparent resilience, relative to past downturns and relative to the experience of other countries, is the result of a number of factors. Some of these factors stem from developments outside the financial system, like better macroeconomic policy and better microeconomic or supply-side fundamentals. And some stem from changes in the nature of financial intermediation, the structure of the financial system, and the capacity of financial institutions to manage risk.  To start with the broader economic context, the strength and length of the expansion of the 1990s helped ensure that U.S. financial institutions entered the latest recession with strong capital positions. The fact that the recession was shallower and shorter than the average of the past helped limit the scale and scope of losses to financial institutions. The forcefulness of the monetary policy response and the large fiscal stimulus provided by the tax cuts and expenditure increases played a significant role in limiting the depth of the downturn and in helping to bring about the recovery. It is significant that the yield curve has been steeper and stayed steep longer in this latest recession than in the previous one. And, finally, the stronger microeconomic fundamentals of the U.S. economy - the shift to just-in-time inventory management, the speed of innovation in the U.S. economy, and other factors that seem to have reduced the amplitude of the business cycle and improved the flexibility and resilience of the U.S. economy in response to shocks - have also contributed to financial stability.  Changes in the nature of financial intermediation have also played a role in improving the overall resilience and performance of the U.S. financial system that was evident in this latest period of economic recession and financial stress. Four different types of changes are particularly important.  • Innovation in financial technology continues to expand the opportunities for financial institutions to separate and distribute, and to manage and hedge, different types of risk.  • The increasingly greater role played by the capital markets in the financial intermediation process relative to banks - both relative to the past and compared with most other major economies - has improved the capacity of our system to handle stress. Loans and securities held by commercial banks today account for less than 20 percent of overall U.S. credit market debt, roughly two--thirds of their 1975 levels.  • The increases in the sophistication of risk management techniques and enhancements to risk management processes have delivered substantial improvements in how banks and other financial institutions actually manage risk in practice. Banks, for example, have aligned their pricing of credit products much more closely with credit risk.  • The increased scale of cross-border financial intermediation, the growing role of securitized financial instruments in those overall flows, and the growth in the size and breadth of financial institutions with global operations may also mean that, as shocks are transmitted more rapidly, they are diffused more broadly.  These are positive developments, and they are likely to be enduring. But they have come with new challenges for those of you who manage financial institutions and for those of us charged with supervision and market oversight. The overall return on these changes will depend on the skill with which we manage the challenges that come with them. Among these challenges are those that relate to the complexity of financial and operational risk management, concentration in critical markets, internal governance to manage conflicts, the quality of public disclosure, opportunities for regulatory and capital arbitrage, and trend amplifying market dynamics in times of stress. The financial innovations that have made risk transfer and hedging possible have increased the complexity of risk management, both financial and operational. The seemingly simple structure of a loan or bond issue can now involve a complex series of additional transactions that seek to allocate risks and responsibilities along specialized lines. This increased number of transactions that need to be separately settled and tracked by themselves create new risks that must be managed.  The economies of scale inherent in certain activities have led to a significant degree of concentration in some markets. A relatively small number of dealers account for a very large share of the over-the-counter derivatives business, with higher degrees of concentration in specific markets such as interest-rate options. Two institutions dominate the government securities clearing business. The growth in the size of government-sponsored mortgage entities creates a high degree of concentration in a market with very large systemic implications. Concentration has benefits, but it necessarily increases the vulnerability of the system to an operational or financial disruption in a single institution, or the decision by a single institution to exit a particular business. Moreover, to the extent that the 2 BIS Review 18/2004 
same set of firms play dominant roles in multiple markets, this concentration can also give rise to linkages between markets that are not apparent in normal circumstances and that could potentially affect how the financial system functions in conditions of acute stress. Increased opportunities for diversification offer the prospect - though not the assurance - of lower overall volatility in earnings, but they also bring much more complicated management challenges in controlling conflicts, reputational risks, and operational risks. The actual gains achieved from diversification depend on the correlation of movements in different sources of earnings and in economic growth among different regions as well as the relative volatility of the new business lines into which the institution is diversifying. To the extent that diversification achieves lower overall volatility in earnings for the major financial institutions, it is clearly good for the stability of the system. But to fully exploit these potential gains requires careful attention to the design of the control and compliance infrastructure, to monitoring and managing credit risk and concentration across diverse types of financial activities, and to managing conflicts of interest.  These are formidable challenges even for the strongest management teams. Trust and reputation are valuable competitive assets for financial institutions, and the desire to preserve those assets creates a powerful incentive for firms to manage conflicts and compliance with exceptional care. Supervision and regulation, and the enforcement response to management failures, should help strengthen the incentives for a stronger compliance infrastructure, but they cannot insulate firms from the consequences of reputational damage.  Financial innovation has made it possible for the market to assign values to a broader range of financial activities. And this, combined with improved disclosure, has increased the potential power of market discipline. But the increased complexity that comes with innovation also creates challenges for investor and counterparty risk assessment. Although the overall quality of disclosure has improved in recent years, along with accounting and auditing processes that underpin the integrity of disclosure, the complexity of public financial reporting can make it very difficult to discern the true picture of a firm’s financial condition and its exposure to risk. Financial innovation has also made it possible for risk to migrate to - and for leverage to accumulate in - parts of the financial system with less strong, or simply different, supervision, capital requirements, or disclosure norms. Risk today, on balance, seems to be allocated more effectively to those institutions better able to manage and hold it, resulting in reduced risk to banks and to the financial system as a whole. However, limitations in the extent of public disclosure over institutions that hold large amounts of risk make it hard to develop a comprehensive picture. It is obviously in the interest of institutions that transfer credit risk, interest rate risk, or other risks to understand the performance capabilities of those institutions from which they are purchasing protection. The ability to arrive at informed independent judgments about counterparty risk, however, can be hindered by the gaps that remain in the quality of disclosure. The same developments in financial technology that have improved the sophistication of risk management and the ability to transfer risk can create positive feedback mechanisms that, for at least short periods of time, amplify large moves in asset prices. There have been substantial increases over the past decade in the capacity of the market, meaning the principal dealers, to handle very large increases in hedging-related flows. This dimension of the financial infrastructure is critical to the capacity of our markets to absorb and respond to large shocks. Dynamic hedging of options and other similar strategies, however, depend on the availability of sufficient liquidity to work effectively. Stressful periods, of course, are marked precisely by a material reduction in market liquidity.  These changes in the nature of finance have several important implications for the supervisors and those responsible for market oversight. Financial innovation will, in some ways, always move ahead of the evolution in risk management techniques. As supervisors, our challenge is to work to ensure that the sophistication of the supervisory process evolves to keep abreast of the pace of change in financial innovation. This is a formidable challenge, and we need to continue to work hard at it. The revisions to the Basel Capital Accord, which aim to align supervisory assessments of capital adequacy more closely with the frontier of risk management techniques, are a good example of these efforts. The changes in the structure of finance and the nature of the financial intermediation process reinforce the importance of cooperation between supervisory authorities. The sources of potential risk to financial stability are not confined to banks. Financial institutions increasingly operate across the legal parameters that define the responsibilities of the individual supervisory authorities. The economic characteristics of many of the financial credit instruments provided by banks and other financial institutions have converged. Our supervisory system is a complex framework in terms of the number of BIS Review 18/2004 3 
responsible supervisory institutions, differences in approaches, overlaps, and gaps. This complexity makes it even more important that we collectively work to ensure a comprehensive look at sources of systemic risk and that we raise the bar on the quality of supervision and market oversight where it is necessary. Bank supervisors have made significant progress in improving how we share and divide responsibilities for supervision of banks and bank holding companies, reduce overlap, and raise the overall contribution of the examination process. With the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999, and the increased scope of activities it has allowed financial institutions to engage in across the financial services industry, we have worked to strengthen cooperation with other regulatory bodies. This will be increasingly important to the effectiveness of the overall supervisory process, as the SEC moves toward providing a form of consolidated supervision for the largest securities firms. At the international level, we have made considerable progress in developing a network for cooperation and information sharing among national authorities that better matches the increased integration of national financial systems. We have worked to clarify the division of labor among supervisors of institutions with supra-national reach, and to cover gaps in the supervisory overlay. We have also worked to identify and promote the adoption of best practices and standards for many dimensions of the institutional framework that underpins well-functioning financial markets. Strengthening home-host supervisory cooperation and avoiding duplication of supervisory efforts will continue to be top priorities for the international supervisory community, especially as we adopt newer supervisory approaches, such as Basel II.  Finally, we need to continue to promote investments in strengthening resilience in critical infrastructure in payments and settlement systems and those institutions that play an important role in market clearance systems. This is a critical part of the supervisory and market oversight process we perform, and there is an active public-private effort underway to bring about further improvements in back-up facilities and overall resilience. The innovations that have transformed finance over the past decade have substantially improved the overall stability and resilience of the U.S. financial system. But these improvements are unlikely to have brought an end to what Charles Kindleberger called “manias and panics” in financial markets. They cannot fully insulate the financial system from the effects of large macroeconomic shocks. And they will not by themselves preclude the possibility of failure in a major financial institution or a critical piece of market infrastructure. For these reasons, it is important that those of you who run financial institutions build in a sufficient cushion against adversity.  Of course, the overall performance of the financial system and the degree of financial stability depends on more than just the skill of risk managers and supervisors. The unique strengths of the U.S. financial system in allocating capital to where long run returns are highest depend on the overall confidence investors have in the fairness and integrity of our financial markets. These strengths depend on our openness to competition and the opportunities and rewards to innovation that the regulatory environment provides.  The stability of the financial system also depends significantly on the quality of macroeconomic policy, not only in terms of the credibility of monetary policy, but also in the degree of confidence investors have in U.S. fiscal management. The current deterioration in the U.S. fiscal position and the acute decline in the net national savings rate represent risks to the financial system and the economy as a whole. These risks are magnified by the size of the U.S. external imbalance and the unprecedented scale of financing requirements it reflects.  Although the present economic environment looks quite favorable, these broader macroeconomic policy challenges make it even more important that we build on the substantial progress we have already made in strengthening risk management and the resilience of critical market infrastructure. Our success in meeting these challenges will help ensure that our financial system proves as resilient in the future as it has in the recent past. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 18/2004 
Klaus Liebscher: Reviving the European economy Panel statement by Mr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the EPP-ED Group Study Days, Vienna, 23 March 2004.  *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  the past three years are frequently cited as not having been too brilliant for the European economy. Triggered by adverse international developments, growth was sluggish or stagnated in the majority of Member States. Partly as a result, fiscal policies in a number of Member States slipped sharply into deficit, threatening the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact. Progress on the implementation of the Lisbon Agenda was slower than hoped for, and the Lisbon Agenda is not accorded enough importance by observers. I want to argue today that things are not really that bad.  • Europe has very successfully managed to achieve economic convergence among its present 15 Member States. • Europe has successfully introduced a single currency for 12 nations. • Europe has designed an impressive agenda of structural reform at the Lisbon summit, and progress is being made. • And Europe has shown remarkable persistence in the pursuit of its ambitious agenda of further development. Eastern enlargement, which future history books will quote as a landmark achievement on the path toward European integration, will become a reality in little more than a month’s time, work on the draft Constitutional Treaty is very far advanced, and the EU is by no means short of important projects for the near future. However, I will also argue that we must not be complacent. In today’s globalized, fast-moving economy, more than ever standing still - or moving too slowly - is tantamount to falling behind.  To my mind, the euro is a success story in several respects.  That this outstanding project was realized bears witness to Europe’s will to push forward with integration. That its introduction went so smoothly is testimony to the creativity, project management capacity and cooperative spirit of everyone involved. The euro has made all our lives easier. The euro also protects our economies to a large extent from foreign exchange turbulence. Today, our economies are - not completely, but to a considerable extent - shielded against the ups and downs of the U.S. dollar (just recall what that would have meant in the ERM I of the early 1990s!). Moreover, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy has established sustainable price stability in the euro area. Inflation expectations have been stabilized at slightly below 2%. This signals the high credibility which the Eurosystem enjoys with professional analysts, financial markets and the general public. That success has only become possible against the background of the lasting consensus among European politicians that price stability is an important goal - both in its own right and as a precondition for sustainable growth.  I mentioned before that we must never become complacent. We take this appeal very seriously in the Eurosystem. The quarterly Bank Lending Survey, the new euro area-wide interest rate statistics or various measures of inflation expectations derived from surveys are just a few examples of continuous efforts the ECB and NCB staffs make to improve on the quality and diversity of the information sources employed to prepare the Governing Council’s monetary policy decisions. The Governing Council also undertook a major review of its monetary policy strategy last spring, which resulted in several refinements of how we structure monetary policy considerations and how we communicate with the public.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  the ECB Governing Council has noted the progress in fiscal consolidation envisaged in the Member States’ stability programs. Nonetheless, there continues to be cause for concern. In some countries, contrary to their commitments, adjustment efforts are insufficient to mitigate the risk of excessive deficits. Moreover, several countries do not plan to attain sound budgetary positions by the end of their respective program horizons, despite favorable growth prospects. This would risk a repetition of the BIS Review 17/2004 1 
policy errors of the last economic upswing, when insufficient consolidation efforts and tax cuts without adequate expenditure restraint laid the foundations for the recent fiscal difficulties.  All Member States would benefit from the strengthening of the sustainability of their public finances. Determined implementation of comprehensive structural fiscal reforms, on both the expenditure side and the revenue side, will bring additional medium-term rewards in the form of higher growth and more sustainable public finances.  Such consolidation and reform strategies are needed to secure a sound macroeconomic environment in the euro area, which in turn enhances confidence and promotes investment, growth and employment in the euro area.  As regards the institutional framework for fiscal policy, the Governing Council of the ECB shares the concerns of the European Commission regarding the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council in November last year. The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty, and the Eurosystem respects the Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity on the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. We do not see a need to change the Treaty, and we consider the Stability and Growth Pact appropriate in its current form. It provides appropriate incentive structures to national policymakers within a multi-country monetary union. If applied appropriately, the framework ensures long-term sustainability and sufficient room for an automatic smoothing of business cycles. The Governing Council agrees with the Commission that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact could be further improved, in particular in terms of the analysis of structural imbalances and the strengthening of incentives for sound fiscal policies during good economic times. The clarity and enforceability of the fiscal framework should be enhanced.  Let me, as an aside, note that Austria successfully managed to implement its fiscal consolidation as planned over the past four years. The Austrian example shows that structural cuts in fiscal deficits need not entail below-average macroeconomic growth. As recent research by the European Commission shows, fiscal consolidation through cuts in expenditures is less likely to entail short-run growth-dampening effects than consolidation which relies on raising taxes. While recent tax cuts by a number of European governments, including that of Austria, are in principle appropriate given high public expenditure-to-GDP ratios, governments should use the coming economic upswing to bring their budgets into balance mainly through cuts in expenditures.  There is a general consensus that the euro area urgently requires further structural reforms in financial, product and labor markets. The Lisbon Strategy provides the appropriate blueprint for progress. I think we can very much compare the current situation of the Lisbon Agenda with the state of EMU in the mid-1990s. • Then as now a project of historical dimensions and of the highest priority for the EU’s further economic development was at stake.  • Then as now there was a lot of scepticism about the project’s viability and timetable.  • Then as now there appeared to be lackluster support from some European leaders.  The decisive move that brought EMU back on track in the mid-1990s was the meeting of the Euroepan Council in Madrid in December 1995. At that meeting, the date for the introduction of the European currency, January 1, 1999, the further steps necessary to reach this goal and the name “euro” were decided. This important guidance from European leadership established a “pioneering mood.” It triggered the necessary work at the various technical levels dealing with the preparation of EMU. And, most importantly, it created confidence in European leadership and problem-solving capacity in the general public. I therefore welcome that the forthcoming spring meeting of the European Council is set to give renewed impetus to the Lisbon agenda, speed up the pace of reforms and strengthen the effectiveness of the decision-making process. If done correctly and with the necessary commitment on behalf of the Member States, European leaders should be able to manage a revival of the Lisbon Agenda comparable to that achieved a decade ago on EMU. Structural reforms will have enormous benefits for the citizens of the euro area. These reforms are crucial for sustained noninflationary growth and employment, and they are therefore also important for maintaining social cohesion in the long run. Confidence among European citizens in the future is vital 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
for a stronger economic recovery and stable growth. The continued low level of consumer confidence is also related to uncertainties about the appropriate path for structural reforms in many euro area countries. Further progress in the implementation of necessary structural reforms is key to stronger confidence, and such reforms create the conditions for consumption and investment, for growth and job creation. Let me emphasize a few points which in my opinion are crucial now to a successful revival of the Lisbon Agenda. • A first message is: Enough talk, now is the time for action!  The necessary reform areas have been sufficiently discussed and have been clearly identified. We do not need more reform papers now, we need implementation.  • A second message is: Set clear priorities and use intelligent sequencing!  Otherwise both politicians and electorates will simply be overwhelmed and discouraged.  • A third message is: Create clear responsibilities !  It is not sufficient for European leaders to issue declarations and conclusions on what “the Community” needs to do. We need a binding commitment by each Member State on the concrete reform steps that it will implement until 2010. The Maastricht convergence criteria would probably never have been fulfilled if there had only been reliance on a general intention that the Community requires price stability, sound public finances and the like. You need to break objectives down to the national level and create incentives to ensure implementation.  • A fourth message is: Talk to people and get them actively involved!  I think a major obstacle to implementation of the Lisbon Agenda by the various governments is a lack of communication with the public. It is thus not surprising that it seems to be rather difficult for people to accept the reforms. Thus, each Member State government needs to convince its citizens of the enormous potential and opportunities released by structural reforms. After all, what we aim for is higher per capita income, replacing redundant activities with more welfare-generating ones, investment in skills and education, a knowledge-based society, more innovation and sufficient research and development. I would think that these objectives are of such a genuinely positive nature that it should be possible to convince people of the reform steps necessary to reach them. At the same time, one should not - and cannot - conceal that some of the reforms necessary on the way are painful or unpleasant, and affect various groups of societies in different ways. In such cases of strong conflicts of interest it is all the more important to enter into an active, constructive dialogue and to jointly find acceptable, fair solutions, since, in the long run, no government can afford to ignore public opinion. I think that some of the official documents prepared ahead of the forthcoming European Council already touch on the course I have just outlined, but to my feeling not sufficiently.  Let me conclude by quoting from Robert Schuman’s legendary Declaration of May 9, 1950: “Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements.”  I think that this statement is as true today as it was more than half a century ago. It will become even more relevant in an enlarged European Union of 25 Member States. While European leadership is becoming ever more important, the European Union can function well only if individual players perform their roles responsibly. This applies both to the division of labour between monetary, fiscal and structural policies and to the division of responsibilities between the EU and national governments. Sound fiscal policies and a rapid implementation of the Lisbon Agenda are both areas where individual Member States have a pivotal role to play. Now it is time to act. BIS Review 17/2004 3 
Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the economic outlook Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at SR-banken, Stavanger, 19 March 2004. The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 11 March, Inflation Report 1/04 and on previous speeches. The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The target is symmetrical - it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for inflation expectations. It therefore influences their decisions concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. History shows that there is no long-term trade-off between lower unemployment or stronger economic growth and higher inflation. We witnessed this in the 1980s when growth was low and inflation high. The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. Low and stable inflation is such an anchor. There are several reasons why it is an advantage for inflation to be higher than zero: • The structure of the economy is in flux. Demand for labour with different qualifications is changing. This requires changes in relative wages. There are rigidities in nominal wage growth. Nominal wages do not readily fall. With some inflation, relative wages can change without a fall in nominal wages. There may also be rigidities in the pricing of goods and services. Some degree of inflation will thus oil the economic machinery. • In periods, inflation and economic growth will be low. It is then appropriate for real interest rates to be low, or even negative. Nominal interest rates cannot be set below zero. If inflation becomes entrenched at a low level or near zero, the interest rate will be less effective as an instrument. • There are different ways of measuring inflation. The consumer price index tends to overestimate actual inflation. The most important source of measurement errors is probably the difficulty of distinguishing between changes in the quality and price of goods. In other countries, findings show that the consumer price index overestimates actual inflation to the order of ½-1 per cent. The inflation target is a vehicle for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to stabilising output and employment. This objective is also expressed in the Regulation on Monetary Policy. If demand for goods and services is high and there is a shortage of labour, there will normally be prospects of higher inflation. When interest rates are increased, demand falls and inflation is kept at bay. If demand is low and unemployment rises, there will be prospects of lower inflation. The interest rate will then be lowered. In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour and capital and adaptability, but in the short and medium term monetary policy can also have an impact on the real economy. The economy grows over time. Output moves in waves. Output will in some periods lie below trend growth and in others above trend. The difference between trend output and actual output is called the output gap. Stabilising output growth means that one seeks to maintain actual output near trend. The output gap provides an indication of pressures in the real economy. Developments in the output gap provide a basis for assessing output stability and can thus also shed light on domestic inflationary pressures in the economy. When the economy is booming, the output gap is positive. When the economy is at a low ebb, the output gap is negative. We have had pronounced economic cycles in the Norwegian economy. The downturn at the beginning of the 1990s was followed by an upturn from 1993. This upturn peaked in 1998. There was a shift from a recovery to a period of strong expansion. Growth came to a halt in 2002. An upturn is now in progress. BIS Review 16/2004 1 
Other indicators may also shed light on stability in output and employment. The wage gap is an indicator of the social partners’ perception of employment and labour shortages. The wage gap measures the difference between actual wage growth and the growth that over time is consistent with the inflation target, and is an indicator of labour market tightness. With estimated productivity growth at 2 per cent, wage growth of 4.5 per cent over time will be consistent with an inflation target of 2.5 per cent. In the chart, the wage gap up to 2000, i.e. before the introduction of the inflation target, is defined as the difference between wage growth in Norway and in other countries. This wage gap appears to be closely in line with the output gap as measured by Norges Bank. Normally, the interest rate is set with a view to achieving inflation of 2½% at the two-year horizon. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to variability in inflation as well as to variability in output and employment. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. The choice of a two-year horizon is thus based on striking a balance between variability in inflation and variability in output and employment, and a perception of how interest rates influence these variables. If extraordinary conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than two years, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. The same applies if special emphasis is placed on developments in financial markets. External cyclical developments and events have had considerable implications for developments in the Norwegian economy. The international upturn came to a halt in 2000. The bubbles in the equity markets burst. Many years of high investment led to excess capacity in some industries, and unemployment increased. The terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 put a new damper on economic activity. From the summer of 2002 to the spring of 2003, a highly extraordinary accumulation of negative events in the global community - accounting scandals, fear of terror, war and disease - put a brake on growth. US interest rates, which were sharply reduced at the beginning of the downturn, have subsequently been reduced further. Interest rates have also remained low in the euro area. Key rates are now historically very low for several of our most important trading partners. Long-term interest rates are also very low. The economic situation in Norway remained firmer for a long period, and wage growth was surprisingly high in 2002. There was less scope for low interest rates than among our trading partners. As a result, the interest rate differential against other countries widened. This had an impact on krone exchange rate developments. In addition, special circumstances in the global economy led to a stronger krone than might have been expected from the higher interest rate differential alone. Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to exchange rate movements. During periods of political and economic unrest, investors may choose individual currencies as a safe haven. In the autumn of 2002, the Norwegian krone was probably also perceived as a safe haven. In the past 12-18 months, developments in the interest rate differential between Norway and other countries appear to have had a particularly marked impact on our currency. Norwegian interest rates have been pushed down towards the level prevailing abroad. In 2003, the interest rate differential narrowed as a result of monetary policy easing. The interest rate has been reduced by 5¼ percentage points and is now approximately the same as among our trading partners. The krone has depreciated by about 6 per cent over the past year and the krone exchange rate, measured by the import-weighted index I-44, is now at the level prevailing in March 2002. This is approximately on a par with the average for the 1990s. In the past few days, the krone has appreciated again somewhat. In February, inflation stood at –0.1 per cent. Apart from some temporary, technical factors that together account for 3-4 tenths of a percentage point, three main factors have contributed to the substantial deviation from the inflation target: • First, the global downturn had considerable implications for the impact of interest-rate setting in Norway, via the exchange rate for instance. • Second, low external inflation and rapid shifts in the international division of labour has resulted in a fall in prices for imported goods and services. This also applies when these prices are measured in terms of what Norwegian importers pay in foreign currency. The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices for clothing, footwear and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological advances have also pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment. 2 BIS Review 16/2004 
• Third, competition has probably increased in the retail industry and other service sectors in Norway in recent years. Initially, heightened competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises will respond by reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the individual business, but subcontractors will also be required to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. Therefore, increased competition usually triggers higher productivity growth in the economy. Low inflation may therefore be matched by growth in productivity. Prices for domestically produced goods and services are expected to rise towards the beginning of 2005 due to higher capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Strong employment growth may contribute to somewhat higher wage growth than in 2004. At the same time, domestically produced goods and services are affected by exchange rate changes, albeit with a longer lag than is the case for imported consumer goods. There are clear signs that the global economy has passed the trough. However, while the outlook is brighter, price inflation is still low and interest rates are being kept unusually low. Economic growth is high again in the US, but there is still excess production capacity and very low inflation. Workforce reductions may no longer be as severe, but companies are still not hiring new staff. It may take some time before interest rates are increased substantially in the US. Growth in Asia is solid, but a global rise in interest rates is unlikely to start there. Inflation is higher in the euro area than in the US and approximately in line with the objective defined by the European Central Bank. In the euro area, however, capacity utilisation is very low, unemployment high and the outlook for growth is weaker. Recently, inflation has moderated slightly. Against this background, it will probably also take time before interest rates rise markedly in the euro area. Interest rates abroad have been unusually low for 2½ years, and it appears they will remain low for a period ahead. This poses a challenge to monetary policy in Norway. Growth in the Norwegian economy has picked up. Lower interest rates have contributed to sustaining growth in private consumption. Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in the Norwegian economy in the period ahead. Against the background of high real income growth, improved job security and expectations of continued low interest rates ahead, household consumption is expected to exhibit strong growth. Petroleum investment exhibited brisk growth in 2003. Growth in petroleum investment would appear to continue in 2004, but probably at a slower rate than in 2003. Low interest rates and house price inflation imply higher housing investment in the period ahead. Fiscal policy also contributes to stimulating activity. The impact of the interest rate decline on private consumption is likely to be stronger this year than in 2003. It takes time for changes in Norges Bank’s key rate to feed through fully to interest rates for households. Norges Bank’s calculations show that if we look at 2003 and 2004 as a whole, it appears that the impact of interest rate changes will result in an overall reduction of about NOK 15bn in household net interest expenses before tax. However, due to the increase in household net debt, net interest expenses will fall much less than this. The impact of the interest rate decline is also conditioned by the expected duration of the low interest rate level. When the sight deposit rate was reduced last autumn, longer interest rates showed relatively little change. The interest rate reductions in December and January, combined with the decline in inflation, have had a stronger impact on long-term interest rates. This indicates that financial market participants expect interest rates to remain low for a longer period. The fall in the value of the krone over the past year has strengthened Norwegian business and industry. With lower wage growth in Norway and a pick-up global activity, the prospects for Norwegian manufacturing and the business sector are brighter now than they were 12-18 months ago. The business sector is, however, still feeling the effects of a sharp rise in labour costs over a period of several years. Relative labour costs measured in a common currency are in line with the level prevailing in 1990, but approximately 10 per cent higher than in the mid-1990s. The internationally exposed sector has been scaled back. Those companies that are still operating may be in a better position to bear the high wage level. BIS Review 16/2004 3 
In 2003, employment and investment both fell, although investment picked up somewhat towards the end of the year. Efficiency-enhancing measures are expected to continue to mark developments in the business sector this year. This will curb the demand for labour. The situation varies across business sectors. Distributive trades and enterprises supplying services to households are expanding as a result of high growth in private consumption. Production for the business market fell through 2003. Demand for services in this market segment will pick up in pace with a rise in manufacturing output and other industries. Strong competition has resulted in substantial restructuring. Manufacturing production is being moved both from Norway and other countries to lower-cost countries. This may continue. EU and EEA enlargement by 10 new members from 1 May may also increase competition in some industries, particularly in the service sector. Investment in onshore industries in Western Norway and Northern Norway has generated a positive impetus to the construction industry. Activity in 2003 in the rest of the country has mainly been held up by public investment projects. Information from our regional network indicates that construction activity has picked up markedly in most regions. This also applies to Rogaland. In recent year, non-residential investment has accounted for more than a third of total investment in services and distributive trades. The large investments in this sector in the latter half of the 1990s has led to a high non-residential vacancy rate. Statistics Norway’s new price index for non-residential commercial property shows that in Norway as a whole, prices peaked in the first half of 2001 and have since fallen by over 9 per cent up to the first half of 2003. This situation is likely to curb overall investment growth in the years ahead. In 2004, many companies will probably realise the gains provided by the efficiency measures that have been implemented. Continued brisk growth in household demand is expected to boost investment activity in 2005 and 2006. Petroleum investment will also increase as a result of the Orme Lange project. This is also the case for Rogaland. Our regional network reports that demand is on the increase, the market outlook for the next six months is favourable and corporate profitability has improved considerably. The economic upturn is primarily being reinforced and driven by stronger household demand, although without any substantial increase in investment or employment. The upturn has both broadened out and gained momentum in the past months. All sectors report stable or increasing demand and sales. The market outlook for the next six months in this county is very positive. Optimism does not translate into a stronger willingness to invest, however. The picture for the petroleum and offshore supply industry is mixed. Operators’ production of oil and gas is high. Some sectors of the offshore supply industry experienced a difficult fourth quarter, but are more optimistic about this year. The maintenance and modification market is showing steady, although moderate, growth. Most companies report stable employment. Extensive rationalisation and restructuring measures are still on the agenda in organisations and enterprises, and so far, growth is being absorbed by excess capacity or by increased productivity. Wholesale and retail trade and the building and construction sectors are increasing their workforces. All industries continue to report that highly qualified labour is in ample supply. Of the Norwegian counties exporting traditional goods, Rogaland is the third largest. The public sector and some private service industries are as important for employment in Rogaland as they are in the rest of Norway, but the share of employment in these sectors is lower than the national average. Manufacturing and oil and gas production are important in Rogaland, but the internationally exposed sector is also relatively large. Employment in Rogaland is mainly concentrated in engineering, shipbuilding and construction of oil platforms. Many are also employed in the food and beverage industry, and Rogaland is an important farming county. The labour market in Norway has improved. The number of persons employed in Norway began to increase in summer 2003 and unemployment stabilised. Employment in distributive trades has increased. There are also signs that employment is rising in education, the public sector and health and social services, from the weak levels recorded in the first six months of last year. Manufacturing employment remained well below the level one year earlier in the fourth quarter of 2003, but is falling at a slower pace. Unemployment has been fairly stable. Adjusted for seasonal variations, LFS 4 BIS Review 16/2004 
unemployment stood at 4.6 per cent of the labour force as measured by Statistics Norway’s Labour Force Survey (LFS) in the fourth quarter of 2003. Growth in household demand, petroleum investment and increased activity in the business sector are paving the way for a rise in employment in the period ahead. On the other hand, intensified competition and continued rationalisation in the business sector may have a dampening impact on labour demand. This year, employment growth is expected to be fairly moderate even if there is a sharp rise in output. Only a slight decrease in unemployment is projected for 2004. Unemployment is projected to edge down in 2005 and 2006. After several years of high wage growth, pay increases in last year’s settlement were more moderate. Annual wage growth was nonetheless 4½% as substantial increases with effect from 2003 were awarded in the 2002 main wage settlement. Wage growth is projected to decline to 3¾% this year. The labour market appears to be improving somewhat more rapidly than expected previously. In isolation, this may contribute to pushing up wage growth relative to previous projections. The effect is, however, expected to be more than offset by the prospects of very low inflation this year. In 2005 and 2006, wage growth is projected to increase as a result of a tighter labour market and higher inflation. There has been a tendency in recent years for a larger portion of pay increases to be agreed in the first year of the two-year period covered by the main agreement. If we consider these two-year periods together, the estimated relationship between wage growth and developments in the labour market are approximately in line with that observed since the mid-1990s. Developments in real economic variables are mirrored in credit markets. In recent years, household income has shown solid growth, and household confidence has been high. However, corporate earnings have been low, and until recently enterprises have primarily focused on enhancing efficiency. Credit developments are giving ambiguous signals to our interest-rate setting. Growth in household borrowing is high, but enterprises are reducing debt. The change in the breakdown of credit may have been amplified by banks’ increased eagerness to extend credit to households after a period of losses on loans to the business sector. Some reports from our regional network indicate that there are some restraints on credit for the business sector in some areas. Developments in credit to enterprises shadow developments in their investments. Low credit growth indicates that mainland business investment has not yet picked up. Total credit is expanding broadly in line with normal growth in nominal GDP. Norwegian households generally finance their mortgages at an interest rate that follows the short-term money market rate. Floating interest rates tend to vary widely over time. The interest rate level is very low at present, and long-term investments cannot rely on this interest rate spanning the life of a housing loan. According to money market expectations, the interest rate will eventually stabilise around 5½ per cent. This is consistent with an inflation target of 2½ per cent and a long-term real interest rate in line with the level abroad. This interest rate, with a mark-up for banks’ margins, provides a more realistic expression of the interest rate level that will apply over the loan’s life than the floating interest rate prevailing today. It may prove to be particularly challenging for borrowers to assess their debt-servicing capacity over time in a period when the interest rate is abnormally low. Such a low interest rate also places particular demands on banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. But experience has shown that the underlying cause of loan defaults can be overly optimistic assessments on the part of both the lender and borrower. House prices and developments in household credit influence consumption and housing investment. We seek to take account of these indirect effects in interest-rate setting. Household debt has increased sharply over the past decade. Developments in debt in the 1990s may partly be interpreted as a delayed adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s after many households experienced financial difficulties following the relaxation. Household assets and debt and housing wealth have risen at a markedly faster pace than disposable income, and housing wealth has grown more than net debt from 1994 up to the present. The Norwegian economy has experienced both upturns and downturns since 1994, and activity is now approximately on a par with the level prevailing in 1994. These changes must therefore be regarded as structural changes. We have limited scope for restraining structural changes that occur when households increase their debt over several years to invest in housing and other property and assets. An interest rate that would BIS Review 16/2004 5 
effectively restrain these structural adjustments would also have an adverse impact on output and employment. The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with low interest rates abroad and a close link between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy will restrain credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced. Household credit demand is closely linked to developments in the housing market. Home-owners who have seen the value of their dwellings rise have the possibility of taking up new mortgage-secured loans. They free up a portion of their home equity value to finance consumption and other investments. House prices in Norway have on average risen by 9 per cent annually between 1995 and 2002. House prices have also increased considerably in other countries. A sharp and sustained rise in house prices might contribute to high credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a portion of the housing stock is sold each year, some dwellings will be sold at a higher price than when they were last sold for a long period. This has contributed to sustaining the high level of growth in credit to households in Norway even after the rise in house prices moderated through 2002 and into 2003. It is easiest to sell dwellings in the largest cities and some specific areas are particularly attractive. Residential property is now a fairly liquid and attractive investment. A persistently high rate of increase in house prices may in isolation engender expectations of a further rise and may thus prove to be self-reinforcing for a period. Moreover, there now seems to be a tendency towards investing in property and incurring loans at a more mature age so that younger generations not only inherit dwellings, but debt as well. Both debt and wealth are on the rise for these more mature age groups. Sharp increases in asset prices and debt accumulation may pose a risk to economic stability. With a view to mitigating this risk, it will be appropriate in some situations to apply a somewhat longer-than-normal time horizon than two years to attain the inflation target. However, at present debt accumulation is high only in the household sector. There is little borrowing activity in the enterprise sector. House prices are rising, but non-residential property prices are stable. Prices for office premises are, however, stable. The analyses in the inflation reports indicate that inflation will remain low this year, picking up thereafter. The krone depreciation since January 2003 is expected to push up prices for imported consumer goods. Overall, mainland GDP growth is projected to pick up markedly this year and remain relatively high in 2005 and 2006. GDP growth is projected to reach 3¼ per cent in 2004 and 2005, followed by a slight decline to 2¾ per cent in 2006. With this path for total output, the output gap, as measured here, will shift to slightly positive in 2005 and 2006 from slightly negative this year. Projections are based on the technical assumption that the interest rate will move in line with forward rates. The assumption implies that the interest rate will be somewhat lower in the near term, but that it will rise gradually from the summer, largely in parallel with the increase in interest rates among our trading partners. The krone is assumed to follow the path of the forward exchange rate, which indicates expectations of a fairly stable exchange rate in the period ahead. A path that is in line with the projections in the previous Inflation Report (IR 1/04) provides a reasonable balance between the prospects for reaching the inflation target and stable developments in the real economy. The aim of monetary policy is higher inflation. It is appropriate to be particularly vigilant with regard to developments in consumer prices, but consumer prices may show random variations from one month to the next. Later this year, we will receive confirmation of whether consumer prices are rising in line with our projections. When inflation increases from a very low level, this will provide a basis for gradually moving towards a more normal short-term interest rate level in Norway. This may counter excessive credit growth and excessive pressures on domestic resources in the medium term. Interest rate developments in other countries may also have a considerable impact on the krone and hence on Norwegian interest rates. At its meeting on the 11 March, the Executive Board decided to reduce the interest rate by 0.25 percentage point. In reaching its decision, the Executive Board had weighed the objective of bringing inflation back to target and stabilising inflation expectations against the risk that output growth may eventually become too strong. Furthermore, according to the Executive Board’s assessment, with a sight deposit rate of 1.75 per cent at present, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2½ per cent is greater than the probability that it will be higher. 6 BIS Review 16/2004 
Lars Heikensten: Economic recovery with low inflationary pressure Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting at Residenset Härnösand, 15 March 2004. *      *      * Allow me to begin by thanking you for your invitation to today’s meeting. In order to get an idea of economic developments in different areas of Sweden and to explain how the Riksbank works, I pay regular visits to various parts of the country. The items on the agenda for today’s visit include a talk at Mid Sweden University on how the Riksbank works, a visit to SCA and a discussion with county representatives about developments in business and the labour market in Västernorrland. At this lunch, I intend to give my views on the economic situation and monetary policy. Before going into the economic assessment itself, however, I would like to say a few words about the Riksbank’s work methods. One of the Riksbank’s objectives is to maintain price stability. We have decided to define this as 2 per cent inflation as measured by the consumer price index, with a tolerance range of plus/minus 1 percentage point. Monetary policy is conducted on the basis of a forecast of inflation over primarily the coming two years. If the forecast in this perspective indicates that inflation will be lower than 2 per cent, the repo rate should normally be cut and vice versa. The reason we focus on inflation 1-2 years ahead is because monetary policy affects the economy and inflation with a certain time lag. This approach has served us well over the decade during which we have conducted monetary policy with an inflation target. Since the target was adopted, inflation has by and large averaged 2 per cent. At the same time, we have experienced better general economic progress than during the two preceding decades. The clear target coupled with our mode of action has also helped to make the Riksbank’s policy accessible to both the public and the financial markets. Inflation expectations have been anchored fairly stably around our target and it has been possible to predict our actions rather well. Nevertheless, there is cause to underline that we do not run on autopilot and mechanically change the repo rate in relation to our inflation forecasts. There may be reasons for us to wait before taking a decision in order to be able to perform more in-depth analysis or obtain more information. There may also be reason to take into account additional aspects in our decision rather than just inflation 1-2 years ahead. Such aspects could include how the economy in general would be affected, inflation in both a longer- and shorter-term perspective and the impact on financial stability. But it is important to have a framework that is as explicit as possible, with clearly defined and stated objectives. In this way, everyone can follow our line of reasoning, question it and comment on it. Monetary policy is most effective when it is firmly established. International upswing is continuing Both real economic activity and inflation in Sweden are highly dependent on developments abroad. Broadly speaking, demand and economic growth since the end of last summer have followed the paths expected by the Riksbank at the time and subsequently. However, when seen over the entire period, growth in the US has been somewhat faster than anticipated. This also applies to the situation in Asia and in Eastern and Central Europe. Conditions are different in Western Europe, particularly in the core countries of the euro area - Germany, France and Italy. Here, demand has not risen as expected and the upswing has been delayed. What has happened since the Riksbank’s last decision on the repo rate in February has followed the same pattern. Recent developments in the US economy have also been unexpectedly positive. This also applies to large parts of Asia, led by China and Japan. In addition, a number of Sweden’s other important export markets such as the UK and Norway appear to have performed somewhat better than anticipated. As regards the euro area, the most recent data does indeed suggest that the recovery in industry has taken root but at the same time domestic demand continues to be weak. The situation in China deserves a special mention. Since 1990, output in China has grown at an average rate of 9 per cent per year. Over the past three years, it has been 8 per cent. This means that China’s share of global output has more than doubled from 6 per cent to 13 per cent. This situation BIS Review 16/2004 1 
has great significance for the world economy today. China has emerged as one of the world’s major importers of commodities, especially regarding crude oil, copper and agricultural products. For example, China’s imports of copper totalled no less than 15 per cent of world trade in copper in 2002, compared with only a couple of per cent in 1990. At the same time, Chinese exports of manufactured goods are increasing rapidly, currently accounting for 6 per cent of world exports compared with 2 per cent in 1990. When we today see an unusually big gap between international price inflation for manufactured goods, which is presently exceptionally slow, and for commodities, which instead is very fast, it is probably somewhat due to what is happening in China. My overall view is that international economic activity will continue to strengthen in the years ahead largely as we expected before. Growth in the OECD area could reach about 3 per cent this year and average around the same in 2005 and 2006. This is marginally higher than we expected and implies slightly better export conditions. International prices of manufactured goods are likely to rise in tandem with the economic recovery. But by how much is uncertain. There are strong arguments to suggest that the increase in prices could be slower than usual against the background of globalisation and the weak price inflation for manufactured goods. Pointing in the opposite direction is increases in commodities prices, which could have a greater impact were demand to accelerate further. However, futures prices of commodities are, if anything, indicating future price declines. Demand in Sweden in line with previous forecasts The Swedish economy has come through the recent economic slowdown comparatively well, with growth in the past three years averaging around 1.5 per cent per year. This is important to remember in order to get some perspective on the outcome of the conduct of economic policy now that employment has fallen somewhat. An important reason that economic activity has not been weaker is that household consumption has been relatively high. This has been bolstered by loose fiscal policy and low interest rates. The relatively weak krona has also boosted Swedish exports and resulted in a considerable trade surplus. Swedish economic developments have largely followed the paths described by the Riksbank in the late summer and autumn 2003. Growth has gradually strengthened in line with international demand. At the same time, private consumption has continued to be relatively high. Investment has remained weak, however. This picture is confirmed in the latest National Accounts. Growth for the full year 2003 is now judged to have been 1.6 per cent. However, there was a marked change over the course of 2003; between the first and second halves of the year growth rose from 1.4 to 1.8 per cent. The situation at present is that the upswing in industry has progressed somewhat. Export demand has gathered pace, and firms are fairly optimistic about the future. It also appears that capacity utilisation in industry is continuing to rise. Exports were unexpectedly strong during the final two quarters last year, and business tendency data point to continued optimism in the period ahead. Households’ expectations regarding both their own finances and the Swedish economy have also begun to rise again after having fallen somewhat at the end of last year. Retail sales figures indicate a continuation of robust consumption. Low interest rates, rising equity prices and low inflation will boost consumption in the period ahead as well. While on the subject of household consumption allow me to say something about the recent discussion on household indebtedness. Debt as a proportion of households’ disposable income continued to grow last year, and the debt ratio is now approaching the levels seen during the sharp expansion in credit at the end of the 1980s. At the same time, low interest rates mean that households’ interest costs as a percentage of income is at a historically low level. The latter means that it is not a great problem today for the household sector to bear its debt even if this debt of course limits households’ scope for consumption in the near future. So this situation hardly constitutes a macroeconomic problem at present. In actual fact, one of the aims of the low interest rates has been exactly to create conditions for households to reduce their saving and maintain their consumption in the weaker economic climate. In spite of this, there is reason for the Riksbank to monitor developments carefully. There is also good reason for individual households to reflect on their debt situation. Interest rates are unusually low at present and will most probably change in the future. On the whole, there is no reason to make any marked adjustment to the overall outlook for demand in the Swedish economy in the coming years compared with in December or February. Most factors still indicate that growth in household consumption will continue to be stable around 2.5 per cent in the 2 BIS Review 16/2004 
years ahead. The contribution to growth from exports will probably be somewhat higher than previously expected, but a large part of the effect on demand will be offset by the fact that this could also be the case for imports. Local government consumption appears to be somewhat weaker than we thought in December. Investment is a source of uncertainty and could probably pick up somewhat later than forecast. On the whole, therefore, GDP growth may be roughly as we expected in the December Inflation Report and when we took our decision in February, reaching around 2.5 per cent per year in the years ahead. Low domestic cost pressure In other words, the outlook from the autumn has so far remained largely intact, and economic activity is strengthening as expected. The situation is different for domestic cost pressure. In this respect, since the middle of autumn 2003, new data has gradually been received that has warranted changes in our view of the inflation situation. These relate to the labour market, which has been weaker than expected with consequences for our assessments of wage developments, to productivity, which has risen more than anticipated, with lower cost pressure as a result, and finally to actual inflation, which has been lower than expected, with effects also on inflation expectations, which have declined somewhat. Employment growth has therefore been weaker than expected, particularly at the end of last year. The same applies to the number of hours worked. The weak employment growth coupled with a lower number of labour market policy measures has resulted in higher unemployment. This rose from 4.5 per cent in February last year to 6.0 per cent in February this year. Business tendency data and other indicators currently suggest that employment growth in the private sector will be relatively weak in 2004. There are some signs that the labour market may be about to turn, but these are weak. Very recently, for example, the number of new job vacancies has increased slightly and redundancy notices have declined. At the same time, the strained financial situation in the public sector points to weak employment growth in local governments in the period ahead as well. Thus, employment growth is likely to be somewhat weaker during the year compared with our December forecast. As early as February, we changed somewhat our outlook for the rate of wage increases as a result of the situation in the labour market. There is reason to expect total rises in wage costs to average around 3.5 per cent in 2004 and 2005, which in terms of average collectively agreed levels leaves little room for more than about 2 per cent on average in the years ahead. The wage bargaining round appears so far to have gone relatively well, but the historical experiences of Swedish wage formation suggest that one should be cautious about assuming that we are home and dry. The parties appear to be far from agreement on a number of issues, and there are risks of conflicts arising. As long as the agreements are reached at moderate levels from an inflation perspective, longer agreement periods are preferable. This would alleviate some future uncertainty and should thereby contribute to a better economic situation. So while employment, measured by the number of hours worked, in the business sector was weaker than expected last year, GDP growth was roughly in line with the Riksbank’s expectations. This means that productivity was higher than anticipated. This picture has been confirmed by the latest National Accounts data and was underlined as early as in our December assessment. Since then it has become clearer, and the somewhat better productivity was an important argument for the rate cut in February. It is likely that the more robust productivity has partly been due to the developments in economic activity; at the beginning of a recovery, existing production resources are utilised more efficiently and only when the revival has been established will a rise in investment and new jobs begin in earnest. But this explanation is not enough since productivity appears to have risen more than normal given the economic situation. This pattern is very clear in the US but is also somewhat discernible in Sweden. One possible interpretation is that it is due to unusually large-scale investment in, for instance, IT at the end of the 1990s. It is also conceivable that it reflects more permanent changes that could be related, for example, to technological advances in IT and telecommunications. At present, it is not possible to determine exactly what has caused the improvement in productivity. However, when we look ahead to the coming years, we see reason to expect a better productivity outlook than that we had in December. The new inflation data that have been received also point to somewhat more subdued inflationary pressure. The decline in inflation seen over the last six months has to a large extent been in line with BIS Review 16/2004 3 
the Riksbank’s previous forecasts. The reason for this is that electricity prices have adjusted downwards as expected. The fact that the expected decline has been confirmed is positive for the inflation outlook since the risk of contagion to other parts of the economy diminishes. These risks have also decreased in that rent agreements at least so far have been concluded at moderate levels. In addition, the inflation outcomes in recent months have been lower than expected for other reasons as well. This is partly due to lower import prices, although domestic underlying inflation is also somewhat lower than previous forecasts. Inflation and monetary policy Permit me now to summarise my view of demand and inflation in the period ahead. It appears that international economic activity is progressing largely as expected. Compared with December, there is perhaps reason to expect marginally stronger activity due mainly to the rapid growth in Asia and the US. Economic developments in Sweden are also essentially following the paths we expected, even if there has been a certain shift between different demand components in that private sector consumption and particularly exports are growing slightly faster, while growth in local government consumption will probably be somewhat weaker. In all, there is still reason to expect GDP growth in the years ahead to be somewhat higher than what the Riksbank believes to be sustainable in the long term. For inflation in the years ahead, it is of course important that there are some unutilised resources to begin with. So what can we expect in terms of inflation developments? In this respect, the outlook has gradually undergone a number of more marked changes since the end of the autumn. Principally, as a result of lower expected increases in wage costs and better productivity growth, unit labour costs are expected today compared with in December to grow a number of tenths slower in the years ahead. Normally, there are few factors that are more significant for inflation a few years ahead than unit labour costs. In addition, international price pressure is muted. Against this background, most factors suggest that inflation in the next two years will be below the Riksbank’s target. Also with regard to the various risks to economic activity and inflation, I believe there is cause to reason somewhat differently than in December. As the economic upswing is gradually confirmed, the risk of a setback in the coming two years will diminish. Correspondingly, the probability that economic activity could prove unexpectedly positive and that the upswing will be quicker than anticipated is also likely to increase. However, this does not mean that there are no downside risks whatsoever in the short term. One such risk is that the weak labour market in the US or in Sweden - confirmed by the latest data - will worry households and dampen their consumption. It seems unlikely, however, that the upswing could be derailed entirely for this reason. As regards inflationary pressure, there are a number of question marks as I mentioned earlier. We don’t know how long the recent rise in productivity will last. In the inflation outlook that I have presented, some consideration has been given to the new data. At the same time, there are good arguments pointing to both higher and lower productivity growth. The same applies to our view of international inflation. As regards wages, there are also risks on the upside, which are essentially related to the way in which wage formation in Sweden is conducted. It can still not be ruled out entirely that the wage bargaining round will be derailed. Should the outcomes prove higher than expected, it is likely to have an impact on the future level of interest rates. So far I have not said anything about the exchange rate. There may be reason to touch upon this. For a long time, we have expected a krona appreciation that over the course of the forecast period would bring us to levels approximately in line with what we believe to be appropriate in the long term, given mainly the competitiveness of the Swedish economy. During the period 2002-2003 as a whole, the krona strengthened roughly as expected. Recently, however, this strengthening has been curbed. One reason for this appears to be expected relative interest rates, where there has been a certain shift since the autumn. There may be reason to take this into account and expect a somewhat lesser probability than before of a krona appreciation. On the whole, this discussion of different uncertainty factors and risks does not lead me to see reason to make any appreciable changes to the assessment I have just presented. The risks I have discussed could perhaps push up inflation somewhat. Nevertheless, with what we know today, the conclusion remains that inflation will be below the Riksbank’s target one to two years ahead. By way of conclusion, allow me to stress that much work remains to be done before the next Inflation Report is published and it is this that will form the basis of our decision about the repo rate at the end 4 BIS Review 16/2004 
of March. So it is not just today’s assessment that could be affected by new data. In the light of the analyses currently being carried out, the Executive Board may assess some of the factors that are significant for inflation in a different way than I have today. Thank you. BIS Review 16/2004 5 
P M W Tucker: Keynote speech at the NAPF annual investment conference Keynote speech by Mr P M W Tucker, Executive Director and member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, at the National Association of Pension Funds Annual Investment Conference, Edinburgh, 19 March 2004. *      *      * It’s very good to be here - or, I should say, good to be back. About seven or eight years ago I spoke to this conference about the raft of reforms then underway in the gilt market: repo, strips, regular auction schedules etc.  Market intelligence and the Bank of England’s mission Since the 1997-98 reforms that gave the Bank monetary independence, codified our financial stability role and created the FSA, gilt issuance has, of course, been the responsibility of the Debt Management Office. There is, though, an important continuity in the Bank’s role and outlook: seeking dialogue with market practitioners. Just as many of those mid-1990s’ reforms came from listening to the asset managers who bought and held gilts, so now we seek a dialogue to support our core mission: monetary and financial system stability. Let me stress: the Bank’s interest in financial markets and participants in markets - and our use of market intelligence to help us figure out what is going on in markets - is undiminished. If anything, our range of interests and contacts has been expanding as financial markets become more sophisticated and integrated.  On the monetary side, the main focus is on markets and financial intermediaries as part of the transmission mechanism through which our interest rate settings affect the economy: credit conditions, financial wealth, the exchange rate etc. And, of course, we implement policy in the money markets, with the yield curve reflecting expectations of the path of policy. This means that, on the monetary side of our business, we tend to focus on core markets - money markets and government bonds, equities, exchange rates. Markets that are, on the whole, pretty efficient. So our starting point - our default hypothesis, if you like - is to assume that asset prices in these markets reflect fundamentals, and that we can use them as a diagnostic of expectations of economic prospects and of the path of policy. We do not, though, kid ourselves that we can stop there. We are on the look out for where there are transitory or persistent frictions that distort the message from asset prices - for example, on account of regulation, features of the infrastructure, particular market conventions, or information asymmetries. Identifying and making sense of such frictions requires intelligence about actual markets in the real world. Plenty of examples come to mind that will be familiar to this audience, not least the hump that featured in the gilt forward curve for so many years on account of the demand for long-dated bonds from life companies and pension funds.  On the financial stability side of our business, we think of markets as a medium for taking and hedging risk. Most of the time, they promote stability by dispersing risk. But they are also part of the mechanism through which a crisis could spread from one part of the system to others, including across product, sector and geographical boundaries. Contributing to avoiding, or containing, debilitating systemic disorder in markets is part of our mission. So for financial stability, the canvas is wide. We are on the look out for symptoms of actual or incipient stress: for example, high leverage coupled with ‘crowded’ trades - ie with ‘everyone’ positioned similarly - in markets that could prove illiquid just when trades are suddenly unwound. In the event of a crisis, we are not going to be able to cope - indeed, the financial authorities collectively, here and internationally, are not going to be able to meet the challenge - unless we can comprehend the instruments and structures involved. Given the growing technical sophistication and complexity of today’s capital markets, that is unavoidably more difficult than a decade or more ago - a world in which exotic options, securitisation, hedge funds etc hardly featured. One precondition for doing our job properly is that we should understand how global financial markets and the key players in them fit together. Another is to understand modern risk management structures and practices.  For many of the core markets, we have a natural entry - in the sterling money markets because that is where we implement monetary policy; in the high-grade sovereign bond, swap and foreign exchange markets through our management of the government’s foreign exchange reserves and liabilities and of our own balance sheet. But for both monetary policy and financial stability, the Bank’s market BIS Review 17/2004 1 
surveillance role has to extend beyond those markets, including to a wide range of derivative markets and structured finance.  This is not the kind of task we can begin to fulfil solely by sitting in our building doing desk-based analysis and research. That vital work has to be integrated with intelligence gained from a wealth of relationships across the market, both in the UK and overseas. Thanks to many of you here - and I really do mean a big thank you - we already have a good network. But we have more to do. The Governor, Mervyn King, has asked me to develop a medium-term strategy to deliver our goals on this front, so I was really delighted to be invited here today to leave the Bank’s calling card.  With that bit of advertising out of the way, let me say something about how I see the current environment as it affects monetary policy and financial stability. The monetary policy environment Compared with when you met at this event a year ago, conditions both for you as asset managers - or rather, I should stress, asset-liability managers - and for us as monetary policy makers are brighter in some important respects but uncomfortably familiar in others.  Most obviously in the context of today’s event, equity prices are some 15% off their March 2003 low, even after the falls since the second half of last week. And default risk in the corporate bond markets seems to have receded - partly reflecting balance sheet restructuring amongst large corporates on both sides of the Atlantic, itself aided by low yields encouraging firms to extend debt maturities.  These improvements in asset markets have, of course, both reflected and contributed to stronger global macroeconomic conditions. I was recently asked at a conference whether the external environment mattered to UK monetary policy - with a goal specified in terms of preserving domestic purchasing power, did we look beyond the domestic economy?  In fact, of course, as a highly open economy, the UK is very much affected by international conditions: more so than either the US or the euro area. Indeed, for some years now, UK monetary policy has been directed at offsetting weaknesses in the external environment. In other words, we have been stimulating domestic spending in order to keep aggregate demand more or less in line with the expansion in the economy’s productive potential, consistent with keeping inflation expectations in line with our target. In terms of our mandate, it has worked: inflation has stayed pretty close to target, averaging 2.3% on the RPIX measure since the beginning of 2000. But as is now familiar, this has been accompanied by accumulating ‘imbalances’ in the economy, manifested in a variety of ways - weak manufacturing but strong services; consumption growing well above its long run average rate for the past three years, or more rapidly than disposable income since; rapid accumulation of debt by the household sector alongside burgeoning house price inflation. That strategy has in principle always had limits, but whether they would be tested - and whether we would identify them - has depended, in part, on external prospects. Other things being equal, the healthier the international environment, the more we could withdraw the stimulus to domestic spending. For policy, that is the significance of the recovery over the past year in the US. Until last summer, the risks looked to me to be pretty clearly weighted to the downside relative to a central projection of a fairly rapid return to trend levels of output. But, after declining for five quarters, business investment spending in the US has bounced back since Q2, with output recovering rapidly back towards trend and capacity utilisation rising. Risks do nevertheless remain. For a while last autumn it looked like the recovery in demand was being accompanied by similarly robust job growth, but since December net job creation has fallen back to well below the average rate of growth of the workforce. Commentators - and policymakers, it should be said - take two views on this. The first view sees employment picking up in an environment of sustained output growth and reduced scope, over time, for extracting greater efficiency from current labour and capital inputs at the rates recently achieved. That’s persuasive, particularly with US monetary policy remaining so accommodative. The other view worries that protracted weakness in the jobs market could dent household confidence and so spending, slowing output growth. US surveys suggest that sentiment is sensitive to job prospects, but so far spending has remained robust, as has house price inflation (over 3½% quarter-on-quarter in Q4). My take is that the most likely outlook is positive but that downside risks have, again, become tangible.  I think it is fair to say that analysis of the euro area is tougher - on both the monetary policy and financial stability sides of our business. Essentially, that reflects less timely and rich data, together with 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
varying regional conditions - and so economic stories - across the area. For some time now, we have been forecasting recovery. That is based on stimulative monetary policy - short real rates are around zero in the euro area as a whole - and some recovery in consumer and, particularly, business confidence. Signs of recovery have, though, recently been more apparent in the surveys than in the data. In particular, domestic demand has remained weak, although it picked up in France in Q4. In Germany, not only has household spending been subdued, but investment (at current prices) is lower relative to economy-wide output than at any time since unification. On the one hand, that suggests that there is plenty of scope for recovery back to trend levels. But, on the other hand, there has to be some risk - perhaps not high - that trend output growth is down a bit. If so, and if that were to have adverse knock-on effects on other parts of the euro area, it would create downside risks for us as the euro area is by far our largest trading partner. For the moment, I continue to place greater weight on the encouraging surveys.  The euro area may be our biggest trading partner, but conditions in the rest of the world make quite a difference to us, both directly and indirectly. In fact, growth has been so strong in parts of Asia that in 2002-03, the ‘rest of the world’ contributed more than a percentage point on average to UK-weighted world output growth. The outlook in various parts of Asia and the Far East may mean we have a second engine of global growth alongside the US. The domestic picture has also gradually changed since the autumn. Last October, there were the upward revisions to the Q2 GDP data, a pick up in business surveys, and greater-than-expected strength in the housing market. Taken alongside diminished risks in the external environment, that was enough for me to vote for a 25bp rise. I regarded that as unwinding the Committee’s July cut, which I had viewed as ‘precautionary’ or ‘insurance’ against the downside risks then apparent.  In the event, the MPC’s rate was raised a month later, November, and since then the debate about the course of policy has altered somewhat. There have been references to ‘caution’ in raising rates, and to moving ‘gradually’ as medium-term inflationary pressures mount. I hope I can provide some clarity about what those terms mean for me.  Our January minutes recorded that if the economy evolved as envisaged in the November Inflation Report, with inflationary pressures gradually building, then a gradual rise in interest rates would be necessary. We are in a similar position now. The February increase in the MPC’s rate, bringing it to 4%, leaves policy stimulating the economy. Indeed, I prefer to think of our recent policy adjustments as withdrawing some - but not all - of the previous stimulus.  If, as projected, output continues to grow above trend then, depending of course on any other developments affecting the outlook, I for one would expect us to continue gradually to reduce the degree of stimulus to demand broadly in line with the take up of slack in the economy and any consequent pick up in inflationary pressures looking ahead. That seems to be more or less the view of the market, as reflected in our February Inflation Report projections using market interest rates; and in the implied forward curve, derived from index-linked gilts, for short-maturity real rates relative to longer-maturity real rates, which in principle should not be affected by cyclical variations (Chart 1). While policy must be forward-looking rather than overly focused on the current rate of inflation, which at 1.3% in February is obviously below our 2% CPI target, there is already some evidence of inflationary pressure. Looking at the categories of goods and services in the CPI basket, the median rate of inflation has risen over the past year or so, as have the 70th and 30th percentiles (ie cutting out the categories for which prices have risen most and least in order to exclude erratic changes) (Chart 2). But we take a month at a time. As each month passes, data may reveal that the outlook is either weaker or stronger than expected. This takes me to what has been said about ‘caution’ in raising rates, which at times has perhaps been misconstrued as implying ‘hesitant’. The idea here is that we care about the extent to which inflation varies around the target and so, amongst other things, about the degree of uncertainty about the effect on inflation of changes in our interest rate. The marked increases in household debt do somewhat increase that uncertainty. With higher debts relative to incomes, interest rate changes will tend to have a bigger effect on the income that households have free to spend after servicing their debts. But we do not know what the sensitivities are. The implication is that, other things being equal, policy would tend to move towards neutral more slowly than would otherwise be optimal, or ‘cautiously’ for want of a better word. But care is needed here, as developments in the economy associated with the debt accumulation have other possible implications. I want to mention two.  BIS Review 17/2004 3 
First, household borrowing has grown alongside a robust housing market. The ratio of house prices to earnings is up by over 40 percentage points since 2001. The increased value of collateral consequently available to households to secure borrowing has, unsurprisingly, been evident in mortgage equity withdrawal, which as a percentage of personal disposable income is estimated to have reached around 7% in the third quarter of last year. Some of that borrowing has probably substituted for more expensive unsecured debt; some of it has been used to finance consumption. Either way, the increased collateral values will plausibly have reduced the credit constraints faced by some households. If so, other things being equal, the short-run effect may have been to increase slightly the level of interest rates at which output and inflation are stabilised. So the same underlying phenomenon could have more than one effect on the optimal path of interest rates.  The second point is that, although there has been some deceleration since the end of 2002, house prices have continued to rise more rapidly than expected over recent months. This is not especially a London or South East of England thing. Over the past nine months or so, prices have risen more strongly in the north of England, Scotland and Wales. Indeed, the regional dispersion of house price inflation remains very high by historical standards (Chart 3 and 4).  For the UK as a whole, relative to the path we incorporated into our February projections, there appear to be upside risks in the near-term. As well as straightforward momentum, that would seem to be the message from the rise over the past few months of the ratio of the number of houses sold by estate agents to the stocks of unsold houses on their books - one measure of ‘tightness’ in the market. This has been a reasonable contemporaneous, or even slightly leading, indicator in the past (Chart 5). The significance for policy is that, taken together with fairly buoyant business surveys, it suggests that the near-term outlook for domestic demand may be slightly stronger than it looked a couple of months ago. We will need to consider that in reaching our policy judgment, alongside other developments, including risks in the international environment. But, in addition, it separately suggests an argument to be placed alongside that in favour of ‘caution’. Namely, that it could be argued that policy may need to be tighter than would otherwise be the case in order to arrest somewhat the continuing strength in the household sector. The argument would be that we should try to reduce the risk of an abrupt correction, which would complicate monetary policy and so make achievement of the inflation target more uncertain further ahead. This is an argument that has to be weighed alongside the analysis pointing towards ‘caution’. I would not, however, subscribe to making a surprise policy tightening as a form of shock therapy. One of the emphases of the MPC’s approach has been to do our utmost to help households, businesses and financial markets to understand our strategy and, in particular, how we react to developments in the economy.  From my perspective, that was the backdrop to the Committee’s debate and to my vote at our most recent meeting at the beginning of March. A tightening then would have come as a surprise. My own view was that there was not sufficient evidence to construct a compelling explanation for a rise in terms of the outlook for inflation. And that being so, I was concerned that an earlier-than-expected policy change might well have been misunderstood as implying that my, or more broadly the Committee’s, policy reaction function had changed for some reason. With inflation expectations well anchored, that was not a risk worth taking. So I voted for no change. Looking ahead, I just take one month at a time, assessing the domestic and international data, and revising my view of the outlook where necessary. Financial stability environment A few words on financial stability. The past year or so has also brought calmer conditions in most financial markets. Signs of some potential fragility were perhaps most evident around October 2002. Credit default swap prices for a number of the world’s largest banks registered sharp rises as losses in corporate loan portfolios, and volatile trading revenues coincided with an uncertain macro outlook, the unwinding of the equity bubble, continuing worries about some emerging market economies, and the fallout from Enron and Worldcom.  On the whole, the environment now looks somewhat more comfortable. In the equity markets, realised and forward-looking volatility is down, and the IPO market seems to have sprung back to life. Most measures of credit risk - spreads, credit default swap premia, default rates, ratings downgrades-to-upgrades - have improved (Chart 6). At the banks and dealers, profits have been used to bolster or replenish capital; and credit default spreads are lower for virtually all banks (Chart 7). 4 BIS Review 17/2004 
But the environment is not without hazards. One may be sourced in the ‘search for yield’ that has been a feature of international markets over the past [18] months or so - as evidenced, for example, by record inflows into hedge funds and into emerging market and high-yield bond mutual funds in the US (Chart 8). Just as eighteen months ago some commentators asked whether credit spreads may have overshot on the upside, over the past few months some have wondered whether they might have overshot on the downside - although there has perhaps been a degree of correction since January. Separately, the global pattern of current account deficits and surpluses creates risks for financial markets, most obviously the foreign exchange markets - although, as I have taken to noting on these occasions, one wouldn’t guess that from what seem to be quite low implied volatilities on most currency pairs. Perhaps more significantly, there are risks of volatility in fixed-income markets given the inevitable uncertainty about the path that the FOMC will take back towards a more neutral rate. There are signs of that uncertainty in options markets (Chart 9). Those implied volatilities might be exaggerated by the bid for options to manage the negative convexity of US mortgage-backed security portfolios. But, in terms of the risk of volatile markets, that convexity hedging can itself create strains, as events during July-August last year underlined rather graphically.  I mention the US MBS market because I guess it has some interest to you given your demand for long-duration fixed-income assets to match long-dated fixed-income-like liabilities etc. So it was good to see that, in his review of the UK mortgage market, David Miles flags the importance of thinking through how any prepayment risk in UK fixed-income mortgages could be managed. Since prepayment in the US seems to have a ‘behavioural’ element, it is not so easy to get an exact hedge via a ‘matching’ financial option. It was also good to see that David has not advocated a Fannie-Freddie type structure for the UK, with the attendant concentration and moral hazard risks - a conceivable source of systemic issues in global markets.  Intelligence on fixed-income markets and UK long-term savings industry This takes me back, briefly, to the Bank’s market intelligence work, as I want to conclude by mentioning just a few of the issues that we would like to explore with you going forward. In particular, we have an interest in understanding the implications for asset prices and market dynamics of the increasing emphasis on joined-up asset and liability management, including giving fund managers benchmarks based on actual liabilities rather than standard market indices. Some of these implications arise from the demand for long-duration assets to match long-term liabilities; moving towards hedging more directly the optionality present in some liabilities, such as guaranteed nominal return annuities; and the search for returns from a wider class of assets. Concretely, the big issue has been - and probably remains - the balance of equity and bonds in asset portfolios. But there are also questions such as whether the industry is a material participant in the newish inflation-swaps market in order to hedge long-dated real defined-benefit pension liabilities; whether swaptions and equity derivatives are being used more to manage risks, and if so whether near to being ‘in-the-money’ options and well ‘out of the money’ options; why demand for long-dated gilt strips has not been greater, especially as many in the industry called for strips; the extent of UK pension fund investment in hedge funds, and whether that is pursued principally via funds of funds; the degree of involvement in other ‘alternative asset classes’, such as private equity or emerging markets; more speculatively, whether there are ‘missing markets’ that would be useful to the long-term savings industry - for example, longevity-risk securitisations; and, more prosaically, whether there is a greater interest in more mundane ways of enhancing returns on asset portfolios, such as securities lending.  Finally, in that connection, I hope that the recent multi-agency report on securities lending will prove helpful to pension fund trustees and others. As some of you will know, my colleague David Rule, chair of the Stock Lending and Repo Committee, helped to facilitate the exercise. But it was written by the industry for the industry, and it has been welcomed by the NAPF. It has been an exercise where the Bank has learned from interaction with you. I hope there will be other such occasions to do so.  BIS Review 17/2004 5 
My thanks again for inviting me to join you today. Chart 1 -2.5-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.522.5199920012003200520072009Survey rs-rl Market rs-rlUK short versus long-maturity forwardreal interest ratesPercentage points22-May-0316-Mar-04 -3-2-1012345619971998199920002001200220032004Percentage changes on a year earlierCPIRPIX30th percentiles(dashed lines)70th percentiles (dotted lines)Median inflation rates(solid lines)Chart 2: Percentiles of the distribution of inflation rates in CPI and RPIX 6 BIS Review 17/2004 
Chart 3  Source: Halifax-10-5051015201983198519871990199219941996199920012003Quarterly regional house price growthper centinterquartile rangemedianmean Chart 4 Source: Halifax0102030405060198319851988199019931995199820002003Dispersion of annual regional house price growthpercentage pointsdispersion of interquartile rangeabsolute dispersion  BIS Review 17/2004 7 
Chart 5 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.81983198519871989199219941996199820012003-4-2024681012Housing market tightnessratioper centratio sales to stocks(a) (left-hand scale)quarterly growth in house prices(b) (right hand scale)Source: Halifax, Nationwide and RICS(a) Ratio of number of houses sold per surveyor over the past three months to stocks of houses on books per surveyor.(b) Average of the Halifax and Nationwide indices. Chart 6  450400350300250200150100500AAAAAABBBBBBCUS dollarEuro-Basis points+Source: Merrill Lynch(a) Spread over swaps.(b) Changes between 22 May 2003 and 16 Mar. 2004.Changes in credit spreads by rating(a)(b) 8 BIS Review 17/2004 
Chart 7 020406080100120140160180200Feb.Apr.Jun.Aug.Oct.Dec.Feb.Abbey NationalJP Morgan Banca IntesaUFJHVBSociete GeneraleCredit Suisse Basis points20032004Highest CDS premia of major banks in selected countriesSource: Mark-it Partners and MorganMarkets. Chart 8 Cumulative corporate bond issuanceSource: Dealogic bondware0510152025303540JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDec2003200220012000199919981997US$ billionsCumulative emerging market corporate bond issuanceUS$ billions BIS Review 17/2004 9 
Chart 9 020406080100120140160180200Feb 96Feb 98Feb 00Feb 02UKUSEUImplied volatility of 3 month into 5 year swaptionsbp10 BIS Review 17/2004 
Kishori J Udeshi: Role of central bankers in an emerging economy like India Address by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Finance Convention of The Wellingkar Institute of Management, Mumbai, 19 March 2004. Ms Kishori J Udeshi is grateful to Shri Rajiv Ranjan, Director, Department of Economic Analysis & Policy, Reserve Bank of India, for his assistance. *      *      * Dr. Kanu Doshi was kind enough to leave the choice of topic for today’s lecture, to be decided by me. I chose this topic as I consider it to be one which would perhaps be of interest to bright and young students and one of contemporary relevance. Although the role of central banking is extensively discussed in the literature on monetary economics, the role of central bankers has remained obscure as central bankers were traditionally meant to operate in anonymity and therefore their public accountability was unclear. Governor Dr. Y.V. Reddy highlighted this neglect of the central banker while adducing to a common perspective that ‘the central banker is neither fish nor fowl; neither an academician nor a banker’. A serious research on why central bankers have been neglected brings to the fore several useful insights about the role of central bankers in general and in emerging countries in particular.  First, a principal reason for lack of focus on the role of the central banker is the common perception that the central banker involves itself only with the discharge of certain specialised and arcane functions. Such a perspective derives justification from extreme generalization of central banking functions, and a common set of instruments used for monetary control to achieve a common set of objectives such as price stability and sustained economic growth. Such a generalised perspective, however, lacks a serious appeal. Should we say that a central banker from a developed country is no different from that of a developing or emerging country? In particular, should we compare a central banker from United States, or United Kingdom with the central banker of a small underdeveloped economy.  Second, central banks are considered as monopoly institutions in their areas of activities. There is a common perception that it is only in a competitive environment that organisations and their managers can be evaluated in terms of distinctive and core competencies. Even though central banks are monopoly institutions, theoretical and empirical studies document the differential effectiveness of public policy, even though the same set of instruments are used across countries. Evidence shows that economic policies may be more effective in some countries but less effective in others. In the context of central banks, styles of monetary management differ significantly across countries due to differences in socio-economic-technological-institutional environment.  A third viewpoint is that central bankers perform only macro-level functions and thus, do not have a feel of micro-level operations. This viewpoint is erroneous. Central banks sometimes do have to engage in micro-level functions. Central banking functions Modern day central banking extends far beyond the domain of traditional functions such as currency management, banker to Government and promoting financial soundness. These re-orientations have been the natural corollary of pursuing monetary policy measures that are focused on definitive, well-defined and quantifiable objectives.  Central banks in emerging economies differ from their counterparts of developed countries in several ways. In some developed countries, central banks are vested only with the conduct of monetary policy. In most emerging countries, central banks, besides monetary policy, also shoulder the responsibilities of debt management, and regulation/supervision of banks and financial institutions. Even in regard to the conduct of monetary policy, central banks in emerging economies have to contend with several objectives, and distinct trade-offs as compared with some developed countries which pursue a single objective of price stability. While pursuing multiple objectives, and managing complex trade-offs, central banks in emerging countries assume the responsibility of looking after the interests of several agents including depositors, intermediaries, government, business, and external trade. In regard to choice of instruments, given the level of market development, and multiple objectives, emerging countries cannot entirely rely on single instrument such as interest rates. Rather, central banks in BIS Review 17/2004 1 
emerging countries prefer a judicious mix of interest rates, cash reserves, and other instruments. The most striking feature of central banking in emerging countries pertains to their critical role in development of financial markets and active involvement in the institution building process.  Institution building  In the Indian context, the RBI, in consultation with the Government, has played a major role in institution building since independence. Efforts in this direction encompass RBI’s contribution to development of commercial banking, development finance institutions in the areas of agriculture and industry, and specialised institutions for development of financial markets. After initiation of the economic reforms of the early 1990s, the role of RBI in the area of developing financial markets particularly the government securities, money markets and payment and settlement systems, have come to the fore. Moreover, in a global environment, with increasing integration of the international economy, the RBI’s role as the regulator and supervisor of commercial banks and financial institutions has assumed a central place in promoting transparency and credibility of institutions and monetary and financial policies.  Monetary policy  Most central bankers presently enjoy independence in choosing their policy instrument and have used it to rely on setting short-term interest rates. As a logical offshoot, many central banks in emerging markets are giving more exposures to pursuing price stability as one of the main objectives of monetary policy. In the RBI, there is a Financial Markets Committee (FMC), which meets daily before the opening of the markets and at times more frequently, when the situation warrants. The FMC reviews the liquidity and interest rate situation in financial markets and advises top management on the course of action that would be required by RBI during the day. This institutionalised framework helps the RBI to take an integrated view on all-important decisions having an impact on financial markets. Economists have long debated as to what should be the objective(s) of monetary policy. In most developed countries, monetary stability, defined as the price stability, constitutes the dominant objective of monetary policy. In emerging economies, central banks have to contend with several concerns; price stability, sustained growth, financial system’s stability, stable exchange rate, and operating objectives of liquidity management. The animated discussion on central bank objectives ranges broadly between single objective and multiple objectives. Such discussion entails a generic analysis of advantages and disadvantages of single or multiple objectives, and the nature, and scope of central banking organisation, which differs across the country groups of developed and emerging countries due to significant difference in socio-economic-technological-institutional environment.  Adoption of a single objective of monetary policy by central banks is based on the arguments that (i) monetary policy should concentrate its instruments on one objective, free from any policy trade-off, thereby strengthening the implementation of monetary policy; (ii) a single objective promotes transparency, accountability and independence of monetary policy; (iii) a single objective is more realistic in a deregulated and globalised economic and financial system; and (iv) it is easier to observe the channels of transmission, and therefore, easier to determine the ‘right’ instruments. Since a central bank’s monetary policy actions could involve several implications for the economy as a whole, the counter-arguments against a single objective derive from the fact that (i) economic objectives should be achieved simultaneously (in harmony), and a single objective may disrupt that harmony; (ii) monetary policy by itself may not be able to bring down inflation further and other wings of policy have to be deployed.  The case for multiple objectives for central banks entails “co-ordination” of a range of policies and thus, a spectrum of objectives. The principal reason as to why central banks in emerging economies have to contend with multiple objectives, or at least dual objectives of price stability and economic growth derives from the concerns of socio-economic-political systems. James Tobin, a Nobel laureate economist, argued that since central banks form an integral part of government, they cannot dissociate from the major objectives of the society, which includes sustained economic growth and price stability. William Poole, a revered central banker viewed that economic growth is a citizens’ objective and central bankers too are citizens.  2 BIS Review 17/2004 
Currency management is one of the most important traditional function of central banks in most countries. Central banks serve as a service provider to issue and distribute currency notes and coins. In most developed countries, high degree of homogeneity in the society as reflected in the culture, language, tastes and preferences of the public and the efficient distribution of income could induce a homogenous pattern of currency demand and thus, facilitate to achieve better currency management as compared with that of developing countries. In developing countries, significant diversity in socio-economic development across regions induce completely different currency preference of the public across regions, and across demographic segments, thus, entailing dynamic and complex currency management tasks for central bankers. What is noteworthy is the way in which technology has been harnessed to bring about improvement in currency management. The RBI performs the role of currency management with the objectives of ensuring adequate availability of coins and notes and maintaining the quality of notes in circulation. This is done through its 18 Regional issue offices/sub offices and a wide network of currency chests, repositories and small coin depots spread across the country. In pursuance of the Clean Note Policy, efforts are being made to improve the quality of notes in circulation.  In most emerging markets including India, central banks manage Government debts. Quite apart from the need to decide on issues such as the kind of auctioning, the types of securities to be auctioned and the maturity profile of the securities, there remains the issue of the extent of support that the central bank and commercial banks should extend to the Government borrowing programme. This is important from not only the point of view of deepening the Government securities markets, but also in terms of its the flow and cost of credit to the commercial sector. As adviser to Government, central bankers need to interact intimately with the Government on fiscal policy matters and provide a unified and coherent signal to the market on the macro policy stance. In recent years, central banks have become pro-active in the area of structural reforms.  The Indian case provides an excellent testimony towards this point. The strategy of financial reforms, was worked out in close coordination with the Government, and undertaken in appropriate sequential steps and synchronised with real sector reforms. This was all the more relevant in the Indian scenario where the Government has a significant stake in the banking system and consequently, any disruption in the financial structure could have significant budgetary implications. The RBI has undertaken wide-ranging reforms to deepen and widen the financial markets - money market, Government securities market and foreign exchange market. These markets have become vibrant and competitive.  Central bankers, in the present era, rely on a combination of policy measures in their day-to-day operations. They undertake combinations of actions primarily to provide signals about their policy stance to market participants. Reforms of the tools of monetary policy have therefore gained prominence. Such reforms have been made possible by the growing emphasis on indirect instruments of monetary control and the de-emphasis on direct instruments of policy. Open market operations, in such a milieu, have grown in importance. Interest rate flexibility is another tool. A major instrument of statutory pre-emption, such as the Cash Reserve Ratio has been progressively de-emphasized and instead, short-term instruments, such as the Repo Rate and in the medium-term, instruments such as Bank Rate have become important. Likewise, in several instances, the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), an erstwhile important prudential measure, has increasingly been scaled down. The idea inherent in these transformations in the approach to monetary policy is to provide banks with maximum freedom in their portfolio choice, without losing sight of the risks in asset accretion, and to provide opportunity to ensure that their resource allocation is optimal. Given the concerns of an emerging economy, certain portion of banks resources are often prescribed to be allotted under the ‘priority sector norms’; but in this case as well, the range of activities covered under priority sector has been expanded to provide greater choice to banks. And let us not forget the central bank’s authority and power of “moral suasion” which can act as a supervisory and regulatory force, even when no explicit oversight of the financial system is in place. Liquidity determination is the key to the efficiency of the actions of the monetary authorities. As the economy increasingly opens up, the interactions between domestic and external markets are expected to impinge on liquidity as much as the growth impulses from within the economy. Liquidity however is not static, in view of the speed of transactions and settlements and the sharp increase in financial innovations. Since liquidity is a function of both domestic monetary policies as much as external sector policies and debt management strategy, modern day central bankers are confronted with the enviable task of balancing a tightrope walk to ensure that the economy remains on track. As bankers to banks, central bankers tend to exercise considerable discretion and rarely go by straightjacket rule-based methods. While the ‘lender-of-the-last’ resort function of the central banks BIS Review 17/2004 3 
continues to be important, in addition, the central bank provides access to refinance facilities and a whole host of services, as in the matter of payments and settlement, funds transfer, settling of government securities through the NDS and the like.  Another area where central bankers of emerging countries have assumed new responsibilities pertains to managing the economy in response to external developments in the context of globalisation. Deputy Governor Dr. Rakesh Mohan has rightly pointed out that globalisation has offered several benefits as well as a host of challenges. In an increasingly global environment, countries have to adapt to greater internationalisation of economic policies. In this regard, central bankers in emerging countries have to be alert to international developments and acquire skills in the areas of international banking, international finance and economics, international regulations and international relations in order to function effectively while managing the monetary and financial conditions of the economy. In the area of banking soundness, central banks in emerging markets have become major initiators of activity. Financial supervision, whether on-site or off-site, has assumed prominence in the face of market imperfections and ensuring depositor protection. It is widely recognised that the Asian crisis was to a large extent, the outcome of lax supervisory standards pursued in these crisis-ridden economies. The soundness of banks and other non-bank entities depend not only on the operation of these entities, but also the efficacy of the supervisory process. In this context, the Core Principles, enunciated by the BIS in 1997, have quickly become a benchmark and we in the RBI are by now, compliant with most of these Principles. In view of the growing risks that banking entails and the scarcity of supervisory resources, many central banks are increasingly moving towards a risk-based approach to supervision in order to ensure optimum utilisation of supervisory resources. Following recent advancements, central banks have developed macro-prudential indicators in order to monitor the health of financial entities within the overall economic environment in which they operate. High quality regulation and supervision, which contribute directly to improvements in operating efficiency, are beneficial for emerging countries since efficiency in the allocation of resources to most productive sectors cannot be achieved and sustained without achieving operating efficiency. Regulation and supervision of institutions is, however, not a simple task especially in the Indian context as it involves a large network of banks and other financial institutions and their large number of branches spread over the entire country. Banks and their branches too involve a wide network of inter-action with different market segments owing to diversified portfolios in a deregulated environment. In this context, central bankers have to be highly skilled, vibrant and most dynamic in order to be effective in regulation and supervision.  In several countries, central banks assume a pivotal place in the payments and settlements system. As financial transactions become increasingly complex, there arises the need to harness financial markets to fully exploit the advances in information technology and communications networking. Some important research studies show that a relatively large involvement of the central bank in the financial system contributes to financial development. For emerging countries, the central bank involvement in the payment system enhances financial development. There is a considered view that an efficient payment and settlement system contributes to operating and allocation efficiencies of the financial system and thus, overall economic growth. Payments and settlement systems in emerging countries involve several features, which are distinct from that of developed countries.  One of the guiding principles followed by RBI in the reforms in the payment and settlement systems has been the need to provide for a safe, secure and efficient systems. RBI has identified the Systemically Important Financial Intermediaries (SIFI), which have the propensity for systemic risks. The introduction of screen based trading in Government securities following the delivery versus payment model in the form of Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) was a milestone in this regard. The commencement of foreign exchange clearing by the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. aimed at net settlement of the foreign exchange transactions is a major step forward, which has brought about more efficiency and safety. The RBI has also embarked upon the introduction of a Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) System for settlement of inter-bank and customer related funds transfers on a real time mode. Going beyond technological upgradation, the issue also remains of formulating an appropriate legal framework, in which transactions could take place in a safe, sound and secured manner. The growth of e-transactions and ‘digital signatures’ is a case in point.  As you would be aware, the challenges to central bankers in the present day are manifold and I venture to list out a few for this discerning audience. First the challenge of financial sector liberalisation. While competitive financial markets no doubt aid in efficient allocation of resources, failure or even disruptions in one segment of the financial sector can have serious ‘contagion effects’ 4 BIS Review 17/2004 
throughout the rest of the economy. Thus central bankers need to be vigilant and alert to domestic and external developments.  There also remains the challenge of ensuring soundness of financial institutions. The supervision of the financial system is getting increasingly complicated with the growth of ‘one-stop-banking’ and conglomerates as well as off-shore financial activities operating in multiple segments of the financial markets, leading to blurring of distinction among the various segments themselves. Repeated financial crises across the world have provided graphic evidence of the fact that financial disruptions can engender serious output costs. In this context, the need for effective supervision can hardly be underscored.  In conclusion, central banking is passing through challenging yet exciting times. While developments within the country charter its transformation, the experience of other countries provides invaluable lessons in the approach to promote growth, whilst maintaining price stability.  All in all, the life of a central banker is one of anonymity, staid and boring. It is only in moments when the going is tough that central bankers emerge from isolation and lean against the wind to battle splenetic insurmountable odds. Central bankers choose their profession because they are driven by a commitment to public service, which they hold dearer to themselves irrespective of financial remuneration. The conduct of central banking inherently involves the ultimate good of the society. An inappropriate choice of instruments or targets can lead to large losses of macro-economic well being. Ultimately, all citizens are stake holders in the central bank. Former Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan rightly referred to central banks as the public’s own institutions. Every central banker is conscious of operating at the apex of the financial system and at the centre of the macro-economic management, continuously balancing risks against every policy action. In this sense, a central banker has to possess certain unique qualities - integrity and professionalism of the highest order, finely honed analytical skills, the capability to take decisions under difficult circumstances, a thorough knowledge of the manner in which the economy functions, adaptability and a dynamism with which to respond to a life of continuous change and challenge. What is more they have to avoid partisanship and command public support. Together, these attributes distinguish a central banker as a leader and manager of people, situations and money, always dedicated to service to the nation. No wonder that central bankers are called priests at the temple of money. BIS Review 17/2004 5 
Caleb M Fundanga: Media relations and key economic development in Zambia during 2003 Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of the Bank of Zambia 9th media seminar, Ndola, 4 March 2004. *      *      * The Chairperson,  Distinguished Participants,  Ladies and Gentlemen  Allow me to first welcome you all, to this year’s media seminar. It is my pleasure to be with you again and preside over the opening of this important seminar. For those that are attending for the first time, you are more than welcome. I would like to urge you to feel free and actively participate in the discussions.  It is also gratifying that the seminar has been possible this year after skipping 2003 to enable us assess whether or not it was meeting the intended objectives. The Bank of Zambia considers this seminar important and has decided to hold one despite financial constraints that the Bank like other institutions in the country is going through. This is because the Bank attaches a lot of importance to media development and indeed the partnership with the media fraternity. In this vein, I urge all of you to treat this seminar with the seriousness it deserves.  Chairperson, this seminar is one way through which the Bank can contribute to capacity building of the media in order for it to play a meaningful role in the country’s quest for economic development and poverty alleviation. A well-informed and balanced media is a key vehicle in our crusade to uplift the standards of living of our people. Further, I share the view that the development of our fledgling democracy goes hand-in-hand with a corresponding healthy growth of a free media. This is crucial for proper expression of the freedom and liberties that our people expect and do enjoy. Even more important to us is the proper interpretation and explanation of Government development programmes and the role of the public in making such programmes attainable.  Ladies and Gentlemen, let me stress here that freedom of the press does not imply abrogation of professional conduct. To the contrary it calls for exemplary professional and ethical conduct. We also look to the media for a supportive approach where issues of national and developmental nature are brought to the attention of policy makers. It is therefore imperative that as journalists you desist from sensational reporting that can only be disruptive to well intended policies. We expect you to be constructive and not to lose your freedom and objectivity in your reporting.  It is my earnest appeal to you, to spend some time reporting on positive developments in our great country in addition to highlighting the various constraints in the implementation of key economic policies. It is also important for the media to highlight the various roles that respective stakeholders must play in order to effectively contribute to the much-needed national development.  Chairperson, the media in Zambia has an even more onerous responsibility, in view of multiparty democracy. This is so because in order to elicit their full participation in the decision making process, the electorate need to be well informed. With a well-informed electorate, policy makers and implementers including the Bank of Zambia will be better placed to develop and implement policies and programmes that are responsive to the needs of the Zambian people. This means that the media needs to disseminate information, while at the same time fulfill its watchdog role of being a mirror of our society. Having said this, may I generally express my satisfaction at the cooperation we enjoyed with the media and the role you played during 2003. I must commend you the media for having been supportive particularly during the trying times and urge you to continue. We in the Bank will always keep our doors open to be on hand to explain or indeed clarify any issues that will enhance your work. We will also continue to hold quarterly Media Briefings on economic developments in general and monetary and financial sector developments in particular, which are within the mandate of the Bank. Chairperson, allow me to highlight the key economic developments during 2003. Despite several setbacks at the beginning of 2003, including, food production shortfall, the pullout of Anglo-American BIS Review 17/2004 1 
Corporation from Konkola Copper Mines, fiscal difficulties arising from, amongst other things, higher than programmed wages, recurrent departmental charges (RDCs) and payments to ex-RAMCOZ workers, high lending interest rates and delay to reach agreement on a new PRGF arrangement and the consequent failure to reach the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative completion point, several positive and encouraging developments were recorded during the year, particularly in the second half of the year. Ladies and Gentlemen, some of the positive developments are that, for the fifth consecutive year national output increased, with real gross domestic product (GDP) growing by 4.3 percent, which was higher than the 3.3 percent growth registered in 2002. With a population growth rate of just under 3 percent, this means a positive per capita growth showing some improvement towards poverty reduction. The growth in real GDP was mainly attributed to favourable developments in both the domestic and global economy. In the domestic economy, a recovery in agriculture from the effects of drought in the 2001/2002-season coupled with Government’s support in the area of input supply to the small but viable farmers through the Fertiliser Support Programme (FSP) were major factors to the recorded positive growth. In addition, the recovery of the world economy pushed prices of non-fuel commodities up which assisted in the growth of non-traditional and metal exports leading to an expansion of the growth in mining and quarrying sector. The other key sectors that contributed to the observed growth were tourism, manufacturing, construction and energy. In addition, annual overall inflation declined to 17.2 percent in December 2003 from 26.7 percent in December 2002 and compared well to the revised target of 17.1 percent. This was mainly attributed to the slow down in food inflation, as food prices continued to fall in 2003, following an improvement in the supply of most food items. The country has come from a position of being a net importer of food to becoming a net exporter of maize and maize products to the countries in the region. Chairperson, following the increased confidence related to the introduction of the Broad-based Inter-bank Foreign Exchange System on 23rd July 2003, and the weakness of the US dollar in the international markets, the Kwacha was fairly resilient against the US dollar depreciating by only 7.5 percent during 2003 compared with a depreciation of 13.2 percent the previous year. This resilience was also supported by the good performance of the non-traditional exports sector as well as the favourable earnings from copper exports due to the high copper prices, which rose to 100.11 US cents in December 2003 from 72.38 US cents in December 2002. Relative stability of the Kwacha exchange rate also contributed to the subdued inflation registered in the year. As you may already know, the main objective of introducing the new system was to enhance the efficiency of the foreign exchange market and make price discovery more transparent. This came by way of improving information flows among market players, thereby reducing speculative behaviour among them. I am glad that this system is working well and the Bank will continue to monitor and support its performance with the view to enhance and consolidate the gains so far achieved. Ladies and Gentlemen, another notable development during 2003 was the decline in commercial banks’ lending rates.  This was reflected in the weighted average lending base rate, which fell to 37.7 percent in December 2003 from 42.4 percent during the same month in 2002. I am glad to inform you that this trend has continued with the lending base rate falling further to 36.2 percent and 33.7 percent in January and February 2004, respectively. This mainly followed the downward adjustment of the statutory reserve requirement by 3.5 percentage points to 14.0 percent from 17.5 percent on both kwacha and foreign currency deposit liabilities held by commercial banks at end-October 2003. As expected, the downward adjustment in statutory reserve ratios led to an improvement in the availability of liquidity to commercial banks. It is our expectation that, with time, commercial banks’ lending to the productive sector, especially agriculture will increase. The Bank is closely monitoring the developments in credit to the productive sector.  I must stress here that lowering of lending rates is not an end in itself. We in the Bank would like to see this development accompanied by an observable increase in loans extended to the growth sectors of our economy for them to thrive, stimulate national output and create employment. It is only through this that our efforts to reduce the current levels of poverty, estimated at 73 percent shall yield positive results. Chairperson, the Media can also play a role in lowering lending rates through educating the borrowing public on the importance of paying back. You may be aware that part of the explanation to the high lending rates in Zambia has been the high risk premiums supported by a long history of loan 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
delinquency. Therefore, a change in credit culture underpinned by improved loan repayment will restore confidence to suppliers of loanable funds; thereby reduce risk premiums, which in turn will have a positive bearing not only on lending rates but also on increased lending to the public.  Furthermore, the media has a mammoth task in the country’s efforts aimed at reaching the completion point under the HIPC Initiative through explaining to the public, the importance and benefits to the country. I should mention here that the fiscal measures put in place by Government are not primarily for reaching the completion point but are ideal for any country’s search for fiscal prudence and macroeconomic stability, which are essential for spurring savings and private sector investments, and hence economic growth. Therefore, with or without HIPC, the country needs to restore prudent budgetary operations.  Ladies and Gentlemen, some favourable developments are also expected during this year. This optimism is premised on the following factors: • Favourable weather during the 2003/2004 agricultural season supported by continued input supply under the Fertiliser Support Programme, which will support growth of the agriculture sector. • The exchange rate is expected to remain relatively stable in view of several factors including the confidence market players have continued to show in the broad-based inter-bank foreign exchange system, increased metals production and favourable metals prices on the world market, good performance of the non-traditional exports and less demand for food imports. • Progress has also been made in the mining sector with the completion of the sale of RAMCOZ and the identification of an equity partner for Konkola Copper Mines.  In addition, the new Kansanshi mine owned by First Quantum Metals was commissioned recently and production is expected to commence soon. All these developments are expected not only to improve foreign exchange supply and contribute to exchange rate stability but to the growth in national output and employment. • It is anticipated that inflationary pressures will be subdued following continued adequate food supply in the first quarter of this year and the expected favourable food output for the 2004/2005 consumption period owing to favourable weather and continued input supply. Further, the anticipated continuation in the exchange rate stability will also contribute to moderating inflationary pressures. • Government net domestic financing from the banking system is expected to be within the projected level, which is essential to inducing a further downward movement in yield rates on Government securities, and thus in commercial banks’ lending interest rates. Such a development will contribute to a drop and stability in prices of goods and services, and hence dampen inflationary pressures. Ladies and Gentlemen, this years’ seminar, like the previous ones, is based on carefully selected topics guided by the need to appraise each other on topical issues such as the operations of the foreign exchange inter-bank system, the need for affordable lending rates and the HIPC. I am confident that my staff and other presenters will do a good job of stimulating discussions of these topics and others for you to have a full appreciation and understanding to be better placed to explain the same to the members of the public and those of your colleagues who for one reason or another could not have the opportunity of being with us. This year we are also privileged to have Dr. Zulu as one of the resource persons. Dr. Zulu was the first Zambian Governor of the Bank of Zambia. After a distinguished career at home, which also saw him serve as Economic Advisor to the President. Dr. Zulu later went to the IMF where he served for many years as Director, first for the Africa Department and later for the Central Banking Department, which in 1991 was renamed Monetary, and Exchange Affairs Department.  In this capacity, Dr. Zulu also served at the United Nations as the IMF Managing Director’s liaison officer. Chairperson, may I remind the participants that in 2003 the Bank of Zambia launched an annual publication called the BoZ Reader. The first publication was entirely based on articles by the Bank staff. In my remarks during the launch of the Reader, I called upon members of the public and indeed the press to subscribe articles to this publication. May I inform you that the Bank has commenced the process of the second publication and therefore I would like to reiterate my invitation to you to submit articles on key or topical developmental issues facing the country. BIS Review 17/2004 3 
At this juncture, may I wish you fruitful discussions and officially declare this seminar open. Thank you 4 BIS Review 17/2004 
Jürgen Stark: Promoting stability and growth - economic reforms and sound institutions Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic, Buenos Aires, 9 March 2004. *      *      * The last time I visited Argentina was five years ago at the start of the economic recession. Since then, Argentina has undergone a painful experience socially, politically, economically and financially. Over the past few years, I have followed developments in Argentina with great attentiveness as well as with great concern about the destruction of many economic livelihoods and the unused opportunities of this country. I have come to Buenos Aires today as a friend of Argentina. I would like to form my own impression of the current situation and the outlook. I shall be listening as well as giving my own assessment of the current problems. And I shall be doing so from the perspective of a major IMF shareholder. Key role of policy Argentina’ history over the past 150 years has been characterised by breaks in its economic and financial development. Periods of economic prosperity and political stability have often been followed by a deep crisis, a rapid decline of the currency and great poverty. Economic and monetary policies have invariably been of major - if not crucial - significance in this. More than 100 years ago, the Bankers’ Magazine encapsulated the role of politics in Argentina when its stated that “Everything in Argentina’s national life, whether industrial, commercial or financial, begins and ends in politics.”1That statement is confirmed by the economic developments of past two decades. For one thing, mistaken economic policy decisions - especially government debt getting out of hand - in the mid and late 1980s led directly to hyperinflation and to the replacement of the currency. After the “lost decade”, the Convertibility Law and comprehensive reforms in the early 1990s succeeded in stabilising the economy and the currency. In the first half of the 1990s, Argentina managed to match the economic success it had enjoyed at the beginning of the twentieth century. The necessary basic conditions for initially successful development were – firm political resolve, – confidence in the country’s own strength and the mobilisation of its inherent potential, – technical and financial assistance for self-help from international institutions. I firmly believe that Argentina can return to stability and prosperity on a lasting and sound basis. Manipulation and arbitrary intervention in the market bring, at best, short-term and illusory success. I think it is important to remember the basic conditions I have just cited. What is required, in particular, is the unconditional political will to undertake comprehensive and sensible economic reforms. Economic recovery in Argentina It is gratifying that, in the past year, the Argentinian economy recovered from four years of recession. Real GDP growth has increased by a good 8%. The inflation rate is low and clearly down on the year. Unemployment and poverty are slowly being reduced. For the current year, too, the outlook is promising. The IMF anticipates growth of 4%. Argentina is benefiting from the improved global economic outlook and the sharp depreciation of the peso. The future pace of growth hinges crucially on the policy measures taken to strengthen investment and to boost corporate and consumer confidence.                                                       1 Bankers’ Magazine (1899), quoted after A G Ford, The Gold Standard 1880-1914. Britain and Argentina, Oxford 1962. BIS Review 15/2004 1 
The political agenda is extensive. It calls for highly credible political leadership in order to press ahead with all the reforms that are needed and to create confidence on the part of investors, consumers as well as, in particular, the international financial markets. That is because special priority is to be assigned to the objective of regaining access to the international financial markets as soon as possible. Argentina should not rely on being able to cover its financing needs via the international financial institutions on a long-term basis. In this connection, it should be called to mind yet again that Argentina has been in debt to the IMF, for example, for an uninterrupted period of more than two decades accompanied by sometimes considerable rates of increase. Argentina has to compete for funding with other emerging economies on the international financial markets. To utilise its potential, create economic growth and jobs, and, especially, to combat poverty, Argentina needs the confidence of international investors. In order to achieve that, better creditor-debtor relations are needed. At the end of the 1990s, Argentina gained a lot of recognition for its exemplary relations with its creditors. It is important to re-establish such relations. The treatment of investors over the past two years has destroyed much of that stock of confidence - not just for Argentina. At this point, it is worth noting that - in contrast to flows of capital to South East Asia - total inflows of private capital to Latin America went down by half last year compared with their level at the end of 2001 according to the latest estimates of the Washington Institute of International Finance. There are reasons for this, which have to be taken very seriously. In Argentina, there are two problem areas which need a rapid and constructive solution. 1. Reform of the banking sector: recapitalisation of the banks is urgently required; compensation for the asymmetrical indexation and pesofication should be brought to a conclusion and the still open question of offsetting the losses arising from the ‘amparos’ should be brought to a settlement as soon as possible. The tax on financial transactions is not conducive to strengthening the banking system either. 2. Restructuring Argentina’s debt. International investors naturally also continue to be deterred by Argentina’s still unresolved debt problem. Since the Argentinian government unilaterally ceased making payments to foreign private creditors more than two years ago, hardly any progress has been made towards rescheduling the debt apart from naming a banking consortium. The offer presented in September 2003 is evidently unacceptable to the private creditors. Without wishing to interfere in this process, I believe it would be in Argentina’s own interests to enter quickly into meaningful negotiations with the private creditors and their representatives who are willing to hold talks. This should be done on the basis of an ambitious time schedule. The aim should be to find a solution that is sustainable over the long term and fair to both sides. This must not place too great a strain on Argentina’s economic and financial capacities. Nor must excessive demands be placed on the creditors’ willingness to waive claims. Those are the key preconditions for regaining access to the international capital markets. I repeat: rapid success in rescheduling is in Argentina’s own interests and is not something to be disregarded. What has to be considered in this context is that a significantly higher primary surplus is required for this. The budget approved by Congress for the current year provides a basis for raising the primary surplus. International community During the past few years, the international community has given extensive assistance to Argentina and not abandoned it to its fate. Argentina remains an important member of the international community of states. Argentina’s membership of the G-20, which was established in 1999, underlines that standing. Every country enjoys advantages as a member of the international community. Membership also entails obligations, which must not be infringed, let alone destroyed. They have to be fulfilled under all circumstances. Argentina’s debt to the international financial institutions at the end of 2003 amounted to around US$31 billion. In line with their share of capital in the IFIs, the member states of the European Union bear US$10 billion of this compared with around US$5 billion for the USA. Even though the IMF and multilateral development banks have paid out this financial aid only with the imposition of conditions, 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
Argentina’s sovereignty has been upheld in all cases. However, there arises from that a responsibility to use the funds for the intended purposes. Conversely, the international financial institutions and their shareholders are responsible for the funds being allocated only in accordance with the conditionality of the relevant statutes of the IFIs. The IMF, for example, may grant financial aid only to avert a temporary balance of payments crisis and subject to conditions. The revolving nature of the IMF’s resources fundamentally prohibits their prolonged use. The international financial institutions, the IMF and the World Bank, and their shareholders have had a lot a patience with Argentina recently. The discussions of the IMF Executive Board at the end of January and the G-7 statement of Boca Raton show that the shareholders now want to see results. It is expected that Argentina will work constructively with the IMF. As is the case for every IMF member and program country, binding commitments with verifiable implementation are a precondition for IMF loans. After all, the high degree of IMF involvement in Argentina has led to the emergence of doubts in some quarters about the preferred creditor status of the IMF and World Bank. That status, which has hitherto been observed without qualification, must not be called into question on account of the possible far-reaching implications it might have for the Fund’s role in overcoming disruptions to the balance of payments. Economic reforms The political mood in Latin America has recently turned against a market-economy-oriented policy in some cases. Many people in Latin America associate reforms with weak growth, low incomes and unemployment. The term “reform” does not do justice to what the word implies, however, and is used for measures that, looked at objectively, can hardly be described as real reforms. It therefore comes as no surprise that positive results fail to materialise and that people talk of “reform fatigue”. The current issue of the magazine Latin Finance takes an in-depth look at the subject of reform fatigue and the resurgence in populism.2 It describes populism as “Latin America’s chronic political disease” and states that “Voters may be attracted to populism, but it cannot deliver long-term growth because it repels private capital and investment.” That is certainly not a new insight and it by no means applies solely to South America, but rather has general validity. Following the debt crisis of the early 1980s, a comprehensive process of reform was begun in Latin America. Macroeconomic policy concentrated on the problem of stabilisation, while structural reforms promoted growth. In 1995 in Mexico, the floating of the peso and the basis provided by economic and financial reforms set in train a process of growth and slowed down the debt dynamics. Something similar was repeated in Argentina at the start of the 1990s. Finally, well over a year ago, Brazil was able to regain investors’ confidence with a comprehensive reform programme. Of course, here - like in the industrial countries - a key debate is taking place on how far, how quickly and at what time structural reforms can or should be implemented. From a European perspective, there are two points to be made here based on general experience. 1. Structural reforms make economies more flexible and therefore less susceptible to shocks. This flexibility and the avoidance of excessive government intervention enhances the efficiency of the economy. If reforms are implemented in a credible manner, the confidence of both investors and consumers is strengthened. Such a strengthening of confidence compensates for potential short-term negative effects on the economy. Furthermore, there is the question of what the macroeconomic costs of failure to act would be. 2. Experience in Europe also confirms that structural reforms combined with a properly structured fiscal consolidation bring positive economic results even in the short term.                                                       2 Latin Finance, February 2004. BIS Review 15/2004 3 
Washington Consensus Examples in Latin America show that a turnaround for the better is possible. What has been the key to success? In 1989, John Williamson, Senior Fellow at the Institute for International Economics, drew up a kind of basic canon of recommendable reform policies for Latin America and coined the term “Washington Consensus” for this.3 Specifically, this involves the following policies: (1) macroeconomic stability as an indispensable prerequisite for economic growth, (2) redistribution of public expenditure in favour of healthcare, education and the infrastructure, (3) tax reform with the goal of a broader assessment base and lower marginal tax rates, (4) liberalisation of the financial sector including interest rates, (5) creation of a competitive exchange rate, (6) liberalisation of trade, (7) dismantling restrictions on foreign direct investment, (8) privatisation of state-owned enterprises, (9) deregulation to make the economy more competitive, and (10) safeguarding rights of ownership. The Washington Consensus has been misinterpreted - often unwittingly and sometimes quite intentionally. For many, it is synonymous with “cold Neoliberalism” and “market fundamentalism”. Such interpretations are obviously at variance with the reforms I have just listed. Slogans such as “minimal state” or “free, unfettered movement of capital” are nowhere to be found among the ten points. After all, this has nothing to do with promoting a particular ideology but is simply a matter of applying economic laws in a market framework. A further misinterpretation concerns the reform programme’s relationship with the international institutions which have their headquarters in Washington. There are some people who claim that it was the power of these institutions that had triggered the reforms in Argentina. Such interpretations obviously overestimate the impact of this programme, however. Incidentally, these reforms were no more than the lowest common denominator that prevailed in Washington in the early 1990s. As I see it, all the reform polices recommended by the Washington Consensus retain their full validity even today for Argentina and Latin America in general. That also goes for exchange rate policy. The 1991 decision to peg the peso to the US dollar through a currency board was right for Argentina at the time. After years of hyperinflation, the currency board was an important and successful element of Argentina’s stabilisation strategy. Over the years, however, the strict pegging to the US dollar handicapped the country’s international competitiveness - the introduction of more flexible arrangements at an earlier stage would therefore have been better. Even those who supported a currency board now admit that floating the peso at the end of the 1990s would have been beneficial for Argentina. By the way, the Bundesbank has always pointed out as a matter of principle that, when a currency board regime is introduced, those charged with responsibility for policy should always have an exit strategy as well. I wish to stress once again that the elements of the Washington Consensus are still valid today. How the elements are implemented - in other words, in what sequence and at what pace - depends on the particular circumstances in the country concerned. Reform Consensus “plus” Having said that, it would seem appropriate to give some thought to augmenting the consensus, a “Consensus plus”. For me, this concerns two points in particular: 1. the importance of sound institutions, and 2. the social dimension of economic developments. Recently, the debate on economic reforms has undergone a shift of emphasis. Without doubt, stability-oriented macropolicy is still key. Alongside the continuing unquestioned importance of issues such as privatisation combined with market liberalisation, deregulation and a general limitation of government activity, the public institutional conditions for the appropriate functioning of the markets have come more sharply into focus of late. Essentially, this concerns the role the institutions play in a country’s economic development. Sound institutions play a part in reducing a country’s susceptibility to external and internal negative shocks.                                                       3 John Williamson, “From Reform Agenda to Damaged Brand Name”, Finance & Development, September 2003, p 10. 4 BIS Review 15/2004 
More than anything else, it is the crises in emerging markets during the past ten years which have clearly revealed what grave implications non-existent or unsound institutions can have. Institutions anchor sovereign action in a reliable framework and can improve the consistency and continuity of political measures. Strong institutions are needed for good policy to become effective. That also applies to central banks which have to be independent of political influence. If, say, the domestic financial markets of emerging economies are only inadequately developed, the countries often tend towards an unsound debt structure by borrowing in the excessively short term and in foreign currency. Moreover, some emerging markets liberalised the financial sector relatively quickly without a parallel adequate strengthening of the banks’ risk management and of the oversight and supervisory institutions. Since last year, the most important industrial and emerging countries represented in the G-20 have been taking an in-depth look at the importance of sound institutions. There is a general consensus that susceptibility to crises can be reduced if a country establishes efficient domestic capital markets and creates independent supervisory institutions to oversee the financial intermediaries and markets. Broad, deep and liquid domestic financial markets can alleviate tensions if access to the international financial markets should deteriorate at some time. What is also crucial is the development of a modern and efficient payment system in which the central bank is actively involved. Various studies have shown that the direct involvement of the central bank in payment system operations is advantageous, above all, for emerging markets. Above and beyond that, the legal system is an integral component of a given country’s institutional framework and is of major importance for the satisfactory functioning of the financial system. That implies a credible statutory framework for monetary and fiscal policies, including the independence of the central bank, rules on competition and regulations for corporate governance. A sound legal system guarantees the freedom and fulfilment of contracts and the enforcement of private rights of ownership. Of importance are appropriate and unambiguous rules and regulations which are rigorously enforced by the courts of law. The second point concerns the social dimension in the sense of creating social security systems and, amongst other things, promoting education and training. This social dimension, however, could also be understood in the sense of a social market economy based on the German model that was successfully applied by Ludwig Erhard more than half a century ago. Social market economy The concept of the social market economy is based on economic freedom safeguarded by the rule of law. This is supplemented by arrangements pertaining to social security and equitable distribution. According to this concept, economic activity is a matter for the private sector, while the government’s policy sets the framework in which economic activity unfolds (or Ordnungspolitik as it is known in Germany). The social market economy requires and encourages competition and entrepreneurship, a sense of personal responsibility and a readiness to take risks. The “social” element in the market economy concept means that market freedom is restricted on social grounds in those areas where it produces socially undesirable outcomes. Furthermore, the results of the economic process should be corrected in those places where they do not appear social enough in the light of society’s values. A properly understood social policy envisages a subsidiary role for the state. The duties of the state should be confined to providing financial insurance against existential risks, such as illness and old age, and to promoting education and training. Unfortunately, we in Germany have moved away from these principles of the social market economy during the past 30 years. We have overextended the welfare state and, by doing so, overstrained the capacity of our economy. For that reason, an in-depth discussion on reverting to the principles of the social market economy has got under way. Given the country’s generous social safety net, social policy for Germany means that transfer payments should be restricted to those groups of persons who are really in need. For Latin America, the weight of basic social problems means that other priorities are likely to apply. For both Europe and Latin America, however, it remains equally important that the emphasis on social aspects of the market economy does not result in the efficiency of the economy being impaired. BIS Review 15/2004 5 
The difficulty of pushing through reforms is something of which we in Germany are only too well aware. We are emerging from a three-year period of stagnation in which potential growth declined. Every effort therefore has to be made to raise potential growth to a sustained higher level again. A number of reforms have now been initiated. Nevertheless, the adopted reforms can be no more than a first step. We in Germany need an all-embracing modernisation of society, government and the economy. Conclusion The Governor of the Mexican central bank, Guillermo Ortiz, recently made a call for Latin America’s reform fatigue to be overcome.4 I concur in that objective and would like to stress, in particular, that greater efforts in terms of creating sound institutions could play a major part in achieving it. That applies not just to emerging markets in Latin America but also to many industrial countries. Argentina has a number of difficult years behind it. At the same time, the people of Argentina will have a better future to look forward to if it mobilises its own abilities and strengths. Argentina is a country with great potential. What is now needed is to strengthen that self-belief and to use the economic potential that is available.                                                       4 Guillermo Ortiz, Overcoming Reform Fatigue, Finance & Development, September 2003. 6 BIS Review 15/2004 
Joseph Yam: Two IFC Talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Federation of Hong Kong Industries Annual Dinner 2004, Hong Kong, 2 March 2004. *      *      * I am delighted to be joining you at your annual dinner this evening. Since its foundation in 1960, the Federation of Hong Kong Industries has seen enormous changes in the business landscape of Hong Kong. In 1960 Hong Kong was reaching the end of its first decade as a major centre of manufacturing. Today Hong Kong is the centre of a much larger regional manufacturing base, with some 5 million manufacturing workers employed by Hong Kong companies in Guangdong Province alone. The size and diversity of this manufacturing base makes the work of your organisation even more important and challenging. The Federation has risen to the challenges with a growing focus on the Pearl River Delta and beyond and a stress on communication and co-operation with counterparts beyond Hong Kong, in Mainland China, in Asia and across the world. As industrialists, you are in command of considerable resources, and as producers of wealth and as investors you are some of the main users of Hong Kong’s financial infrastructure. My aim in this speech is to tell you something about recent and future developments in that infrastructure. But first I should point out that “Two IFC” - the title of this speech - does not stand for the magnificent new building in which the HKMA offices are now housed. It stands for a Mach Two International Financial Centre. It stands for a new vision of what an international financial centre is like. It raises questions on how the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government (HKSARG) should go about discharging its responsibility under Article 109 of the Basic Law in “the maintenance of the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre”. You may wonder why I refer to Mach Two in the description of an international financial centre. Mach is defined in the New Oxford Dictionary of English as “the ratio of the speed of a body to the speed of sound in the surrounding medium”. Mach Two is generally used to mean twice the speed of sound. It is also used as an image for a higher dimension. I think it is a suitable description of the phenomenal, dimensional jump that we have been seeing in global finance - and in the environment in which an international financial centre has to function. Financial liberalisation, and consequently the globalisation of financial markets, has placed new demands on an international financial centre. The information technology revolution means that the speed at which international capital travels the globe, and its volume, have increased tremendously, to the extent that the traditional topography or the key attributes constituting an international financial centre are no longer adequate. The migration of financial sector activity into cyber space has begun, whether we like it or not. When was the last time you went into a bank? You can now conduct most banking transactions through the Internet, while enjoying your vacation in Phuket or having a family reunion in Whistler. Soon it will be the financial intermediaries, or may be even the markets themselves, that will start to migrate into cyber space. Indeed, the boundaries arising from geography and time zones are breaking down for many activities, particularly those of financial markets, under the influence of globalisation and the revolution of information technology. What then are the attributes of a Mach Two International Financial Centre? And how does the HKSARG discharge its responsibility specified clearly in Article 109 of the Basic Law? These are challenging questions and the legal responsibility is an onerous one. But before I attempt to answer these questions, I think I should, in view of the increasing emphasis in Hong Kong on accountability, first draw attention to where the functions and responsibilities of this task rest. You may not be aware of this, but the Chief Executive of the HKSARG, on 27 June last year, issued a public statement concerning the responsibilities of the Financial Secretary (FS) and the Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury (SFST). Specifically in relation to the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre, the statement specifies that: “FS shall be responsible for determining the policy objectives at a macro level. SFST shall be responsible for formulating specific policies to achieve such objectives and for overseeing their implementation through the regulatory authorities and other organisations as appropriate”. BIS Review 15/2004 1 
On the same day, the Financial Secretary made a public statement concerning the macro policy objectives in relation to, among other things, the maintenance of the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre. He said that: “An international financial centre is a place where financial institutions from many different jurisdictions come together to carry out financial intermediation of an international dimension. The Government should seek to maintain and enhance Hong Kong’s status as a major international financial centre. Towards this end, the Government should - a. maintain an appropriate economic and legal environment for an open, fair and efficient market, including through ensuring that Hong Kong’s laws continue to provide a level playing field; b. further enhance the international competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial services through promoting international financial intermediation and attracting foreign savings to Hong Kong; c. develop payment, clearing and settlement systems to facilitate the safe and efficient conduct of international and cross-border financial services in Hong Kong; and d. strengthen corporate governance standards with a view to fostering international confidence in our financial markets.” I think these macro policy objectives for the maintenance of the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre are very appropriate. Indeed, it seems that they are so appropriate that there has not been any difference of opinion expressed publicly since their promulgation in June last year. It may be that this is a reflection of a general lack of interest in the subject. I hope not. The Hong Kong Monetary Authority is one of the regulatory authorities responsible for implementing the specific policies for maintaining Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre. You may have heard of an exchange of letters between the Financial Secretary and the Monetary Authority, also in June last year, which set out the division of functions and responsibilities in monetary and financial affairs between the two. In the principal letter, the Financial Secretary specifies that, in support of policies to maintain the status of Hong Kong as an international financial centre: “The Monetary Authority, when discharging his responsibilities for maintaining the stability and integrity of the monetary and financial systems of Hong Kong, shall, in co-operation with other relevant authorities and organisations, seek to promote: a. the development of payment, clearing and settlement systems to facilitate the safe and efficient conduct of international and cross-border financial activities in Hong Kong; b. confidence in Hong Kong’s monetary and financial systems through active participation in international financial and central banking forums; and c. appropriate market development initiatives that help strengthen the international competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial services.” Against this somewhat bureaucratic but politically essential background, let me now give you my views, for what they are worth, on a Mach Two International Financial Centre. As explained in the statement of the Financial Secretary last June, an international financial centre is a place for carrying out financial intermediation of an international dimension. This means, I think, not only the channelling of foreign savings into Hong Kong investments and Hong Kong savings into foreign investments. That would be too narrow an interpretation. In any case, the Hong Kong economy is small by international standard. Savings and investments, in national accounting terms, amount merely to HK$400 billion a year, hardly a month’s turnover in the stock exchange. Financial intermediation of an international dimension is, I think, meant to include also the channelling of savings from one foreign jurisdiction into investments in another foreign jurisdiction, for example, US savings into investments in the Mainland of China, or vice versa, or German savings into Indonesian investments, and so on. To aspire to be an international financial centre, we must provide the platform whereby international financial intermediation can be conducted in Hong Kong, and for a substantial volume of the activity to be captured here. The question is: “How?” 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
We should not, of course, forget the traditional Mach One answers. I am sure they are familiar to you all. They include: a. respect for the rule of law and independence of the judiciary; b. a pool of skilled labour; c. a robust regulatory system with a light regulatory touch; d. a simple personal and corporate tax regime with a low tax rate; e. a government that is responsive to financial sector concerns; f. a stable and freely convertible currency; g. a clean and efficient government; and h. an attractive working and living environment. All these Mach One attributes continue to be important. They lie at the foundation of an international financial centre, and we must all do our best to ensure their continuity, and to strengthen them in the light of changing circumstances. But, as I said earlier, the dimensional jump in global finance arising from the globalisation of financial markets and the revolution of information technology has made them inadequate on their own. On the business side, we are now talking about, for example, the provident fund managers in a foreign jurisdiction who have access to up to the minute information on financial markets. They are nimble in making portfolio reallocations among bank deposits, debt and equity, hopping across the three different channels of financial intermediation and looking for financial arrangements and instruments that best suit their investment appetite. We are also talking about the increasing number of high net worth international citizens who carry portable computers, and who are quite capable of managing their own finances and demanding direct access to financial markets. On the risk management side, we are talking about investors who are increasingly alert to risks and skilful in managing them. Apart from the minority who play the currency markets, the majority of them probably do not wish, for example, to incur the exchange rate risk of a second currency on top of that of the currency of the economy in which they are investing their savings. We are also talking about the increasing number of sophisticated market participants who are aware of the payment, clearing and settlement risks of financial transactions. Receiving a cheque does not necessarily mean finality of payment. Striking a deal in a bond purchase does not necessarily mean that you have immediate title over the bonds. You do not necessarily get your US dollars or euros, when you buy them in Asian time zone out of Asian currencies, at the same time as you part with your money. Many of you probably still do not care. But increasingly you will when you realise what can happen to your money in the few hours of time difference in this age of information technology. I hope the wake-up call will not take the form of a major IT scandal in international finance. But let me offer a little comfort by telling you that the Mach Two International Financial Centre that I have in mind should go a long way towards meeting the business and risk management needs that I have just referred to. In fact, we have been quietly and effectively putting together the building blocks, plumbing and wiring to cater for those needs and enable Hong Kong to attain that Mach Two status. I think we are some way ahead of others in this effort, but quite a lot still needs to be done. And we need more time, effort, support and understanding of the community, particularly the financial community, parts of which may have a vested interest in the maintenance of the status quo. What then are the additional attributes that qualify a Mach One International Financial Centre as a Mach Two? There are, as far as I can identify, four such attributes. The first attribute is the more obvious one and this is the existence of financial intermediation channels that are characterised by stability, integrity, diversity and efficiency. I believe our financial intermediation channels of banking, equity and debt, and their derivatives, already enjoy these characteristics. For many years after the series of banking crises in the eighties, the banking system has been serving as a reliable conduit for absorbing domestic as well as international savings, and channelling them to those who borrow funds. Greater competition, particularly after interest rate liberalisation, has increased efficiency and benefited borrowers. The many mortgagers of Hong Kong, for example, are now enjoying a mortgage interest rate, relative to prime, that is four percentage points less than six years ago. And greater depositor protection is on the way with the planned introduction of deposit insurance. The sharing of commercial as well as consumer credit information also helps those BIS Review 15/2004 3 
with good credit standing to have ready access to funds, and at favourable interest rates. As banking supervisor we attach great importance to promoting “the general stability and effective working of the banking system” - a requirement that is clearly stated in the preamble of the Banking Ordinance. We take this responsibility seriously and have been able to work with the banks to ensure that confidence in this traditional and essential financial intermediation channel remains high, even against most unfavourable circumstances, such as those of the past few years. Similar progress has been made in the regulation of the equity market by the Securities and Futures Commission. Long gone are the days when the equity market was run by, and primarily for, the financial intermediaries rather than as a channel for financial intermediation. Long gone are the days when the market can be closed for days and this important financial intermediation channel brutally disrupted because the financial intermediaries got into difficulties. There is greater realisation now of the role of the stock exchange as a secondary market that provides the bedrock for the primary IPO market, which channels savings into investments to promote economic growth and development. There is now much greater appreciation that this public interest is of importance that overrides the private interest of financial intermediaries. Improvements seen in that market in the past decade have gone way beyond the governance of the market place to greater market transparency, which has enabled it to meet the best international standards. But in the diversity of financial intermediation channels, Hong Kong is still behind because the flow of funds through the debt channel remains, relatively speaking, small. This is notwithstanding our considerable efforts since 1990 to bring debt issues to the market, principally in the form of Exchange Fund paper, which now has an outstanding amount of HK$120 billion. We have also established a reliable benchmark yield curve for Hong Kong dollar debt of up to ten-year maturity to assist private sector issuers in their pricing and built an efficient, paperless debt clearing system for the market as a whole. Perhaps a long period of low and sometimes negative real interest rates in the nineties was a disincentive for debt issues by the private sector. Indeed, the significantly positive real interest rates of the past few years and low nominal interest rates seem to have made a difference in both the number of and the amount involved in debt issues brought to the market. We need to sustain our efforts in the development of the debt market. The diversity of financial intermediation channels is not only an important attribute of an international financial centre: it is also essential to the maintenance of financial stability. Diversity reduces dependence on a particular financial intermediation channel, which in turn reduces the risk of systemic problems that seriously disrupt the normal conduct of economic activities in the event of a crisis in that channel. The second attribute that makes a Mach Two International Financial Centre is the existence of a platform for financial transactions to be conducted in the major foreign currencies as well as in the domestic currency. Foreign savings, particularly those with institutionalised management, tend to have a small appetite, if any, in the assumption of currency risks in seeking investment opportunities overseas. Hedging currency risks, when exposed to a relatively minor currency like the Hong Kong dollar, notwithstanding the exchange rate stability it has demonstrated over the past twenty years, can be expensive, to the extent of undermining the attraction of those investment opportunities. Currency hedging is even more difficult for investments in a jurisdiction with a non-convertible currency. I believe foreign investors’ interests in the many financial products available in Hong Kong, not least those allowing participation in the rapid development in the Mainland, may be considerably enhanced if there is a choice in currency denomination for those products. This would also reduce the large capital flows into and out of our currency, which we get for example whenever there is a large IPO, and strengthen currency stability. Furthermore, from when New York goes to bed and before London wakes up the next day, there are quite a few working hours in which activity in the markets for financial instruments denominated in the US dollar and the euro traditionally goes into a lull. But financial globalisation will increasingly demand 24-hour markets, not only those with over-the-counter trading but also those with a physical market place in the form, for example, of a stock exchange. Jurisdictions in our time zone collectively are a net lender to those in the other two time zones, and much of such lending takes the form of holdings of foreign assets denominated in the two large currencies. About 60% of the world’s foreign currency reserves are held by jurisdictions in this time zone. Some of us would obviously welcome, and may even demand, the facility for managing our foreign assets in our time zone, not just to avoid having to stay up late, but also to avoid unnecessary delays to the execution of investment decisions. Events do occur in our time zone that move financial markets denominated in the US dollar and the euro. Whether it is to facilitate the management of currency risks by investors, or our management of currency stability, or to complete the 24-hour trading loop for global financial instruments, there is a 4 BIS Review 15/2004 
growing need for a liquid platform in our time zone for conducting financial transactions in foreign currencies. However, it has not been easy to acquire this particular attribute of a Mach Two International Financial Centre. The difficulty lies in the understandable resistance against any intrusion into the proprietary rights over the market place of individual jurisdictions. The origins of, and the justifications for, financial markets are invariably domestic in nature. While markets have become global, market structures have remained largely domestic. There are not a lot of incentives for the largest markets to go global in terms of crossing time zones and denominating products also in foreign currencies. The hitherto high degree of domestic orientation of those markets means that they can afford such an attitude, but the high savings rate of Asia and its rapid accumulation of foreign reserves will force a change in that orientation, if this has not already taken place. Last year the net purchase of US Treasuries by ten Asian economies amounted to US$193.2 billion: this is almost 60% of the net increase in the supply of such paper. So far, there has been some progress in the form of the global harmonisation of standards and “strategic” linkages between equity markets in different jurisdictions, and Hong Kong has been at the forefront of these developments. We remain alert to further opportunities. The platform for the conduct of financial transactions in foreign currencies has to be supported by robust payment, clearing and settlement systems. This is the third attribute of a Mach Two International Financial Centre. The revolution in information technology has sped up the transmission of information tremendously. This also means a much higher speed in the movement of international capital and much higher settlement risks for financial transactions. Fortunately, information technology can also be applied to the prudent management of settlement risks. The question is whether the authorities responsible for the financial infrastructure are adequately tuned in. When you are living comfortably at home, you seldom notice the importance of the proper functioning of the plumbing, electricity and gas systems, until a failure occurs. A failure in the financial infrastructure can be quite damaging to the integrity of and confidence in the financial system, and if this occurs in an international financial centre the implications can be quite serious. In this age of information technology, the payment, clearing and settlement systems, particularly of an international financial centre, should be structured in a manner that minimises the risks of failure in the settlement of financial transactions. Let me make four brief points about the nuts and bolts of these systems. First, these systems should be designed to achieve real time gross settlement (RTGS) at least for large financial transactions, delivery versus payment (DVP) for the trading of financial instruments and payment versus payment (PVP) for foreign exchange transactions. Secondly, we have already made significant progress in building such a financial infrastructure. We are clearly ahead of other financial centres in this, with operating RTGS systems for the US dollar, the euro and of course our domestic currency the Hong Kong dollar, and these systems are all linked up to provide PVP. Thirdly, we intend, as the next step and as you might have guessed, to include the renminbi in this infrastructure as soon as circumstances permit, a move that will cement our position as the international financial centre of China. Our experience in building these systems puts us in a strong position to do so. We need a lead-time of only six to nine months to include an additional currency in our payment infrastructure. Fourthly, I urge all of you as significant users of financial services to use these systems and manage the settlement risks of your financial transactions. Your bankers should be able to help you to obtain the comfort of getting what you have bought at the same time as you paid for it. The fourth attribute of a Mach Two International Financial Centre is the availability of multidimensional and direct access to all that I have talked about just now - the channels of financial intermediation, the platforms for the conduct of financial transactions and the payment and settlement systems. Direct access to financial services should be available at the wholesale and retail levels, to financial intermediaries and principals, including issuers and investors, regardless of geographical boundaries. There is increasing demand for greater convenience and more direct access, given that modern information technology is quite capable of accommodating such demands. The market place for finance no longer requires a physical location. The need for financial intermediaries is also decreasing. Technology also promises finer bid-ask spreads for your trades; lower transaction, settlement and custodian costs; and instant access to your computerised account holding your deposits, debt securities and stocks of various currency denominations. Even as a borrower, you should, on the basis of your established credit rating and your credit history that are available to banks, be able to get onto your computer screen competitive offers for money. This is not too far-fetched. We are almost there for residential mortgages, except for the need to access a multiple of bank web-sites rather than a single one. BIS Review 15/2004 5 
There is, understandably, some resistance against progress in this direction. It is natural, for example, that the intermediaries would resist disintermediation, even though it promises greater efficiency in the intermediation of funds to the benefit of the economy. Institutional rigidities, whether or not arising from the passage of time or from technological innovation, are always difficult to resolve to the satisfaction of the affected parties, particularly when some are enshrined in legislation. So the achievement of multidimensional access to financial services is likely to take a little more time than the achievement of the other three attributes of a Mach Two International Financial Centre. One helpful initiative may be to develop greater appreciation of the public interest among all concerned. But I am confident that market forces will assist in promoting the necessary changes, with or without the involvement of Government or the supervisory authorities. Ladies and Gentlemen, I hope this conducted tour of Two IFC has not been too boring to you. My aim has been to offer some views on how Hong Kong is developing as an IFC and what we need to do to maintain the edge that we undoubtedly have in our financial infrastructure. As users of that infrastructure, you will probably have views and perspectives of your own, and I would be most happy to discuss these and answer questions. Thank you. 6 BIS Review 15/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Paris seminar on the EU accession process (concluding remarks) Concluding remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Paris seminar on the EU accession process, Paris, 5 March 2004. *      *      * Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, To conclude this seminar, let me say what a great pleasure it has been for me to be here with you yesterday and today. This seminar has brought together governors, vice-governors and high-level representatives of the 12 accession country central banks, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the 15 national central banks of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB), as well as representatives of the Irish Presidency and the European Commission. Today’s discussions have, in my view, clearly shown how much progress we have already made in exploring many of the key issues that will shape successful monetary cooperation and integration in an enlarged European Union (EU). They also illustrate how much common ground we share on central banking matters here in Europe. Obviously, this is the result of our regular and increasingly close contact over half a decade. And I believe that this permanent dialogue is a very valuable asset for future interaction, particularly in an enlarged ESCB. *** Listening to today’s presentations and statements, it struck me how many interlinkages there are between, on the one hand, the policy issues, and on the other, the practical and operational aspects. It is important, and it will always be important, to understand the implementation issues, and to anticipate questions that may arise in day-to-day practice. Our discussion in the first session, entitled “Monetary and exchange rate policies and the practical functioning of ERM II”, illustrated that this is particularly important in the case of ERM II, as our practical and operational experience with ERM II is still somewhat limited and our initial experience from “ERM I”, although useful, is not always wholly relevant. Our discussions highlighted both that ERM II is a useful framework to help Member States participating in the mechanism in their efforts to adopt the euro and, also, that participation in ERM II is only one element of the overall policy framework. Participation in ERM II must be complemented by other elements of this overall policy framework. As we stated in the Policy position of the Governing Council of the ECB on exchange rate issues relating to the acceding countries (published on 18 December 2003), to ensure a smooth participation in ERM II it would be necessary that major policy adjustments - for example with regard to price liberalisation and fiscal policy - are undertaken prior to participation in the mechanism, and that a credible fiscal consolidation path is being followed. Drawing lessons from one’s own experience and from that of others was clearly another leitmotiv of today’s seminar. Obviously, this is easier said than done. But if a task is difficult, it means that we should simply work harder at it. Respecting rules is particularly important in the EU institutional framework. Fiscal rules in the European Union are a clear case in point, as the discussion in our second session today entitled “Budgetary discipline in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact” has clearly shown. Fiscal performance has been rather weak recently in some of the acceding countries. In this context, the multilateral surveillance procedures within the EU framework, and in particular the Stability and Growth Pact, will play a key role in enhancing budgetary discipline. In this area, let me reiterate that the Governing Council of the ECB shares the concerns of the European Commission regarding the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council in November last year. The Commission is the guardian of the Treaty and the ECB respects the Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity. Furthermore, we do not see a need to change the Treaty and, in our view, the Stability and Growth Pact in its current form is appropriate. We are in agreement with the Commission that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact could be further improved, in particular in terms of the analysis of structural imbalances BIS Review 15/2004 1 
and the strengthening of incentives for sound fiscal policies during good economic times. Clarity and enforceability of the fiscal framework should be enhanced. What holds true for rules in general can also be applied to standards and regulations (which are specific forms of rules). Our discussion in the last session, entitled “Issues related to financial standards, accounting regulations and corporate governance”, has made this crystal clear with regard to standards and regulations in the financial and corporate sector. Given the extent of globalisation in today’s world, the need for a sound framework for the conduct of business and for appropriate supervision, also in cross-border terms, has never been more pressing. If I can draw just one general conclusion from all of our discussions today, it is the importance of being prepared. Although the forthcoming accession is undoubtedly a major historic achievement, we must continue to thoroughly prepare for integration in the future in order to get the timing of policy actions right. So where do we go from here? Looking ahead over the remainder of 2004 and beyond, there are clearly challenges for which we need to continue to prepare. Challenges and opportunities for all countries represented here today. • Bulgaria and Romania will of course face the challenge of making further progress towards creating the conditions for EU membership and of completing accession negotiations. • For the 10 new Member States, the main agenda item will still be full integration into the EU framework. This is particularly the case for integration into Economic and Monetary Union, since all acceding countries will join the EU as Member States with a derogation. That means that, while not yet adopting the euro, they are committed to striving towards the eventual adoption of the euro upon the fulfilment of the convergence criteria laid down in the Treaty. Full integration will also require considerable efforts in other key areas such as the single market. • As regards the 25 Member States, speeding up the pace of structural reforms would help to improve the longer-term growth potential of the wider EU. Moreover, there is also the important task of moving ahead with the project of a Constitution for Europe. The months and years ahead will be very formative for all of us. And I think decisions will be taken that may well shape Europe for a long time to come. *** Let me conclude by warmly thanking Governor Noyer and the staff of the Banque de France for their excellent preparation of this seminar. I am sure I speak for all participants when I say that we have appreciated your very warm hospitality and splendid organisation both yesterday evening and today. In the name of all fellow members of the Governing Council of the ECB, I would also like to thank all participants, and in particular our colleagues from the accession countries, for coming to Paris to discuss a broad set of issues that are vital to both the future of monetary integration in Europe and the financial stability of our continent. As I said yesterday evening, this seminar in Paris is the last one in the current configuration. However, there will be other seminars and opportunities for close dialogue with central banks from those countries still negotiating EU membership, and with central banks from countries that may become accession countries in the future. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
David Dodge: Adjusting to global economic change Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Brazil-Canada Chamber of Commerce, São Paulo, 10 March 2004. *      *      * Good morning. I am glad to have the opportunity to meet with business leaders in São Paulo today. I am also pleased to meet with my counterpart, Governor Henrique Meirelles, and with some of his colleagues at the Banco Central do Brasil. Geographically, Brazil and Canada are far apart. But from an economic viewpoint, we have more in common than some might think. We share common issues and challenges. We both operate monetary policy systems based on inflation targets and floating exchange rates. We are both being affected by the recent slowdown in the world economy and by global economic imbalances. And we are both working on the structural adjustments that are necessary to weather shocks and to thrive in a changing environment. Today, I want to focus my remarks on Canada’s adjustment to changes in the global economy. I will talk about our efforts to adjust to longer-term economic forces and about the challenges that these forces present. Some of our experiences may be relevant to other economies that are making similar adjustments in the face of similar economic circumstances. Past adjustments Our experience over the last couple of decades has taught us that structural adjustments are key to adapting to change, and, just as important, that sound macroeconomic policies have a role to play in making those adjustments with a minimum of economic and social disruption. These lessons may seem self-evident. But Canadians have been reminded of their importance through some significant and painful economic adjustments during the past 30 years. For example, Canada was hit by an abrupt slowdown in productivity growth during the 1970s. That slower productivity growth made it impossible to continue to provide the gains in real wages to which Canadians had become accustomed. The situation was exacerbated by the OPEC oil embargo of 1973 and by the subsequent energy crisis that hit economies around the globe. The consensus of the day was that the impact of those events on Canada would be temporary. And so Canadian policy-makers used macroeconomic and microeconomic policies to try to shield our economy from the impact of those events. Instead of making the necessary adjustments, we tried to avoid them. As a result, the eventual adjustment was slower and more painful than it needed to be. And we ended up with slower growth, relatively high inflation, and large government budget deficits. Canadians learned during this period that economic policies must be focused on adjusting to change - even if that adjustment causes short-term difficulties. By the beginning of the 1990s, it was clear that we needed a framework of policies to help with adjustment, to bring down inflation, and to put our public finances in order. The first major change came in 1991, when the government and the Bank of Canada agreed on an explicit anchor for monetary policy. That anchor was a series of inflation-reduction targets that would gradually lower the rate of inflation to 2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range. The agreement has been extended three times and currently covers the period to the end of 2006. Each time, the midpoint of the target range has been kept at 2 per cent. I want to note here that while the Bank and the government established the monetary policy anchor jointly, the Bank alone takes responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy and for achieving the inflation target. I want to stress the importance of that independence. Experience around the world has shown that there are distinct advantages to having monetary policy carried out by an independent central bank, not the least of which is separating the power to print money from the power to spend it. Central bank independence is also a mechanism for building credibility among investors. Central banks have a choice to make as to how to anchor their monetary policy. Some countries have chosen a fixed exchange rate as their anchor. In doing so, their central banks give up the power to control domestic inflation. In contrast, other countries - such as Canada - have chosen domestic BIS Review 15/2004 1 
inflation as their anchor. By doing this, they leave it to foreign exchange markets to set the external value of the currency. The key point is that, since capital is mobile, no central bank can successfully control inflation and the exchange rate at the same time. The choice of an inflation-targeting framework has served Canada very well. Since the end of 1994, inflation has averaged almost exactly 2 per cent. Moreover, not only has inflation fallen, it has become more stable than it was in the 1970s and early 1980s. Just as importantly, inflation expectations have fallen into line with the 2 per cent target and have remained there. As for the floating exchange rate, it helps the economy adjust to disturbances and fluctuations in the world prices of our products, notably commodities. It also helps our economy adjust to changes in global savings and investment flows. One of the most important advantages of adopting a system of inflation-control targets is that we at the Bank of Canada can now explain more clearly to business, to labour, and to the general public what we are doing and why. We do this through eight regularly scheduled interest rate announcements each year, plus our regular Monetary Policy Reports and Updates. One should not underestimate the benefits that arise from having the public understand the policies and actions of its monetary authority. This understanding makes it easier for us to conduct monetary policy, and it allows citizens to judge the performance of their central bank. It has been less than five years since Brazil adopted its own inflation-targeting system in July 1999, after floating its currency in January of that same year. The system is already proving to be extremely helpful in reducing inflation rates in this country, even in the face of some large shocks. Establishing a track record of credible inflation targeting leads to lower inflation expectations. These lower expectations create a virtuous circle - they lead businesses and consumers to make pricing and spending decisions that, in turn, help the central bank meet inflation targets. And consistently meeting inflation targets allows citizens to make investment and savings decisions with confidence that inflation will remain close to the target. The second major adjustment that Canada had to make in the 1990s was to get its fiscal situation under control. In the early part of that decade, the combined federal and provincial primary deficit (which excludes debt-service costs) peaked at just under 3 per cent of GDP, and the total deficit was close to 8 per cent. The combined public debt reached a peak of 100 per cent of GDP. While some of the shortfall reflected cyclical factors, it was clear that the situation was unsustainable. So between 1993 and 1997, both federal and provincial governments in Canada made a determined, and successful, effort to eliminate their deficits and run consistent primary budget surpluses. The fiscal adjustments made by both levels of government helped to improve the credibility of our economic policies and reduced the risk premium that investors demanded on Canadian bonds. While this credibility is always useful, it is particularly beneficial during periods of crisis, when the spreads on riskier investments tend to widen. Consider Canada’s experience with the Mexican currency crisis of 1994, before the credibility of our monetary and fiscal policy was fully established. Spreads on Canadian bonds widened significantly during that event, and consumption and investment slowed, leading to a period of weaker economic growth. Our credibility was better established by 1997, and so we were able to weather the financial crises in Asia and Russia with only a slight widening of spreads. There was minimal uncertainty, and growth actually strengthened in the wake of those events. When you compare these two experiences, you can see that there is a real payoff from the achievement of fiscal and monetary credibility. And it does not take too long for that payoff to be realized. Canada’s public and private sectors also made structural adjustments in the 1990s, leading to a more flexible economy. This added flexibility helped us to weather the recent global economic slowdown. Our governments, both federal and provincial, also took steps to reduce distortions in the economy. In the latter half of the 1990s, federal industrial subsidies were cut by more than 60 per cent. Provinces eliminated many of their own subsidy programs. The federal government reformed its unemployment insurance system, and Canada’s public pension plans were overhauled to make them self-financing in the decades ahead. This involved some restructuring of benefits and an increase in contribution rates. And contributions are now being invested in markets in order to generate the best possible returns - with due consideration for prudence - over the long term. Throughout this difficult period, governments worked hard to ensure that the burden of adjustment did not fall disproportionately on those segments of the population that were least able to bear it. It was 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
only after the adjustment process was well underway that the federal government began to reduce corporate and personal income taxes. As governments take steps to improve the structure of their economies, it is equally important that businesses make their own adjustments. During the 1990s, Canadian firms responded to the challenges of freer trade by improving the quality of their products and by marketing them aggressively to new North American customers. These adjustments were not easy. But they did leave Canada in a better position to handle economic shocks and, therefore, to grow on a sustained basis. To recap, a sound monetary policy supported by a floating exchange rate, sound fiscal policy, and appropriate structural adjustments all did their part to help Canada’s economy respond to the changing circumstances of the 1990s. While these adjustments were difficult, the payoff came quickly. By the end of the decade, Canadians were beginning to see higher real incomes. Adjustments in the future So that’s a quick look at the lessons we have learned from past experience. Let’s turn now to the international forces at work in our economies and talk about what these forces will mean for economic policies in the future. In the global economy today, we see significant financial imbalances. The United States is faced with a large fiscal deficit and a high and growing current account deficit, while some Asian countries are accumulating record current account surpluses. The economies of China and India, as well as yours here in Brazil, are becoming increasingly powerful players on the world stage. This increases the competitive pressure facing Canadian producers. But it also means new, fast-growing sources of demand and new opportunities. So in the face of these forces, what kinds of adjustments are needed? I will talk about our situation in Canada, but what I have to say is applicable to most economies. The first thing I would say is that maintaining fiscal balance must remain a priority for Canada in the years ahead. Our federal and provincial governments have made great progress on this front, but we in Canada cannot afford to give back these hard-won gains. Neither can governments in this country. Maintaining fiscal balance is as important for Brazil as it is for Canada. This priority is heightened in Canada by our longer-term demographic challenges. Our ratio of public debt to GDP will need to decline further to give us the flexibility to meet the demands of our aging population. My second point is that we must provide the appropriate microeconomic policies in areas such as labour markets, intellectual property law, the environment, and foreign investment. The right microeconomic policies are essential in order to increase productivity and raise living standards in the future. This is true for every country. However, we know that implementing the right economic policies can mean that some groups will bear an unfair share of the burden of adjustment. This does not mean that we should shy away from the task. But it does lead to my third point, which is that authorities must put in place the right policies to facilitate adjustment, such as providing access to training, or helping workers relocate or shift into expanding areas of the economy. In doing so, we should keep in mind that government help should be directed towards people, and not towards specific businesses or industries. So what can policy-makers do to provide a supportive economic environment for business? In my view, promoting an efficient and robust financial system, including a strong banking sector, is critical. And that is my fourth point. This is particularly true in countries such as Canada, where small and medium-sized businesses create the majority of jobs. Growing firms must have access to credit within a well-functioning financial system. Further, people need to have confidence in the banking sector, so that savings can be efficiently recycled to help businesses expand. A robust financial system can also be a country’s best defence against international financial crises. A key lesson from the Asian and Russian crises was that countries with strong banking sectors are much less likely to be affected than countries where the banking sectors are weak. Beyond the banking sector, countries should also work to develop healthy and efficient financial markets. This is not a new idea. Canada’s efforts to build domestic money markets go back over 50 years. And we built these markets living next door to the country with the deepest, most liquid BIS Review 15/2004 3 
financial markets in the world - the United States. Now, and in the future, we will need to remain focused on promoting healthy and efficient markets. This topic is an ongoing priority for research at the Bank of Canada. In fact, later this year we will host, along with the German Bundesbank, a G-20 workshop on building strong domestic financial systems. My fifth and final point has to do with trade. Canada has a long history of supporting multilateral trade agreements. We have seen, first-hand, how our economy has benefited from opening our borders to trade. That is why we are committed to trying to extend the benefits of free trade to the whole of the Americas through the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). It is why we also support your efforts in Mercosur. And, most importantly, it is why we are committed to lowering trade barriers at the Doha round of multilateral negotiations. I have seen many examples of the challenges that governments face in reducing trade barriers and subsidies. We in Canada have our own difficulties in this regard but, as an economist, I know that the economic benefits of freer trade make the effort worthwhile. So those are the five areas that should be priorities for Canada in the years ahead: fiscal prudence, the right microeconomic policies, appropriate social policies, a strong and stable financial system, and more open trade. Monetary policy, for its part, will continue to be focused on keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable, thus giving citizens, businesses, and investors confidence in the future value of their money. To achieve this, we will try to keep supply and demand in balance. Since the Bank of Canada has chosen low domestic inflation as its monetary policy anchor, we will continue to have a flexible exchange rate. We recognize that a floating currency implies some volatility. But I can tell you that Canada derives enormous benefits from having a floating currency working in conjunction with a solid monetary policy anchor. It gives us the ability to set monetary policy tailored to Canada’s specific economic circumstances. It sends important price signals to economic participants and helps our economy to make the necessary adjustments. Conclusion Let me conclude. For many firms and many employees, adjustment can be painful and difficult. But in today’s world, not adjusting is not an option. Fortunately, in both our countries, we are making these adjustments under relatively favourable conditions. Global demand is strengthening, and credit conditions are good. We have a better knowledge of what we need to do. And we have made important progress in strengthening our economic policy frameworks. The challenges that we will face make it even more important for us to continue to strengthen those frameworks in order to adjust to changing circumstances and to take advantage of potential gains. The faster we are able to adjust, the greater the wealth that Canada and Brazil can create for their citizens. That is not to say that adjusting will be easy. Indeed, the experience of recent decades proves that it can be difficult, at least over the short term. But if we take the leap and seize the opportunities that change will bring, our societies will surely benefit. 4 BIS Review 15/2004 
Mark W Olson: A regulator's view of emerging issues in community banking  Speech by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the 118th Assembly for Bank Directors, Las Croabas, Puerto Rico, 27 February 2004. *      *      * In 2003 community banks once again demonstrated their value to their shareholders, delivering solid profitability. Community banks - by that I mean commercial banks with assets less than $1 billion - earned $12.9 billion in 2003, based on preliminary Call Report data. This figure translates into a return on assets of 1.18 percent and a return on equity of 11.55 percent. Fourth-quarter returns were a bit below that, following a familiar seasonal pattern. Overall, return on assets has been consistently between 1.10 percent and 1.20 percent and return on equity has been close to 12 percent. Higher non-interest income-including mortgage origination and servicing income - and decreases in required provisioning allowed earnings to remain strong despite pressure on margins. Only about 6 percent of community banks lost money for the year, representing less than 3 percent of their total assets. Consolidation continued in the industry in 2003. According to our preliminary figures, there were about 7,300 community banks at year-end 2003, some 140 fewer (1.9 percent) than a year earlier and about 500 (or 11 percent) fewer existed five years ago. The consolidation in the industry, and the search for efficiency and scope, should not be misunderstood. It does not signal a threat to the community banking franchise; far from it. The market for community bank charters makes this point clear. Seventy-seven new commercial bank charters were issued in the first nine months of 2003, and nearly five hundred since the beginning of 2000. Over that same period, for every five banks that disappeared through consolidation, another two new charters were granted. In total, that represents $2.4 billion in new equity capital invested in community bank charters. Community bank net interest margins continue to be above those of the industry as a whole. For 2003, the community bank margin was about 4.1 percent, nearly thirty-basis points higher than the comparable figure for the industry. To some extent, this reflects a different business mix, despite the role of high-spread credit card lending at larger institutions. A closer look at the Call Report shows that community banks seem to pay more for their nonmaturity deposits than do larger institutions. The average effective rate paid at community banks in 2003 was just below 1.00 percent, some 25 basis points higher than the industry-wide figure of 0.74 percent. Among other factors, this trend has contributed to narrowing margins over the last few years. Credit quality has also improved at community banks, supporting higher earnings, although it had not deteriorated as significantly as the industry did as a whole. Problem loans barely reached 1.00 percent of total loans in this credit cycle, compared with 1.27 percent for the industry as a whole. By late 2003, however, community banks had a problem asset ratio roughly equal to that of the larger institutions, at about 0.90 percent.  Although there were many similarities, balance sheet developments at community banks in 2003 differed in many regards from those at larger institutions. Community bank holdings of mortgage-related securities were largely unchanged from those at the end of 2002, and their closed-end mortgage loan holdings declined about 5 percent, while larger institutions experienced significant growth in both categories. Commercial and industrial loans fell at community banks in both 2002 and 2003 but at a much slower rate of decline - less than half a percent in each year - than at larger institutions. Capitalization is another area of contrast. Strong capital ratios, well in excess of regulatory minimums, have been a key factor in managing credit concentrations and, indeed, a striking attribute of the most profitable community banks. The top one-fifth of community banks, in terms of profitability, typically hold 1.6 percentage points more capital relative to assets than other community banks. The most striking difference, however, is seen in loans for commercial real estate. Commercial real estate lending - made up of construction lending; loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties; and multifamily housing - continued to grow rapidly in 2003. The nominal growth in such loans at community banks - $29 billion - essentially accounted for all of the asset growth at these institutions, while amounting to only about one-seventh of asset growth for the industry as a whole. By the end of 2003, this lending had reached 25.1 percent of aggregate community bank assets. That is 7 percent higher than five years ago, and it has set a new record for community banks as the highest BIS Review 14/2004 1 
concentration in commercial real estate loans - yes, even higher than in the early 1990s. This increase appears to be fairly widespread across the population of community banks, and it is evident at highly profitable and less-profitable institutions.  Commercial real estate lending is a traditional and natural part of the community banking franchise, and by all accounts underwriting practices continue to be much better than they were in the troubled days of the 1980s. For these reasons, there is no indication at this time that the overall credit quality of commercial real estate exposures at community banks has deteriorated. Moreover, market reports indicate the vacancy rates in some markets have turned around and are recovering. That said, there are a number of markets nationwide that have experienced weakness in recent years and continue to do so. Many of these markets are likely to take years to recover. Bank directors and management - as well as supervisors - will need to closely monitor further developments in this area.  More generally, a critical “franchise” issue for community bankers has been recognizing and managing credit risk concentrations that also tend to be a natural part of the community banking business. When credit quality problems emerge at an institution, they of course cause lower returns and attract more attention from your friendly bank supervisors. The presence of lending concentrations indicates that such problems can develop more quickly and more broadly across a pool of borrowers. Successful management of concentrations requires adherence to good credit fundamentals. Important advances in the measurement and management of credit risk have been developed that community bankers should probably consider for their own use in the coming years. There are no magic bullets here, but community bankers may find that these advanced techniques provide useful tools and concepts that can reinforce existing disciplines in the credit management process. The near-term outlook for community bank profitability is good, but at this point prospects for the rate of earnings growth may be a bit less rosy than for larger institutions. Paradoxically, there is probably little more room to lower credit costs for community banks, unlike at larger institutions with still-elevated levels of problem loans. Provisions at community banks in 2003 were roughly 50 basis points of average loans, the lowest level seen at community banks since 1998 and a figure that would probably be considered “normal” and prudent over the longer term. This leveling of loan-loss provisions accompanied by the cooling of fees from mortgage refinancings and originations will heighten attention on new opportunities for asset growth and higher-margin assets.  Most observers expect that business borrowers will soon resume more normal levels of borrowing activity. Although their return may provide one avenue for earnings growth to banks of all sizes, it is important that the competitive drive to win borrowers is not allowed to overcome the discipline of prudent lending practice. Directors and management should be particularly attentive to this possibility given the extended period of weak loan demand that we've recently experienced.  A natural temptation for a banker when facing pressures for earnings growth would be to extend maturities in search of more attractive rates of return. I'd like to say a few cautionary words about this temptation. With a steep yield curve, the portion of community bank assets maturing beyond five years has grown steadily since year-end 2000, from 16.9 percent to 18.4 percent of assets. Larger institutions hold a greater share of their assets in long-term instruments and have also seen an increase in long-term assets over the same period. They arguably may have better access to derivatives markets and more sophisticated programs for managing their interest rate risk. Rather than resorting to the derivatives market - fewer than 600 commercial banks hold any derivatives contracts at all - most community bankers may simply choose to rely on the interest rate protection provided by their stable and reliable core deposit base. They may believe this base to be more stable and reliable than at larger institutions, and from a historical point of view that belief might be difficult to dispute. Community bankers depend on these deposits maintaining the stability and reliability they have exhibited in the past. As a result, interest rate and liquidity management become even more closely intertwined. Money market deposit accounts and savings deposits at community banks grew sharply in 2003, although they dropped slightly - less than $2 billion or 0.6 percent - in the fourth quarter. A drop of this size hasn't taken place at community banks for some years, and has not occurred at all at the larger banks. If our analysis is correct and deposit growth has been fueled by low interest rates and weakness in the equity markets, community bankers should be aware that they may face unexpected liquidity and interest rate pressures if their deposit customers shift their funds to other investment vehicles. This is not idle speculation. We need to remember that depositor behavior can change. An excellent example is the high-interest rate period we experienced in the late 1970s and early 1980s, 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
BIS Review 14/2004 3 when long-term certificates of deposit were redeemed early - despite the significant penalties assessed - in order to lock in higher market rates. The relative stability of these nonmaturity deposits and the liquidity they provide have been an important strength to community banks, although there have been too many instances in which rapidly growing banks have faced unexpected liquidity pressures because they relied more heavily on non-core or volatile funding sources. Careful planning of growth and funding needs is a key aspect of sound management and requires the appropriate degree of management attention.  Conclusion The past year was a good year for the industry, one in which banks were able to adapt to a changing environment and still generate record profits. Community banks once again demonstrated their value to the marketplace and the prominent and vibrant position they rightly occupy in the industry. The industry is strong and resilient, but we should not gauge the industry's ability to withstand and adapt to challenges solely on the basis of what happened in 2003. As we reflect on this banner year, it will serve us well to bear in mind that the credit and business challenges the industry faced in recent years were certainly not as difficult as they might have been - and indeed may yet be at some point in the future. Asset quality certainly was an issue in this credit cycle, but never approached the levels experienced in the early 1990s. Similarly, a low-interest rate environment, together with a steep yield curve, can provide a forgiving setting for bankers, at least in the near term. To paraphrase the old adage, those who do not learn all of the lessons of history are destined to repeat them. Once again, the fundamental management challenge is to balance the opportunities of the present with the prospects for the future.  
M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Achieving financial system stability Welcoming remark by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Conference on Banking Sector Issues: Weak Banks and Systemic Crises, Bangkok, 18-20 February 2004. *      *      * Distinguished panelists,  Honorable guests and participants,  Ladies and Gentlemen,  On behalf of the Bank of Thailand, I would like to warmly welcome you to the city of Bangkok and this BIS/FSI Conference. My sincere thanks to our overseas speakers and guests who have followed through with your commitment to share your expertise at this international conference despite the recent outbreak of the bird flu. It is my sincere hope that you will take the opportunity to see more of our country beyond the conference hall and enjoy your stay here in Thailand.  At the outset, I would like to say I am honoured to have this opportunity to address a distinguished audience of bank supervising experts from all corners of the world. The conference has adopted the theme: Banking Sector Issues: Weak Banks and Systemic Crises, a timely subject - appropriate and critical to bank supervisory authorities, since risk management is inherent in all commercial activities. I would like to suggest that this is a commonly faced challenge to us all, regardless of borders or stages of socio-economic development. I hope that over the course of this two-and-a-half days' conference, the deliberations, emerging from the experts and audience on a wide array of supervision-related issues, will shed more light on how best to deal with weak banks and systemic crisis.  All banking supervisors and central bankers seek the “Holy Grail” aspiration for a stable financial system which is resilient and capable of returning to a balance after a shock. To fulfill this common goal, let me repeat a golden principle of sound banking supervision - prevention is fundamental to avoiding a banking crisis. We all know that handling a crisis is always very difficult and painful; therefore, supervisors and bankers have a shared responsibility and accountability to prevent banking problems. Supervisors must create a sound framework, foster a robust and effective system, and establish clear procedures to identify and deal with weak banks. This means the supervisors must be equipped with the legal power to effectively carry out their duties and have the necessary tools, resources and capacity to solve the problems. These are the necessary infrastructure or building blocks of a sound and stable financial system. Equally important, the Board and management of individual banks must shoulder the responsibility of monitoring and addressing bank weaknesses. They cannot fail in their oversight and risk managerial duties, just as supervisors cannot fail in their on-site and off-site supervision.  In this respect, I am a strong believer that good governance is the corner stone of a stable financial sector. We must create a banking community that does not tolerate imprudent business practices and lax systems and control. These are the sins of the past. Thailand, for instance, is carefully fostering a new business culture with the right values. On our part, the Bank of Thailand has since March 2002 announced guidelines supporting the practice of good corporate governance of banks' Board and management to ensure that they look after the interests of their stakeholders in an effective manner. These rules are not ground-breaking; they are just simple common sense. But we need to communicate clearly to the private sector what our expectations are and what the consequences are if the efforts fail.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  The cost of financial restructuring in Thailand was, after all, too enormous in figures and too painful in real terms to allow us to continue with our old way. In addition to changing the corporate culture, we are also amending a few key laws to solidify the foundation of our financial infrastructure. The new Financial Institutions Businesses Act will empower banking authorities with the necessary power to supervise financial institutions on a consolidated basis and to take appropriate actions against weak banks, with the provisions of prompt corrective actions. The Deposit Insurance Act will support a deposit insurance system to limit the loss of public money and reduce the moral hazard inherent in the current guarantee system. We must ensure that when a bank failure does occur, despite all preventive measures and utmost efforts to prevent it, depositors are taken care of fairly, and the bank's BIS Review 14/2004 1 
2 BIS Review 14/2004 shareholders accept their due share of burdens. Moreover, we have drafted the Financial Sector Master Plan to foster an efficient, stable, and competitive financial sector, guiding the development of the financial sector over the medium term.  All these initiatives were undertaken with the objective of providing the right framework for effective supervision in order to develop a sound and strong banking sector. In this regard, I trust that the discussions in the next two and a half days will be very constructive, providing more insights on these issues, as well as other controversial debates - such as the role of governments and lender of last resort.  Allow me to say a few words on the substantial progress made by various international bodies in crisis prevention. The IMF has taken a leading role, revamping its own approach and sharpening its focus on crisis prevention, management, and resolution. Standards and codes of best practices have been introduced - the work coordinated by the IMF, World Bank, BIS, OECD and other international experts, underpinned by the Financial Sector Assessment Program. The Basel Committee has introduced the New Basel Capital Accord, the evolutionary supervisory framework. Supervision is directed away from rule-based guidelines to a more comprehensive risk-based calculation of capital adequacy, methodologies on operational risk, supervisory review process, and market discipline. These are just a few examples of the important work accomplished by the international financial institutions and various experts. Your presence here at this Conference is the best testament to how the solutions and ways for crisis prevention are still evolving, situations being reassessed, and tools being refined.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  There has been a saying that “every crisis is a new crisis” - we don't have the same kind of crisis twice - and this indeed is a scary thought. We can come up with a how - to book on solving banking problems and crisis resolution, but the challenges are still enormous. I would like to reiterate the point made earlier that prevention is key because once a weak bank explodes into a full-blown crisis, the depth and complexity of problems could be of the magnitude that is unimaginable. It is with these thoughts in mind that I would have to sum up with this simple message: a supervisor can never be complacent.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  The Asian crisis started from Thailand slightly over six years ago, and it induced a train of international coordination programs and discussions to prevent a recurrence and means to manage it. I hope this conference will add to our knowledge of supervisory tools that can aid participating supervisors to better meet the challenges of weak bank resolution and systemic crisis regardless of the stages of economic development and forms of financial system. I am happy that Thailand is the venue of, and is host to, this conference - a commendable international effort to bring us all closer to our aspiration of a sound and stable financial system. May I take this opportunity to thank the FSI and BIS for allowing us to take part in this event and for the excellent cooperation over the years. Our compliments to Mr. Jason George and his team for their very efficient organization of this event. I wish you all a successful conference.  Thank you.  
Alan Greenspan: Current account Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Economic Club of New York, New York, 2 March 2004. *      *      * It has been a number of years since the foreign exchange rate of the dollar has played so prominent a role in evaluations of economic activity. I have no intention today of discussing the foreign exchange policy of the United States. That is the province of the Secretary of the Treasury. Nor do I intend to project exchange rates. My experience is that exchange markets have become so efficient that virtually all relevant information is embedded almost instantaneously in exchange rates to the point that anticipating movements in major currencies is rarely possible. The exceptions to this conclusion are those few cases of successful speculation in which governments have tried and failed to support a particular exchange rate. Nonetheless, despite extensive efforts on the part of analysts, to my knowledge, no model projecting directional movements in exchange rates is significantly superior to tossing a coin. I am aware that of the thousands who try, some are quite successful. So are winners of coin-tossing contests. The seeming ability of a number of banking organizations to make consistent profits from foreign exchange trading likely derives not from their insight into future rate changes but from market making. This may seem a rather surprising conclusion, given that so many commentators apparently believe that they know the real value of the dollar must decline further because of the record current account deficit of the United States. It should be sobering to recall that three years ago - February 2001 - to be exact for similar reasons a vast majority of a large panel of forecasters were projecting a lower dollar against the euro. In the subsequent twelve months, the dollar rose nearly 6 percent against the euro. Rather than engage in exchange rate forecasting, today I will discuss certain developments in foreign exchange markets, and in the international financial system in general, which bear on the ultimate outcome of our current account adjustment process. Before raising the broader issues of adjustment, I should like to address the actions of certain of the players in the exchange market that are likely to delay the adjustment process, but only for a time. I refer to the heavy degree of intervention by East Asian monetary authorities, especially in Japan and China, and the apparent stepped up hedging of currency movements by exporters, especially in Europe. As all of you who follow these markets are aware, since the start of 2002, the extraordinary purchases by Asian central banks and governments of dollar assets, largely those by Japan and China, have totaled almost $240 billion, all in an apparent attempt to prevent their currencies from rising against the dollar. In particular, total foreign exchange reserves for China reached $420 billion in November of last year and for Japan more than $650 billion in December. The awesome size of Japan's accumulation results from persistent intervention to suppress what Japanese authorities have judged is a dollar-yen exchange rate that is out of line with fundamentals. One factor boosting the yen is a significant yen bias on the part of Japanese investors. This propensity, in my judgment, runs far beyond the normal tendency of investors worldwide to buy familiar domestic assets and eschew foreign-exchange risk. Nowhere else in the world will investors voluntarily purchase ten-year government obligations at an interest rate of 1 percent or less, especially given a rate of increase in the outstanding supply of government debt that has generally been running at 9 percent over the past year. Not surprisingly, very few Japanese government bonds (JGBs) are held outside of Japan. Aside from the holdings of the Bank of Japan, almost all JGBs are held by Japanese households, banks, insurance companies and the postal saving system. And none of them holds significant amounts of foreign assets; 99 percent of household assets are in yen, and, including the postal saving system, about 91 percent of the assets of financial institutions are in yen. Japanese nonfinancial corporations do hold a larger share of foreign assets in their securities' portfolios, but the absolute amounts are small. The Japanese have made significant foreign direct investments, especially in the United States, and the Ministry of Finance does, of course, hold large dollar balances as a consequence of exchange rate intervention. But the Japanese private sector, by and large, has BIS Review 14/2004 1 
exhibited limited interest in accumulating dollar or other foreign assets, removing what in other large trading economies would be a significant segment of demand for foreign assets. The degree of domestic currency bias in Japan, which far exceeds that of its trading partners, may thus have contributed to a foreign exchange rate for the yen that appears to be elevated relative to the dollar and possibly other internationally traded currencies as well.1 Of course, this preference for yen assets, while a persistent influence on the value of the yen, has at times been overwhelmed by other factors. Granted the level of intervention pursued by the Japanese monetary authorities has influenced the market value of the yen, but the size of the impact is difficult to judge. In any event, it must be presumed that the rate of accumulation of dollar assets by the Japanese government will have to slow at some point and eventually cease. For now, partially unsterilized intervention is perceived as a means of expanding the monetary base of Japan, a basic element of monetary policy. (The same effect, of course, is available through the purchase of domestic assets.) In time, however, as the present deflationary situation abates, the monetary consequences of continued intervention could become problematic. The current performance of the Japanese economy suggests that we are getting closer to the point where continued intervention at the present scale will no longer meet the monetary policy needs of Japan. China is a similar story. In order to maintain the tight relationship with the dollar initiated in the 1990s, the Chinese central bank has chosen to purchase large quantities of U.S. Treasury securities with renminbi. What is not clear is how much of the current upward pressure on the currency results from underlying market forces, how much from capital inflows owing to speculation on potential revaluation, and how much from capital controls that suppress the demand of Chinese residents for dollars and other currencies. No one truly knows whether easing or ending capital controls would lessen pressure on the currency and, in the process, also eliminate inflows from speculation on a revaluation. Many in China, however, fear that an immediate ending of controls could induce capital outflows large enough to destabilize the nation's improving, but still fragile, banking system. Others believe that decontrol, but at a gradual pace, could conceivably avoid such an outcome. Chinese central bank purchases of dollars, unless offset, threaten an excess of so-called high-powered money expansion and a consequent overheating of the Chinese economy. The Chinese central bank last year offset - that is, sterilized - much of its heavy dollar purchases by reducing its loans to commercial banks, by selling bonds, and by increasing reserve requirements. But the ratio of the money supply to the monetary base in China has been rising steadily for a number of years as financial efficiency improves. Thus the modest rise that has occurred in currency and commercial bank reserves has been enough to support a twelve-month growth of the M2 money supply in the neighborhood of 20 percent through 2003 and a bit less so far this year. Should this pattern continue, the central bank will be confronted with the choice of curtailing its purchases of dollar assets or facing an overheated economy with the associated economic instabilities. Lesser dollar purchases presumably would allow the renminbi, at least temporarily, to appreciate against the dollar. Other East Asian monetary authorities, in an endeavor to hold their currencies at a par with the yen and the renminbi, accumulated about $120 billion in reserves in 2003 and appear to have continued that rate of intervention since. * * * There is a general view that this heavy intervention places upward pressure on the euro. It is assumed that the dollar's trade-weighted exchange rate reflects its worldwide fundamentals, and therefore if the Asian currencies are being suppressed, the euro and other non-Asian currencies need to appreciate as an offset. But a more likely possibility is that Asian currency intervention has had little effect on other currencies and that the trade-weighted average of the dollar is, thus, somewhat elevated relative to the rate that would have prevailed absent intervention. When Asian authorities intervene to ease their currencies against the dollar, they purchase dollar-denominated assets from private sector portfolios. With fewer                                                       1 The yen bias certainly existed in earlier decades, but it has become more evident as Japanese growth slowed.  2 BIS Review 14/2004 
dollar assets in private hands, the natural inclination to rebalance portfolios will tend to buoy the dollar even against currencies that are not used in intervention operations, including the euro. These transactions raise the dollar against, for example, the yen, lower the yen against the euro, and lower the euro against the dollar. The strength of the euro against the dollar thus appears to be the consequence of forces unrelated to Asian intervention. As I will explain later, this does not mean that when Asian intervention ceases the dollar will automatically fall because other influences on the dollar cannot be foreseen. Some have argued that purchases of U.S. Treasuries by Asian officials are holding down interest rates on these instruments, and therefore U.S. interest rates are likely to rise as intervention by Asian monetary authorities slows, ceases, or even turns to net sales. While there are obvious reasons to be concerned about such an outcome, the effect of a reduction in the scale of intervention, or even net sales, on U.S. financial markets would likely be small. The reason is that central bank reserves are heavily concentrated in short-term maturities; moreover, the overall market in short-term dollar assets, combining both public and private instruments, is huge relative to the size of asset holdings of Asian monetary authorities. And because these issues are short-term and hence capable of only limited price change, realized capital losses, if any, would be small. Accordingly, any incentive for monetary authorities to sell dollars, in order to preserve market value, would be muted. * * * A different issue arises with the apparent level of hedging by exporters in Europe and elsewhere. The effect, however, is the same as Asian official intervention: It slows the process of adjustment. Against a broad basket of currencies of our trading partners, the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar has declined about 12 percent from its peak in early 2002. Ordinarily, currency depreciation is accompanied by a rise in the dollar prices of our imported goods and services, because foreign exporters seek to avoid price declines in their own currencies, which would otherwise result from the fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Reflecting the swing from dollar appreciation to dollar depreciation, the dollar prices of goods and services imported into the United States have begun to rise after declining on balance for several years. But the turnaround to date has been moderate and far short of that implied by the exchange rate change. Apparently, foreign exporters have been willing to absorb some of the price decline measured in their own currencies and the consequent squeeze on profit margins it entails in order to hold market share. In fact, given that the nearly 9 percent rise in dollar prices of goods imported from western Europe since the start of 2002 has been far short of the rise in the euro, profit margins of euro-area exporters to the United States may well have turned negative. Nonetheless, euro-area exports to the United States, when expressed in euros, have slowed only modestly. A possible reason is that European exporters' incentives to sell to the United States were diminished significantly less than indicated by the dollar price and exchange rate movements owing to accelerated short forward positions against the dollar in foreign exchange markets. A marked increase in foreign exchange derivative trading, especially in dollar-euro, according to the Bank for International Settlements, is consistent with increased hedging of exports to the United States and to other markets that use currencies tied to the U.S. dollar.2 However, most contracts are short-term because long-term hedging is expensive. Thus, although hedging may delay, and perhaps even smooth out, the adjustment, it cannot eliminate, without prohibitive cost, the consequences of exchange rate change. Accordingly, the currency depreciation that we have experienced of late should eventually help to contain our current account deficit as foreign producers export less to the United States. On the other side of the ledger, the current account should improve as U.S. firms find the export market more receptive. But in the process, dollar prices of imports will surely rise. * * * When the temporary forestalling of the U.S. balance of payments adjustment process comes to an end, does that suggest a steepening of the decline in the dollar's exchange rate?                                                       2 That many exports even from Europe are priced in dollars is a trading convention. It does not affect the costs in domestic currencies that exporters incur.  BIS Review 14/2004 3 
As I pointed out in the beginning, the most sophisticated analytical techniques have been unable to profitably project the exchange rates of major currencies. Yet, most commentators argue that because the current account deficit must eventually narrow, the price-adjusted value of the dollar must accordingly decline. But how can exchange rates and the current account be systematically related, if exchange rates are inherently unpredictable? The answer is that the point at which the U.S. current account deficit will be forced to narrow is itself inherently difficult to predict. The current account reflects the myriad forces that bring our transactions with foreign economies into balance at our borders, of which exchange rates are only one. But those forces that, in the end, are reflected in a current account surplus or deficit are both domestic and foreign. Indeed, our current account balance can be shown to be exactly equal to the difference between domestic saving and domestic investment. In fact, it is often instructive in longer-term analysis to view our current account in terms of its domestic counterparts. As I pointed out in a speech last November,3 virtually all of our trading partners share our inclination to invest a disproportionate percentage of domestic savings in domestic capital assets, irrespective of their differential rates of return. People seem to prefer to invest in familiar local businesses even where currency and country risks do not exist. For the United States, studies have shown that individual investors and even professional money managers have a slight preference for investments in their own communities and states. Trust, so crucial an aspect of investing, is most likely to be fostered by the familiarity of local communities. As a consequence, “home bias” will likely continue to constrain the movement of world savings into its optimum use as capital investment, thus limiting the internationalization of financial intermediation and hence the growth of external assets and liabilities and the dispersion of world current account balances that such growth implies. Nonetheless, during the past decade, home bias has apparently declined significantly. For most of the earlier post World War II era, the correlation between domestic saving rates and domestic investment rates across the world's major economies, a conventional measure of home bias, was exceptionally high.4 For the member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) , the GDP-weighted correlation coefficient was 0.97 in 1970. However, it fell from 0.96 in 1992 to less than 0.8 in 2002. For OECD countries excluding the United States, the recent decline is even more pronounced. These declines, not surprisingly, mirror the rise in the differences between saving and investment or, equivalently, of the dispersion of current account balances over the same years. The decline in home bias probably reflects an increased international tendency for financial systems to be more transparent, open, and supportive of strong investor protection.5 Moreover, vast improvements in information and communication technologies have broadened investors' vision to the point that foreign investment appears less exotic and risky. Accordingly, the trend of declining home bias and expanding international financial intermediation will likely continue. This process has enabled the United States to incur and finance a much larger current account deficit than would have been feasible in earlier decades. It is quite difficult to contemplate foreign savings in an amount equivalent to 5 percent of U.S. GDP being transferred to the United States two or three decades ago. * * * It is unclear whether the burden of servicing our growing external liabilities or the rising weight of U.S. assets in global portfolios will impose the greater restraint on current account dispersion over the longer term. Either way, when that point arrives, will the process of reining in our current account deficit be benign to the economies of the United States and the world?                                                       3 Alan Greenspan, speech at the 21st Annual Monetary Conference, cosponsored by the Cato Institute and the Economist, Washington, D.C., November 20, 2003.  4 See Martin Feldstein and Charles Horioka, “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows,” The Economic Journal, June 1980, 314-29. 5 Research indicates that home bias in investment toward a foreign country is likely to be diminished to the extent that the country's financial system offers transparency, accessibility, and investor safeguards. See Alan Ahearne, William Griever, and Frank Warnock, “Information Costs and Home Bias: An Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities,” Journal of International Economics, March 2004, pages 313 36.  4 BIS Review 14/2004 
According to a Federal Reserve staff study, current account deficits that emerged among developed countries since 1980 have risen as high as double-digit percentages of GDP before markets enforced a reversal.6 The median high has been about 5 percent of GDP. Complicating the evaluation of the timing of a turnaround is that deficit countries, both developed and emerging, borrow in international markets largely in dollars rather than in their domestic currency. The United States has been rare in its ability to finance its external deficit in a reserve currency. This ability has presumably enlarged the capability of the United States relative to most of our trading partners to incur foreign debt. Besides experiences with the current account deficits of other countries, there are few useful guideposts of how high our country's net foreign liabilities can mount. The foreign accumulation of U.S. assets would likely slow if dollar assets, irrespective of their competitive return, came to occupy too large a share of the world's portfolio of store of value assets. In these circumstances, investors would seek greater diversification in non-dollar assets. At the end of 2002, U.S. dollars accounted for about 65 percent of the foreign exchange reserves of foreign monetary authorities, with the euro second at 19 percent. Approximately half of private cross-border holdings were denominated in dollars, with one-third in euros. * * * More important than the way that the adjustment of the U.S. current account deficit will be initiated is the effect of the adjustment on both our economy and the economies of our trading partners. The history of such adjustments has been mixed. According to the aforementioned Federal Reserve study of current account corrections in developed countries, although the large majority of episodes were characterized by some significant slowing of economic growth, most economies managed the adjustment without crisis. The institutional strengths of many of these developed economies - rule of law, transparency, and investor and property protection - likely helped to minimize disruptions associated with current account adjustments. The United Kingdom, however, had significant adjustment difficulties in its early postwar years, as did, more recently, Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Russia, Brazil, and Argentina, to name just a few. Can market forces incrementally defuse a worrisome buildup in a nation's current account deficit and net external debt before a crisis more abruptly does so? The answer seems to lie with the degree of flexibility in both domestic and international markets. In domestic economies that approach full flexibility, imbalances are likely to be adjusted well before they become potentially destabilizing. In a similarly flexible world economy, as debt projections rise, product and equity prices, interest rates, and exchange rates could change, presumably to reestablish global balance. The experience over the past two centuries of trade and finance among the individual states that make up the United States comes close to that paradigm of flexibility even though exchange rates among the states have been fixed. Although we have scant data on cross-border transactions among the separate states, anecdotal evidence suggests that over the decades significant apparent imbalances have been resolved without precipitating interstate balance of payments crises. The dispersion of unemployment rates among the states, one measure of imbalances, spikes during periods of economic stress but rapidly returns to modest levels, reflecting a high degree of adjustment flexibility. That flexibility is even more apparent in regional money markets, where interest rates that presumably reflect differential imbalances in states' current accounts and hence cross-border borrowing requirements have, in recent years, exhibited very little interstate dispersion. This observation suggests either negligible cross-state-border imbalances, an unlikely occurrence given the pattern of state unemployment dispersion, or more likely very rapid financial adjustments. * * * We may not be able to usefully determine at what point foreign accumulation of net claims on the United States will slow or even reverse, but it is evident that the greater the degree of international flexibility, the less the risk of a crisis.7 The experience of the United States over the past three years is                                                       6 Caroline Freund, “Current Account Adjustment in Industrialized Countries,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 692, December 2000.  7 Although increased flexibility apparently promotes resolution of current account imbalances without significant disruption, it may also allow larger deficits to emerge before markets are required to address them.  BIS Review 14/2004 5 
6 BIS Review 14/2004                                                      illustrative. The apparent ability of our economy to withstand a number of severe shocks since mid 2000, with only a small decline in real GDP, attests to the marked increase in our economy's flexibility over the past quarter century.8 * * * In evaluating the nature of the adjustment process, we need to ask whether there is something special in the dollar being the world's primary reserve currency. With so few historical examples of dominant world reserve currencies, we are understandably inclined to look to the experiences of the dollar's immediate predecessor. At the height of sterling's role as the world's currency more than a century ago, Great Britain had net external assets amounting to some 150 percent of its annual GDP, most of which were lost in World Wars I and II. Britain in the early post World War II period was hobbled with periodic sterling crises when much of the remnants of Empire endeavored to disengage themselves from heavy reliance on holding sterling assets as central bank reserves and private stores of value. The experience of Britain's then extensively regulated economy, harboring many wartime controls well beyond the end of hostilities, provides testimony to the costs of structural rigidity in times of crisis. * * * Should globalization be allowed to proceed and thereby create an ever more flexible international financial system, history suggests that the odds are favorable that current imbalances will be defused with little disruption to the economy or financial markets. But there are other outcomes that are less benign, and we must endeavor to limit the likelihood of these outcomes. One avenue by which to lessen the risk of a more difficult adjustment is for us to restore fiscal discipline. The rise in national saving that would accompany a reduction in the federal budget deficit will alleviate some of the burden of adjustment that would otherwise be required of the private sector through movements in asset prices. Even more worrisome than the lack of fiscal restraint are the clouds of emerging protectionism that have become increasingly visible on today's horizon. Over the years, protected interests have often endeavored to stop in its tracks the process of unsettling economic change. Pitted against the powerful forces of market competition, virtually all such efforts have failed. The costs of any new such protectionist initiatives, in the context of wide current account imbalances, could significantly erode the flexibility of the global economy. Consequently, it is imperative that creeping protectionism be thwarted and reversed.  8 See Alan Greenspan, remarks before a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30, 2002.  
Jürgen Stark: Economic perspectives in the euro area and Germany Lecture by Dr Jürgen Stark, Vice President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the dinner with The Money Marketeers, New York, 25 February 2004. *      *      * I It is an honour and a pleasure to have the privilege of addressing you here today on the economic perspectives for Germany and the euro area as a whole.  As a central banker, I prefer not to focus on the change in the latest monthly sentiment indicators and on quarterly growth figures, but rather on longer-term issues which are essential for a stability-oriented monetary policy, for potential growth and for an economy’s resilience to shocks. I shall also be highlighting some differences and similarities between economic fundamentals in Europe and the United States. European economic and monetary union (EMU) is now in its sixth year with the euro as its single currency. These years have been fairly demanding but despite a number of sizeable adverse shocks, the Eurosystem, which consists of the European Central Bank and the euro area national central banks, has managed to deliver a credible monetary policy stance.  In the run-up to EMU and at its outset, many sceptics queried the feasibility of an “one-size-fits-all” monetary policy with a decentralised but closely coordinated economic and budgetary policy. The area was seen as too heterogeneous for such a demanding regime. Such criticism has become less vociferous recently due to the monetary policy track record, which proves that the credibility test has been passed so far. Average inflation has been close to 2% and long-term inflation expectations have been well contained, being close to and mostly below our ESCB definition of price stability of below 2%. The growth performance of Germany and the euro area as a whole has been less encouraging. However, after three years of sluggish growth, the region is finally showing increasing signs of a moderate cyclical economic recovery. The underlying conditions for strengthened economic growth remain favourable. Financing conditions are generally supportive, with low nominal and real interest rates. The restructuring of corporate balance sheets, particularly in Germany, has made considerable progress. Robust growth in our major trading partners is also aiding the economic recovery process. The favourable impact of world trade and world growth dynamics are more important for our exports than the recent decline in price competitiveness caused by the appreciation of the euro. The debate on the potential adverse effects of a stronger euro should not distract us from the real underlying obstacles to growth in Europe. I would not be sketching a full picture of the economic outlook if I failed to mention the risks to the broadening global recovery. Four factors, in particular, have to be watched carefully. Firstly, global imbalances, especially the persistent US current account deficit. According to the OECD, it is likely to surpass US$600 billion in 2005, which is equivalent to more than 5% of GDP. The deficit is growing both in dollar terms and relative to the size of the economy. What does that mean? Why was it not an issue years ago and why is it an issue now? Basically, the answer to those questions is that the source and the financing of the deficit have shifted from the private to the public sector. From an US perspective that is not a problem as long as foreigners are willing to continue supplying their savings. But the composition of external financing is becoming unbalanced and, to a growing extent, it is relying on foreign central bank purchases of US Treasuries. The willingness of overseas investors to hold an ever-growing dollar-denominated portfolio is obviously something which cannot go on for ever. Secondly, protectionist pressure. When Alan Greenspan spoke about globalisation last month at the Bundesbank Lecture 2004 in Berlin, he reminded us of the virtue of open markets. He stated: “it is BIS Review 14/2004 1 
imperative that creeping protectionism be thwarted and reversed”.1 This insight comes as no surprise to an economist, but it is a message which is easily forgotten. Unfortunately, that is something which holds true on both sides of the Atlantic. Withstanding archaic reflex responses of emerging protectionism is sometimes a quixotic experience. But we should never forget that open markets and free trade in a multilateral world are key to prosperity - on both sides of the Atlantic. Thirdly, large fiscal deficits in all major economic regions and increasing debt-to-GDP ratios. It cannot be ruled out that this worldwide deterioration of fiscal positions will sooner or later lead to market reactions. An appreciable rise in interest rates has to be expected when investors begin to doubt the longer-term sustainability of public finances. Finally, ample liquidity. That is to say the gap on a global scale between real money growth and real GDP growth. This excess liquidity nurtures the risk appetite of investors. The search for yield has led to a considerable narrowing of corporate bond and emerging market sovereign spreads. If excess liquidity is not mopped up at some point in time, it will find its way through in terms of pushing up inflation or in feeding new asset price bubbles which could be costly to unwind. II The global economic recovery is at present mainly driven by two centres of gravity: the US economy and emerging Asia. The euro area is lagging behind. Why has growth performance in the euro area and Germany been so sluggish during the past few years? Growth differentials between the United States and the euro area are for the most part a non-cyclical phenomenon. For instance, the estimates of overall production potential differ significantly.  The US experience might hold important policy lessons in this regard and we have had quite a lively debate in Europe about the need to become more like the United States. In a nutshell: this is about the contest between the pros and cons of the Anglo-American free market model and the European model of social cohesion. I shall try to remedy certain misunderstandings or misperceptions that arise when country-specific factors are compared. The latest growth figures for the United States are impressive. However, when thinking in terms of prosperity developments, it is necessary to apply a per capita assessment. A country with a fast-growing population needs to generate a greater increase in real income than a country with a less rapidly expanding population if it wishes to maintain or even increase the prosperity of its citizens. The euro area's annual population growth between 1996 and 2003 was about ¼% (in Germany about 0.1%), whereas the US population grew by an average of about 1% owing to its higher birth rate and a sizeable influx of immigrants. Thus, the annual real GDP change of 2.0% in the euro area (1.2% in Germany) and 3.3% in the US in per capita terms was 1.7% in the euro area (1.1% in Germany) and 2.2% in the US. The per capita growth differential is therefore “only” roughly one-third of the overall figure, which could be narrowed down further if methodological differences regarding the measurement of deflation and depreciation were to be incorporated. The smaller per capita difference by no means justifies complacency. However, it is a better reflection of the improvement that has been achieved in the standard of living. It still shows that the per capita growth gap between the USA and Europe is growing and not converging. And one also has to take into consideration the fact that the United States is already at a considerably higher level. In 2002, GDP per capita on the basis of purchasing power parities was one-third larger in the United States than in the euro area. What are the main elements behind these developments? Lower GDP per capita means lower national living standards. Economic well-being is largely determined by productivity. Looking at labour productivity, it is striking that the factor labour is not very efficiently incorporated into the production process in Europe. The labour force participation rate in the euro area - that is the members of the workforce in relation to the population of working age - is about 68% and more than 8 percentage points lower than in the United States.                                                       1 Alan Greenspan (2004), Remarks before the Bundesbank Lecture 2004, Berlin. 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
Labour utilisation in Europe and Germany has declined significantly, mainly due to three factors. 1. The preference for shorter working weeks and longer holidays. Working hours per person employed during the last 25 years have remained virtually unchanged at around 1,800 hours per year in the United States, whereas in Germany, the average number of hours that employees work is now around 1,450 hours, which is 15% lower than 25 years ago. 2. Withdrawals from the labour force, including high participation in early retirement schemes since the early 1980s. The average retirement age at present in Germany and France is about 59 years. 3. The rise in unemployment, since the late 1970s up to 8.8% of the labour force. An interim conclusion may be drawn from this: the once popular European belief that the distribution of a presumably fixed amount of labour would lead to greater work opportunities has not become a reality. On the contrary, it has led to higher non-wage labour costs and higher taxes, which have become an impediment to economic growth and job creation. Labour productivity per hour worked is at present about the same in the United States and in Germany. However, since the mid-1990s, increases in hourly productivity have been lower than in the United States. According to an OECD study,2 the main factors behind this have been a smaller-scale use and slower diffusion of information and communication technologies (ICT) and less intensive research and development. Other factors that play a role are institutional differences such as labour market rigidities and the relatively entangled web of regulations. Taken together, this has resulted in a hard core of structural unemployment. In particular, Europe has been less successful than the United States in integrating “marginal” or less productive members of the labour force into the economic process. A better inclusion of this part of the labour force might transitionally slow down changes in labour productivity, but would still increase overall welfare. Of course, the available data have to be interpreted with caution. Statistical sources vary and societies have deep-seated structural and cultural differences which make any comparison difficult. Nevertheless, despite all terminological, conceptual and empirical difficulties, cross-country comparisons still remain important indicators for evaluating policy measures. Last but not least, lower productivity per employee than in the United States is, in part, a reflection of the democratic choice or the preference of European societies for shorter working time, which is, in economic terms, a substitution of consumption opportunities through leisure. However, this should not be interpreted as economic inefficiency. It could also be argued that US workers have had to work longer hours than their euro area colleagues to maintain similar per capita growth rates. Occasionally, it is suggested that not only material living standards should be considered but also other indicators of welfare, as Robert J. Gordon has done.3 According to his analysis, the GDP of the United States is bloated due, for instance, to the huge cost of keeping more then two million residents in prison and jail (700 inmates per 100,000 residents, whereas Germany has about 80 inmates per 100,000 residents), the higher primary energy consumption per capita owing to the more extreme climate (energy consumption in Germany per capita is about half as high) and elevated transportation costs on account of the greater dispersion of the US population. These factors boost GDP without creating more welfare. I am not willing to make a value judgement on these issues. Nevertheless, those factors should be kept at the back of one’s mind when comparing developments in GDP. III In Germany, three years of an almost stagnating economy have led to the so called “Rhineland model of capitalism” being subjected to more intense scrutiny. This development has not only raised questions about the economy, but also about German society and its political system.                                                       2 OECD (2003), ICT and Economic Growth: Evidence from OECD Countries, Industries and Firms, Paris. 3 Robert J. Gordon (2002), Two Centuries of Economic Growth: Chasing the American Frontier, Northwestern University.  BIS Review 14/2004 3 
The late Rudi Dornbusch once described Germany as an economy with two faces.4 On the one hand, an immensely successful country, prosperous and stable, with among the highest living standards in the world. On the other hand, a country that is plain stuck with mass unemployment, slow growth, with no idea of what to do about it and even less courage to try. I don’t believe that the last two criticisms still hold true.  Less than a year ago, the situation had become so serious that the Bundesbank felt impelled to take an unusual step for a central bank in publishing a reform strategy based on a thorough analysis. To overcome the prevailing crisis of confidence, we called for a coherent overall approach to structural reform in the labour market, the social security system and fiscal policy. The momentum for reform is almost tangible. The government has already started to implement a number of important measures of its Agenda 2010. This is designed to increase, over time, the growth potential of the German economy and includes  - labour market - pension system and  - health care reforms. The objective is a more flexible economy and to bring the social security system more in line with economic capacity. It is imperative that corrective measures be implemented in a timely manner. Unfortunately, experience shows that in the political sphere often more than 20 years pass by between awareness of social and economic challenges and their being addressed. Not to mention the difficulties in gaining popular support for or mere acceptance of structural changes. However, policy must not be confined to the “art of the possible”. Policy is also the art of making possible that which is necessary.  The general public is beginning to realise that the deep-seated German proclivity for consensus does not work in an environment of low growth rates. Much remains to be done and it is crucial that this impetus does not falter. The structure of Germany’s constitution with its different layers of checks and balances makes it difficult to obtain the large parliamentary majorities needed for implementing daunting reforms. This pronounced decentralised system is firmly rooted in German history. It did not hamper the enormous economic upswing in the second half of the last century, but it has encountered difficulties in coping with the changes that have become necessary owing to reunification, European integration, globalisation and demographic challenges. IV Structural change is possible in Europe. The most convincing recent example is European economic and monetary union. The creation of a single European currency was the most far-reaching and challenging monetary event to take place since the Bretton Woods conference in 1944 and the changeover to flexible exchange rates in the early 1970s. The true dimensions of this political project are often underestimated. The same is true of the economic benefits that will materialise over time. A monetary union has to be grounded in shared values. The basis of those shared values is the definition of the member states’ economic policies enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty as the principle of an open market economy with free competition. However, another fundamental policy decision was also necessary for the introduction of a single currency, namely the willingness to transfer national monetary sovereignty to a supranational institution. The concomitant renunciation of sovereignty signified a profound break with the historical and political self-perception of the EU member states. European economic and monetary union was possible only against a backdrop of shared traditions, a decades-long process of integration and successful convergence in the 1990s. The opportunity to                                                       4 Rudi Dornbusch (2000), Keys to Prosperity, MIT. 4 BIS Review 14/2004 
create a single European currency unleashed great energies in the EU member states. In that process of convergence, inflation rates, interest rates and government debts were reduced to the benefit of the participating economies. Given reliable underlying economic policy conditions, exchange rate relationships on the foreign exchange markets within Europe were able to stabilise. Those countries which used to have weak currencies gained especially from this since their risk premium on capital market rates decreased appreciably. Overall, economic and financial policy has become more geared to the medium term and more predictable as a result. Essentially, this means that the member states have said goodbye to the stop-and-go policy that often used to be pursued. Despite differing economic policy standpoints and traditions, it was possible to develop and put in place a joint stability-oriented strategy for economic and monetary union. That would not have been possible without political courage and the will to shape events. At this juncture, let me introduce another institutional pillar of European monetary union: the Stability and Growth Pact, which aims to limit the risks to price stability which might otherwise arise from national “free rider” fiscal policies. From a macroeconomic stabilisation perspective, the central budget of the European Union, at roughly 1% of EU GDP, is insignificant in Europe. The crucial stabilising role compared with the US government expenditure of 34% is played by the national budgets of the member countries, whose general government expenditure accounts for 48% of euro area GDP. That is one reason why EMU needs a counterweight to the politico-economic incentives to borrow without being penalised adequately by financial markets in terms of a higher interest rate premium as compensation for the national inflation and depreciation risk. The Stability and Growth Pact is therefore also an insurance policy for countries which adhere to sound fiscal policies. This framework for fiscal discipline makes long-run sustainability of public finance and short-term stabilisation compatible. The objective is to achieve a medium-term budgetary position close to balance or in surplus. An additional rationale for the Stability and Growth Pact is the urgent need to take account of the unfavourable demographic trends in Europe. Such a trend exists in the United States as well, but is less pronounced. By 2050 the share of elderly people (≥65 years) in the population will have gone up from 12% to 21% in the United States and from 16% to 28% in the EU. Within the fiscal framework of the Stability and Growth Pact, the automatic stabilisers are allowed to operate freely as long as the upper ceiling of the 3% deficit is not endangered. The higher general government ratio in Europe and the structure of social transfer payments make the automatic stabilisers twice as effective as in the United States. As a result, discretionary fiscal policy and all its well-known pro-cyclical drawbacks are less of an issue. However, some governments’ degree of commitment to the rules and procedures of the Stability and Growth Pact has not been encouraging recently. The credibility of the framework has been cast into doubt. This development is jeopardising confidence in the sustainability of public finance in the euro area. European and especially German consumers seem to be more Ricardian in nature than American consumers are. That is to say, they have lost confidence in the soundness of public finance and they tend to regard higher deficits today as higher taxes tomorrow, therefore increasing their savings and holding back on consumption. Occasionally, the monetary policy of the Eurosystem is blamed for the slow growth performance of the euro area. By the same token, it is acknowledged that the ECB is only fulfilling its mandate. Consequently, it is argued that the mandate should be changed and reflect more the goals of the Federal Reserve System. I believe this line of reasoning is rooted in unfamiliarity with fundamentals within the euro area. But let me also raise two important questions. 1. What is the role and focus of monetary policy? 2. What can be achieved through monetary policy? In answering these questions allow me to make the following points. Firstly, the primary focus of European monetary policy is on maintaining price stability over the medium term. The clear and straightforward mandate recognises that this is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to an environment conducive to growth and job creation. This mandate is BIS Review 14/2004 5 
6 BIS Review 14/2004 not in the least outdated. It reflects the limitations of monetary policy and mirrors the latest insights into monetary theory and practical experience. Secondly, the mandate also reflects historical experience. The hyperinflation that occurred in some European countries, and especially in Germany, in the 1920s left a profound impression on subsequent generations. In the United States, the Great Depression left its mark and is an important factor in explaining why the mandate given by the US Congress to the Federal Reserve consists of the three non-prioritised goals of “maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates”. Thirdly, the structural differences between continental Europe and the United States, such as the degree of structural flexibility, impact on the transmission mechanisms and the time lags of monetary policy. What I have particularly in mind in this context are differences in the transmission that arise between a more market-based financial system and a more bank-based one, and the fact that changes in short-term interest rates play a far less important role in investment decisions in continental Europe than they do in the United States. Finally, having said that, we have to bear in mind that monetary policy does not have the appropriate tools to fine-tune the business cycle or to balance deficiencies in other policy areas. At the same time, not too much emphasis should be placed on monetary policy responses to short-term macroeconomic developments or even indicators. Activist policies directed at exploiting short-term trade-offs between prices and economic growth bear the risk of contributing to instability in the medium to longer term.  In the final analysis, all central banks are concerned about price stability. I would not place too much store on statements that inflation may have been eradicated, even if such assertions do come every now and then from well-known economists. Such statements put matters too strongly and are rather heroic in their assumptions. A world in which basic economic relations have ceased to exist is a dangerous promise to make - perhaps comparable to the irrational exuberance surrounding the hype of the “New Economy”. Low inflation is an experience of recent history. Its track record does not stretch over decades. And - as far as the euro area is concerned - the Eurosystem has responsibility for a region with a more inflation-prone history. V Let me summarise the most important lessons. 1. Up to now, monetary policy in the euro area has been successful. Our experience of anchoring inflation expectations reinforces the commitment to the medium-term approach. Greater activism would do more harm than good, especially considering the environment of little structural flexibility. 2. We need to overcome the disappointing weak economic performance in Germany and the euro area as a whole. Let me be clear about this: the economic problems in continental Europe cannot be reduced to monetary policy issues. What is needed is structural reform in member states, including pension reform, health insurance reform and labour market reform. Fortunately, there is a general recognition of the importance of structural flexibility in terms of raising long-term growth potential and increasing resilience to economic shocks. Addressing these issues will rebuild confidence. Even the larger economies are now showing a willingness to tackle structural impediments. 3. Putting fiscal positions back on a sound track and sticking to the fiscal rules of the SGP would help to restore confidence. The credibility of consolidation measures is crucial. Fiscal adjustment should be seen to lead to a permanent increase in future disposable income. Moreover, if appropriately designed, consolidation can raise output and employment in the medium term. Positive results will most likely be produced in the short run if consolidation is combined with structural reforms. 4. The integration of Europe is an ongoing process, which does not always develop as smoothly as might be hoped for. But, eventually, challenges have been met and the groundwork for new challenges such as the enlargement of the EU with ten new member states has been well laid. Nevertheless, all policymakers have to live up to their responsibilities. EMU offers the opportunity for a more dynamic Europe. 
Susan Schmidt Bies: Qualitative aspects of effective risk management Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Global Association of Risk Professionals Fifth Annual Convention, New York, 25 February 2004. *      *      * Good morning. I am delighted to be here for GARP’s 5th Annual Risk Management Convention and to support, to the extent that I can, the work of your organization. It’s gratifying to see the progress GARP has made in its short life toward promoting the visibility and quality of the risk management profession. I congratulate you on the progress you have made and wish you further success in the years ahead. I have spent much of my own career in the field of risk management, and certainly the Federal Reserve has a keen interest in the matter. For those of us who have spent more than a few years in the business, it is easy to see the recent progress in the quantitative or scientific aspects of risk management as a result of data base and other technological advances. These increased capabilities have helped push financial theory and have opened doors and minds to new ways of measuring and managing risk. These advances have also made possible the development of important new markets and products that have become widespread and essential to the risk management practices of both financial and nonfinancial firms. They have also made the practice of risk management far more sophisticated and complex. The application of mathematics and statistics, the collection and compilation of large amounts of data, and the analysis and characterization of the risks embedded in business activities today are much different - and in many ways more challenging - than they were not long ago. While the enhanced quantitative dimensions of risk measurement may be quite visible (at least to practitioners of the art), their implications for the qualitative aspects of risk management may be less apparent. In practice, though, these qualitative aspects are no less important to the successful operation of a business - as events continue to demonstrate. As risk measurement practices advance, the full range of risk management practices needs to keep pace. In my remarks today, I would like to highlight some of the advances in risk management that we have seen in recent years, particularly those related to the management and transfer of credit risk. These gains and the development of new and important markets have come about because of better risk-measurement techniques and have the potential, I believe, to substantially improve the efficiency of U.S. and world financial markets. However, as an economist, I also know there is no free lunch; some of the implications of these developments on the more fundamental elements of risk management must be considered and adequately addressed if the quantitative aspects are to work well. For obvious reasons, I will focus on the practices of large commercial banks. Competitive and innovative markets I would like to draw on some observations gathered from the Federal Reserve’s role in banking supervision as we have worked to better understand recent practices by financial institutions to manage and transfer credit risk. I find the preliminary assessment to be informative, interesting, and at least somewhat reassuring; however, I also feel that it appropriately highlights vulnerabilities in market practices that must be carefully monitored and managed. Because much of the innovation in credit risk transfer involves credit derivatives, attention has been focused on transactions using these instruments and on credit default swaps (CDS), in particular. By way of note, the Federal Reserve also is participating in work commissioned last year by the Financial Stability Forum to gain a broader understanding of these issues. I look forward to the conclusions and assessment in this regard. As most of you know, credit default swaps involve the sale, or transfer, of credit risk associated with a specific reference entity for a fixed term in exchange for a fee from the other counterparty (the “protection buyer”). Related instruments - synthetic collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) - entail similar arrangements, but are based on portfolios of exposures and are “tranched” in a manner typically seen in securitizations. Consequently, through CDOs, parties gain even greater flexibility in tailoring and marketing financial transactions to match the risk appetites of ultimate investors, or risk takers. BIS Review 13/2004 1 
This market has grown rapidly in recent years, attracting increased attention among risk managers and leading to larger operations and higher staffing levels - particularly at dealer firms. The British Bankers Association, for example, reports that the notional value of credit derivatives has grown from less than $200 billion in 1997 to nearly $2 trillion in 2002. Our own bank Call Reports indicate that late last year U.S. commercial banks held credit derivatives with notional values of more than $800 billion, which may represent one-third of the global market. Trading of these instruments occurs mostly among some 1,200 large investment-grade “reference entities,” with more liquidity, of course, among the most active fifty names than among the next several hundred. Most liquidity for CDS contracts is with five-year maturities, although participants are trying to expand market depth at longer terms. There are also efforts to push demand beyond investment-grade corporate names, for example to high-yield and middle-market sectors. A key question - how much risk is being transferred? - has been difficult to answer due to the participation in the market of many types of regulated and unregulated investors and firms as well as the fact that participants simply reverse or close out one exposure by entering into an additional and offsetting one, as they do with other types of swaps. To be sure, notional amounts substantially overstate the level of risk transfer, but by most accounts, market participants seem to agree that the volume of risk transferred has been material. Anecdotally, some of the largest banks indicate they hedge about 15 percent of their investment-grade corporate credit. Standard and Poor’s estimates the banking system globally has used credit derivatives to transfer the risk associated with some $300 billion of exposures. But S&P acknowledges that this estimate likely overstates the true level of risk transferred because CDS are almost exclusively written on low-risk, investment-grade credits, and because banks issuing CDOs typically retain the riskier tranches. Even so, it seems to me that such risk management practices are important in governing credit risk in large banking organizations and, in many respects, reducing systemic risk, as well. Despite the common practice by banks that issue CDOs to retain much or all of the first-loss or “expected-loss” tranche, such banks have at least reduced their previous, full credit exposure. Moreover, the sale and purchase of CDS also allow banks to manage concentrations and to further diversify their portfolios. In the event of highly unexpected defaults among investment-grade firms, a hedged bank’s losses will be reduced. The experience with credit derivatives in the Enron, World Com, and Parmalat events, indicate that these new risk products can work effectively. One aspect that we, as bank supervisors, find encouraging about the growth of credit risk transfer activity is the diversification benefit it provides - and its potential for greater economic efficiency. Certainly, not all of the risk transferred by banks has left the banking sector. S&P estimates that roughly one-half of this risk remains in the banking sector. The insurance sector, including reinsurance firms, has been a major participant among nonbank firms. Among banks, the belief is that those in Europe and Asia have been net sellers of credit protection, particularly with respect to North American borrowers. Such credit flows, whether within or outside the banking system, should help enhance the geographic diversification of the protection-seller and add liquidity to the debt offerings of the reference firms. By distributing risks more broadly among the major players - banks, insurance companies, hedge funds, and private asset managers - these transactions would seem almost by definition to add to the diversity and strength of financial markets and reduce risk concentrations. By their design, derivative instruments segment risk for distribution to parties most willing to accept them. A key point, however, is that these parties are also able to do so by successfully absorbing and diffusing any subsequent loss. In any event, reducing or more evenly redistributing the risk within the banking system - where such credit risk has been traditionally concentrated - would seem to be a clear benefit. A second question that is certainly of interest to you as risk management professionals is whether participants recognize and understand the underlying risks. It is important to recognize that the market for credit default swaps is dominated by large institutions and private investors that have specialized expertise in credit analysis and significant historical performance records. Participants will always adjust their positions and move in and out of markets as they gain experience, and there will certainly be lessons to learn along the way. We will learn them, and hopefully we will deal with them well - as we have so far. But we have little evidence, to date, that suggests there are material weaknesses in the knowledge and understanding of the major market-making dealers. That said, I would offer one critical caveat regarding the potential for a large group of market participants to place an over-reliance on external ratings and key modeling assumptions. In particular, the pricing and risk management of the increasingly complex credit risk transfer instruments and 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
trading strategies rely on credit risk models and supporting assumptions, including assumptions about the degree of default correlations between different reference entities. Although these future correlations cannot be measured, correlations during periods of normal conditions can change greatly during periods of stress. Time will tell how robust these models are and whether they will perform well. Market participants must consider whether there is a concentration of reliance on a small set of risk management frameworks or approaches in the Credit Risk Transfer (CRT) market. This issue arises in regard to the reported similarity of credit risk models and assumptions used by major market participants. Of course, there is nothing inherently wrong with convergence in risk management approaches. But in this case, given the widespread view that models are still in their relative infancy, the similarities are perhaps worth noting. This issue also arises in relation to the reliance on rating agency ratings and methodologies regarding CDO tranches and related structures. Ideally, all market participants that are investing substantial amounts in CDOs would have the capacity to undertake their own analysis of the risks, so that the rating agency ratings would function more as a supplement to these analyses. In practice, however, it is likely that substantial reliance will be placed on the rating agency’s rating. Consequently, the risk judgments of many market participants are concentrated in the hands of a small number of public rating agencies. In the context of commercial banking where past credit-related failures have had substantial and widespread effects, we also have close government supervision, that has focused primarily on risk management practices and controls relating to evolving market practices. I would not for a minute suggest that such oversight ensures that all will go well in the future. But it should help to reinforce effective risk management, and we are learning from the growing list of case studies. Qualitative aspects This discussion of the role of derivatives in transferring credit risk serves to illustrate many important - and not always highly technical - aspects of risk management that cannot be overlooked. Some of these issues relate to the nascent features of that particular market, but they apply to other markets as well, and to the sheer complexity of measuring risk. Thoughts of legal risk, operational risk, reputational risk, counterparty credit risk, and model risk all come to mind. For their part, central bankers and bank supervisors must also consider the implications of new products, activities, and management innovations on financial markets, systemic risk, and their own prudential regulations. The combined implications of market innovations on all of these and other issues can be profound and challenging, but, I would submit, overall beneficial to market efficiency. We simply must manage the process well. In the legal arena, the financial industry has made, and continues to make, substantial progress, for example, standardizing netting agreements related to derivative instruments and reducing related misunderstandings and differences among institutions and legal jurisdictions. Understanding market practices, such as those related to settling transactions using “cheapest to deliver,” and knowing for certain the specific legal entities that are the reference parties on credit risk swaps are also crucial, low tech elements of a successful risk management process. Uncertainties will exist in any complicated operation. They are typically greater when associated with innovation and they grow as product structures become more complex. We all need to recognize this. Regarding models, aside from the technical parts, it’s important to consider the less quantitative. For instance, are the inputs sound? Are the model parameters based on sufficiently robust and accurate data? Are the assumptions reasonable? One needs to understand the business and risk management principles, but that does not require a “quant.” In modeling, “GIGO” - garbage in, garbage out - always rules. Data integrity is growing in importance in effective risk management. In today’s world of credit risk models, especially for centralized underwriting in areas such as consumer, mortgage, and small business credit, the responsibilities of data input may reside with the lending officer. To ensure effective underwriting, the culture and incentives for loan officers should support accountability for valid information going into a model. In the “old days” when individual loan officers made credit decisions, any weaknesses in underwriting were confined to that lender’s portfolio. It was the responsibility of loan reviewers to identify those weaknesses before losses became extensive. Today, the responsibility for effectively predicting defaults and loss given default resides with the senior credit officer responsible for the credit scoring model. When the underwriting results are then tested for reliability, it is critical to identify the root BIS Review 13/2004 3 
cause of errors due to model specifications and changes in customer behavior. The risk of centralized, model-based underwriting is that errors are no longer limited to the portfolio of a single loan officer. Rather, model errors can create significant systemic risks across that loan product portfolio. We are still trying to learn how to estimate these types of risks. In our current regulatory efforts to develop internal rating-based capital standards for credit risk, we find that simply identifying and describing “minimum” data requirements can be a challenge. What is adequate and robust for a given purpose and what is not? Each company’s practices are unique - as they should be. We do not wish to create the moral hazard and greater systemic risk associated with a highly specific, government-dictated procedure to measure risk. Rather, we want the discipline that can be gained from requiring that the input data and the parameters used for regulatory purposes are -as much as possible - the same as those used for business purposes, so that they can be market-tested. Differences among model results will occur, but both management and regulators must decide what is good enough for their respective purposes. Some answers are more judgmental than empirical. Experience, judgment, and a sound degree of prudence are all important. In the old days, banking was often a smaller and certainly less complex business. In this smaller scale, management could gain a more direct “feel” about their customers, their exposures, and the related risk. And the potential consequences of making mistakes were typically small as well. If the bank had a bad loan underwriter, it could dismiss the person and proceed to clean up the mess. As many banking organizations have grown into much larger and far more complex institutions, that personal feel often gets lost. Their managements need the more sophisticated and systematic processes that risk modeling can provide, but they also need to ensure that an incorrect or weak model does not bring down the house. I would offer that success in this area often requires grey hair and keen intuition as well as highly developed analytical skills. Beyond these points, accounting and disclosure practices must be considered as they relate to such matters as earnings volatility, customer suitability, and the incentives or disincentives they provide to risk managers. Fundamental elements of corporate governance must also be adequately addressed - and they naturally become more challenging as activities become more complex. Nevertheless, they cannot be ignored, given the corporate scandals of recent years and the legislated remedies that followed. Recent failures of corporate governance - whether at Enron, Parmalat, or the New York Stock Exchange - have changed the landscape underlying many transactions conducted by financial institutions. The implications of the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation are now being felt throughout corporate America and are proving to be expensive to many firms. How much better, for all, had these few corporations behaved more responsibly all along! Responsible self-governance and sound corporate governance are much better and far less costly than rigid governmental-imposed rules. A greater awareness of business ethics and a reshaping of accounting practices and incentive packages should help. But risk managers must also play an active role in focusing on sound practices, and not just on expedience. Accounting, disclosure, and market discipline Revelations of significant corporate governance and accounting failures, with Parmalat being the latest example, demonstrate that strong accounting, effective internal and external auditing, and transparent disclosure practices are critical concerns worldwide, not just in one part of the world, such as the United States. Events at the international level have renewed attention to the need for companies worldwide to implement high-quality corporate governance practices and accounting and disclosure standards, and for their external auditors to employ rigorous and sound international auditing techniques. Long before coming to the Federal Reserve, I had a strong interest and became involved in accounting, auditing, and internal control matters. This led to my serving on the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Emerging Issues Task Force and the Committee on Corporate Reporting of the Financial Executives Institute. I have continued to pursue this interest in my role as a Federal Reserve Board member and as chair of the Board’s Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Affairs. I would like, now, to turn to some of the recent accounting issues surrounding complex instruments and the role of financial disclosure in promoting risk management. For starters, I am pleased to see movement in recognizing employee stock options grants as a business expense. At year-end 2003, thirty-five of the fifty largest U.S. bank holding companies that we closely monitor each quarter were taking this approach, a notable increase from the year before. 4 BIS Review 13/2004 
Many nonbank firms are doing so as well, and we should expect to see many more companies do so in periods ahead. In my view, that is a useful step toward more accurately disclosing a company’s true results, and one that should help rebuild investor confidence in financial statements. The techniques for valuing financial derivatives - whether they be employee stock options, mortgage interest rate lock commitments, credit default swaps, or another type - are continuing to evolve. As these markets grow, fair-value estimates will only improve. In the process, firms of all types will face growing competitive pressures to manage risk more effectively and to make greater use of these and other products. Accounting rules and disclosure practices must keep pace. A frequently cited issue is the effect of current hedge accounting rules, which sometimes cause banks to recognize losses on credit hedges while ignoring, in earnings, the offsetting gains in the economic value of the asset hedged. This leads to greater earnings volatility and has understandably caused some banks to reassess, and in some cases scale back, their credit hedging activities. If market discipline is to function, accounting boards themselves must find better, more-innovative solutions that more accurately capture the underlying economics of transactions. Moreover, with regard to securitizations, derivatives, and other innovative instruments that can transfer risk, it is not at all clear that accounting measures of a company’s balance sheet at a given point in time are sufficient to reflect the company’s financial risk profile. As bank regulators, we recognize the need to strike the right balance in deciding what disclosure standards to promote. It is said that for every complex issue there is an answer that is simple, concise, and wrong. We would prefer to get it right. We need to identify the information that sufficiently informs investors of risk levels without being unduly burdensome and without revealing proprietary information. Much of the answer may involve disclosures about how risks are being managed and valued, drawing less on accounting information and more on information available in risk management reports. Disclosures need not be fully standardized; rather each firm should tell its own story. One area in which improved disclosures by banking organizations are needed involves credit risk and the allowance for loan losses. As you know, there is a high degree of management judgment in estimating the loan-loss allowance, and that estimate can have a significant impact on an institution’s balance sheet and earnings. Expanded disclosures in this area would improve market participants’ understanding of an institution’s risk profile and whether the firm has adequately provided for its estimated credit losses in a consistent, well-disciplined manner. Accordingly, I strongly encourage institutions to provide additional disclosures in this area. Examples include a breakdown of credit exposures by internal credit grade, the allowance estimates broken down by key components, more-thorough discussions of why allowance components have changed from period to period, and enhanced discussions of the rationale behind changes in the more-subjective allowance estimates, including unallocated amounts. It is also important to note that the soon-to-be-released enterprise risk management (ERM) framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, or COSO, should provide much needed guidance in the areas of risk management and internal controls and, thus, is of particular interest to bank regulators. The ERM framework, as proposed, requires an entity to identify the potential events that may affect its operations and requires the entity to systematically manage those risks with a particular emphasis on its risk appetite and strategic direction. The framework is predicated on the existence of sound controls and effective management. Successful application of the framework requires managers to consider both current and planned or anticipated operational and market changes and to identify the risks arising from those changes. Once these risks have been identified comprehensively, assessed, and evaluated as to their potential impact on the organization, management must determine the effectiveness of existing controls and develop and implement additional mitigating controls where needed. This is a critical step and if it is not performed properly, it may doom the entire process. One of the weaknesses that we have seen is the delegation by management of both the development and the assessment of the internal control structure to the same risk management, internal control, or compliance group. It is important to emphasize that line management has the responsibility for identifying risks and ensuring that the mitigating controls are effective - and to leave the assessments to a group that is independent of that line organization. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually and to report the results of this process to the chief risk officer and the audit committee of the board of directors. An independent group, such as internal audit, should perform a separate assessment to confirm management’s assessment. BIS Review 13/2004 5 
Internal audit’s review should determine whether the firm is accomplishing its stated control objectives, in light of growth and changes in the firm’s business mix as well as in regard to new customers, strategic initiatives, reorganizations, and process changes. Internal audit should also evaluate the entity’s adherence to its control processes and assess the adequacy of those processes and its related disclosure practices in light of the complexity and legal and reputational risk profile of the organization. It is essential for internal audit to be staffed with personnel who have the necessary skills and experience to report on the degree of compliance with an entity’s policies and procedures. Internal audit should test transactions to validate that business lines are complying with the firm’s standards and should report the results of that testing to the board or the audit committee, as appropriate. Although I have referred to internal audit, the key point is that strong internal controls, sound corporate governance, and effective disclosure practices require that periodic assessments of overall effectiveness be performed by an independent group. Then, as corporate disclosure practices evolve, market analysts must do their part to understand the information, while recognizing both its value and its limitations. Analysts need to make sure they are correctly using all available information. This includes understanding that some accounting practices may not result in the best presentation of economic reality and that other sources of information may provide more-accurate insight into a company’s condition. For example, current accounting rules for defined-benefit pension plans permit firms to use expectations of the long-term return on assets to calculate current-period pension costs. A spot rate is used to discount future liabilities. The discrepancies between the assumed and the actual returns are reconciled by gradual amortization. This smoothing feature can create large distortions between economic reality and the pension-financing cost accrual embedded in the income statement. A recent study by Federal Reserve staff members indicates that “full disclosure” of the underlying details would not necessarily assist the analyst in reaching a “correct” judgment.1 The study adopts the premise that most of what investors need to know about true pension-financing costs can be reflected in two numbers disclosed in the pension footnote. These two numbers are the fair-market value of the pension assets and the present value of outstanding pension liabilities. The study finds that these two numbers tend to be ignored by investors in favor of the potentially misleading accounting measures. Investors and analysts need to ensure that the information they are using most accurately reflects the organization under consideration. Also, bank employees who use financial statements of potential borrowers to make credit-related decisions need to understand the documents they are using and be able to identify potential shortfalls. Too often, analysts have relied too heavily on projections and interpretations given to them by management. Recent events have injected more independence into the analysis process and should help wean many analysts from CFOs and investor relations departments. More-insightful and more-independent analysis by them can help greatly in promoting market discipline and identifying a company’s true worth. That progress, in turn, strengthens the input data and the risk-measurement systems we all rely on. Throughout its supervisory and regulatory efforts, the Federal Reserve is, indeed, looking more to market signals. For example, information contained in subordinated debt spreads, credit default swap spreads, KMV EDFs, and equity prices provide useful indications of the market’s collective assessment of a company’s underlying risk. In banks, this information supports credit judgments and overall measures of the institution’s capital adequacy and credit risk. As regulators worldwide move to finalize new capital standards, the role of market information in risk management should grow further, particularly among the largest banks, as it will in our own oversight activities. Before closing, I would like to take off my central banker hat and speak to you only as an industry observer and a former bank CFO. I want to simply note the historically low level of interest rates which are not within the work experience of many investment and risk managers. The typical response is to try to increase nominal yields and widen spreads. Thus, some banks have acted to extend portfolio durations and accept risk, given the steep yield curve, because statistics will likely tell you that the odds of a rate increase are greater than a further decline. We are also seeing some investors attempt to increase nominal yields by investing in lower-rated bonds. But the skills that this association’s members practice, remind us that the goal should be appropriate “risk management,” that is, given an                                                       1 Julia Coronado and Steve Sharpe, “Did Pension Accounting Contribute to a Stock Market Bubble?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, July 2003. 6 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 7 organization’s risk appetite, the attractiveness of higher yields must always be balanced against the increased level of risk in the transaction. And in times of turns in business and interest rate cycles, estimating these tradeoffs can be more difficult. That is not a prediction of near or future rate movements - just advice from an experienced manager of interest rate risk. Conclusion In my remarks this morning, I have sought to encourage you to continue your efforts to support the evolution of risk-management practices and heighten the degree of professionalism that every effective risk manager should demonstrate. I would like to leave by reminding all of you not to become so caught up in the latest technical development that you lose sight of the qualitative aspects of your responsibilities. Models alone do not guarantee an effective risk-management process. You should encourage continuous improvement in all aspects, including some I mentioned today - data integrity, legal clarity, transparent disclosures, and internal controls. 
Seung Park: Economic and financial developments in East Asia Introductory remarks by Dr Seung Park, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the International Forum on Monetary & Financial Cooperation for Asia, Seoul, 20 February 2004. *      *      * Opening remarks Ladies and gentlemen, Let me first extend a hearty welcome to all participants who have gathered from Australia, China, Japan and Korea to attend the International Forum on Monetary & Financial Cooperation for Asia. I am very glad to see here today so many great scholars of money and finance. I would especially like to express my deep thanks to Prof. Choi, Woonyoul, President of Korea Monetary and Finance Association, and all those involved with arranging this meaningful and timely forum for having invited me to address you today. Prof. Choi was one of the Monetary Policy Committee members of the Bank of Korea until the end of last year and contributed greatly to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. Taking this opportunity I thank him again for all his services during his terms of office. The finance associations of the four countries taking part in this forum have been engaged in very lively research activities and academic exchanges that have contributed mightily to financial sector development not only of their own countries but of entire Western Pacific Basin region. Your forum is also the focus of attention because discussion will center mainly on a matter of common concern throughout East Asia, namely on plans to promote regional cooperation for the growth of the financial sector. The position of East Asia in the world economy Ladies and gentlemen, as you are well aware, East Asia has achieved very high rates of economic growth over the last half century, and is now a major pole of the global economy. Japan long ago joined the ranks of advanced countries after the post-war reconstruction of economy. Korea, for its part, achieved the Miracle of Han River rising phoenix-like from the ashes of the Korean War and utter destitution to become a member of what is often called the rich man’s club of the OECD in 1996. Since the 1980s, China has also maintained rapid growth averaging around 9% and paved its way as a great new economic power. As a result, East Asia’s economic profile has been greatly heightened. Japan, China and Korea now rank the 2nd, the 6th and the 12th country respectively in terms of the scale of their economies with the combined GDP of three countries representing 18% of that of the world as a whole. In the course of its dramatic economic spring forward, East Asia has accumulated immense foreign reserves. As of the end of last year, the foreign reserves of Japan, China and Korea amounted in all to some 1.2 trillion dollars. The total when those of Taiwan and Hongkong are added in, makes up half of the world’s foreign reserves. East Asian reserves have been mainly invested in U.S Treasuries. This means that a large proportion of the American fiscal and current account deficits is financed by the East Asian countries. Fragility of the financial sector in East Asia Despite the dramatic growth in the real economy, the East Asian financial sector trails those of the U.S  and Europe. The Japanese financial industry was once the world leader in terms of scale of financial assets. It proved unable, however, to adapt itself to liberalization and market openness. Its structural fragility was laid bare resulting in the protracted recession of last decade. After the foreign currency crisis in 1997, the Korean financial sector turned its back on the old system and achieved a rebirth through thoroughgoing structural reform. Nevertheless the soundness and profit of financial institutions worsened again last year in line with the rise of household insolvencies. BIS Review 13/2004 1 
The troubled status of some credit card companies still remains a big problem, which destabilizes the financial market and is one cause of the subdued state of domestic demand. In the Chinese financial sector, it is said that there is still much room for improvement in terms of the legal and institutional infrastructure. Notably, in the process of rapid economic growth, the banking sector expanded loans to state companies so rapidly that they hold a great stock of non-performing loans. This overhang represents a latent threat that could hold back the sustained development of the Chinese economy at a later stage. Need for financial upgrading and the strengthening of cooperation in East Asia Without financial stability and development, it is unreasonable to look for continuous growth of the real economy. Examples spring all too readily to mind. The Korean economy, after long maintaining its rapid growth pace, was hit by a foreign currency crisis and a deep recession at the end of 1997. The accumulated structural fragilities of the financial sector were revealed all at once. For its part, Japan endured a long recession for more than 10 years after the bubble burst in the early 1990s. In East Asia, along with the brisk growth of the real economy, financial demand has also been increasing sharply, in connection with trade, foreign direct and indirect investment, and the operation of the foreign reserves. Looking only at trade, the volume between Japan, China and Korea built up rapidly from 96 billion dollars in 1990 to 378 billion dollars in 2002. The regional financial demand accompanying those trade flows has seen explosive growth. Nevertheless, because of the fragility of regional financial structures, U.S & European-based investment banks meet a large part of the regional financial demand through their advanced financial systems and accumulated expertise. This is why East Asian countries must cure the fragility of their financial sectors and strengthen financial cooperation within the area. Notably East Asian financial markets are relatively narrow so that they are easily liable to attacks from large flows of speculative capital. Worse still, with the progress of financial liberalization and openness, financial unstability in one country spreads instantaneously to other associated countries. In the light of this situation, close financial cooperation is more urgent than ever. Encouragingly several steps have been already taken to strengthen regional financial cooperation. In May 2000, the members of ASEAN+3 opted for the Chiang Mai Initiative. This is based on the provision of bilateral liquidity support through the arrangement of currency swaps between the central banks involved. The Bank of Korea has regular conferences on matters of mutual interest with the Bank of Japan and the People’s Bank of China. Beside this, it opened a Beijing representative office last November with a view to intensifying cooperation. These steps, I think, are only just beginning. It is absolutely vital that we continue to expand such financial cooperation throughout the region. Closing remarks Given the increasing necessity of financial cooperation among regional countries, Korea, China and Japan have recognized the building of an East Asian financial hub as a core task for economic development. There is rivalry among them for it to be built in their own countries. Such competition, however, does not mean the exclusion of others. Rather competition in good faith can provide opportunity for the financial markets of each country to overcome their structural fragility, and develop together. In this way it, in fact, promotes mutual cooperation. Your conference offers a valuable chance in this respect to expand financial cooperation by widening the breath of mutual understanding through the sharing of ideas and opinions among experts. My especial hope is that we will find a basis for specific and practical initiatives in deep and wide-ranging discussions about East Asian monetary integration and the development of Asian bond markets, both matters that are the focus of intense debate these days. Fruitful outcomes from this conference will be a great boost to financial economists. More practically they will be of immense help to administrative authorities like governments, central banks, and 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 3 financial supervisory institutions and to financial players like banks, insurers and securities companies. In this respect I have great anticipations of this conference. 
Alan Greenspan: Economic outlook and current fiscal issues Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System before the Committee on the Budget, US House of Representatives, 25 February 2004. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today and to offer my views on the outlook for the economy and current fiscal issues. I want to emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve. As you know, the U.S. economy appears to have made the transition from a period of subpar growth to one of more vigorous expansion. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose briskly in the second half of last year, fueled by a sizable increase in household spending, a notable strengthening in business investment, and a sharp rebound in exports. Moreover, productivity surged, prices remained stable, and financial conditions improved further. Overall, the economy has lately made impressive gains in output and real incomes, although progress in creating jobs has been limited. The most recent indicators suggest that the economy is off to a strong start in 2004, and prospects for sustaining the expansion in the period ahead are good. The marked improvement in the financial situations of many households and businesses in recent years should bolster aggregate demand. And with short-term real interest rates close to zero, monetary policy remains highly accommodative. Also, the impetus from fiscal policy appears likely to stay expansionary through this year. At the same time, increases in efficiency and a significant level of underutilized resources should help keep a lid on inflation. This favorable short-term outlook for the U.S. economy, however, is playing out against a backdrop of growing concern about the prospects for the federal budget. As you are well aware, after having run surpluses for a brief period around the turn of the decade, the federal budget has reverted to deficit. The unified deficit swelled to $375 billion in fiscal 2003 and appears to be continuing to widen in the current fiscal year. According to the latest projections from the Administration and the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), if current policies remain in place, the budget will stay in deficit for some time. In part, the recent deficits have resulted from the economic downturn in 2001 and the period of slow growth that followed, as well as the sharp declines in equity prices. The deficits also reflect a significant step-up in spending on defense and higher outlays for homeland security and many other nondefense discretionary programs. Tax reductions - some of which were intended specifically to provide stimulus to the economy - also contributed to the deterioration of the fiscal balance. For a time, the fiscal stimulus associated with the larger deficits was helpful in shoring up a weak economy. During the next few years, these deficits will tend to narrow somewhat as the economic expansion proceeds and rising incomes generate increases in revenues. Moreover, the current ramp-up in defense spending will not continue indefinitely. Merely maintaining a given military commitment, rather than adding to it, will remove an important factor driving the deficit higher. But the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP has already stopped falling and has even edged up in the past couple of years - implying a worsening of the starting point from which policymakers will have to address the adverse budgetary implications of an aging population and rising health care costs. For about a decade, the rules laid out in the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990, and the later modifications and extensions of the act, provided a procedural framework that helped the Congress make the difficult decisions that were required to forge a better fiscal balance. However, the brief emergence of surpluses eroded the will to adhere to those rules, and many of the provisions that helped to restrain budgetary decisionmaking in the 1990s - in particular, the limits on discretionary spending and the PAYGO requirements - were violated more and more frequently and eventually allowed to expire. In recent years, budget debates have turned to choices offered by those advocating tax cuts and those advocating increased spending. To date, actions that would lower forthcoming deficits have received only narrow support, and many analysts are becoming increasingly concerned that, without a restoration of the budget enforcement mechanisms and the fundamental political will they signal, the inbuilt political bias in favor of red ink will once again become entrenched. In 2008 - just four years from now - the first cohort of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits may be claimed and the age at which about half of prospective beneficiaries choose to retire; in 2011, these individuals will reach 65 and will thus BIS Review 13/2004 1 
be eligible for Medicare. At that time, under the intermediate assumptions of the OASDI trustees, there will still be more than three covered workers for each OASDI beneficiary; by 2025, this ratio is projected to be down to 2-1/4. This dramatic demographic change is certain to place enormous demands on our nation’s resources - demands we almost surely will be unable to meet unless action is taken. For a variety of reasons, that action is better taken as soon as possible. The budget scenarios considered by the CBO in its December assessment of the long-term budget outlook offer a vivid - and sobering - illustration of the challenges we face as we prepare for the retirement of the baby-boom generation. These scenarios suggest that, under a range of reasonably plausible assumptions about spending and taxes, we could be in a situation in the decades ahead in which rapid increases in the unified budget deficit set in motion a dynamic in which large deficits result in ever-growing interest payments that augment deficits in future years. The resulting rise in the federal debt could drain funds away from private capital formation and thus over time slow the growth of living standards. Favorable productivity developments, of course, can help to alleviate the impending budgetary strains, but no one should expect productivity growth to be sufficient to bail us out. Indeed, productivity would have to grow at a rate far above its historical average to fully resolve the long-term financing problems of Social Security and Medicare. Higher productivity, of course, buoys expected revenues to the system, but it also raises Social Security obligations.1 Moreover, although productivity has no direct link to Medicare spending, historical experience suggests that the demand for medical services increases with real income, which over time rises in line with productivity. Today, federal outlays under Social Security and Medicare amount to less than 7 percent of GDP. In December, the CBO projected that these outlays would increase to 12 percent of GDP by 2030 under current law, using assumptions about the growth of health-care costs similar to the intermediate assumptions of the Medicare trustees; when spending on Medicaid is added in, the rise in the ratio is even steeper. To be sure, the rise in these outlays relative to GDP could be financed by tax increases, but the CBO results suggest that, even if other non-interest spending is constrained fairly tightly, ensuring fiscal stability would require an overall federal tax burden well above its long-term average. Most experts believe that the best baseline for planning purposes is to assume that the demographic shift associated with the retirement of the baby-boom generation will be permanent - that is, it will not reverse when that cohort passes away. Indeed, so long as longevity continues to increase - and assuming no significant changes in immigration or fertility rates - the proportion of elderly in the population will only rise. If this fundamental change in the age distribution materializes, we will eventually have no choice but to make significant structural adjustments in the major retirement programs. One change the Congress could consider as it moves forward on this critical issue is to replace the current measure of the “cost of living” that is used for many purposes with respect to both revenues and outlays with a more appropriate price index. As you may be aware, in 2002, the Bureau of Labor Statistics introduced a new price index - the chained consumer price index (CPI). The new index is based on the same underlying individual prices as is the official CPI. But it combines those prices so as to remove some of the inadvertent bias in the official price index, and thus it better measures changes in the cost of living, the statutory intent of the indexing.2 All else being equal, had a chained CPI been used for indexing over the past decade, the cumulative unified budget deficit and thus the level of the federal debt would have been reduced about $200 billion; higher receipts and the reduction in debt service associated with those higher receipts account for roughly 60 percent of the saving, with the remainder attributable to lower outlays. Shifting to the chain-weighted measure would not address perhaps more fundamental shortcomings in the CPI - most notably the question of whether quality improvement is adequately captured - but it would be an important step toward better implementation of the intention of the Congress.                                                       1 Under current law, faster productivity growth would not affect individuals who are already retired because their benefits are indexed by the consumer price index (CPI). However, it would raise initial benefits for future retirees through its effect on real wages over time. In the end, productivity would have to rise about 3-1/2 percent per year, about 2 percentage points per year faster than the trustees’ current intermediate assumption, to eliminate the Social Security imbalance over seventy-five years; productivity growth would have to be even more rapid to achieve balance in perpetuity. 2 In particular, the chained CPI captures more fully than does the official CPI the way that consumers alter the mix of their expenditures in response to changes in relative prices. 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 3 Another possible adjustment relates to the age at which Social Security and Medicare benefits will be provided. Under current law, and even with the so-called normal retirement age for Social Security slated to move up to 67 over the next two decades, the ratio of the number of years that the typical worker will spend in retirement to the number of years he or she works will rise in the long term. A critical step forward would be to adjust the system so that this ratio stabilizes. A number of specific approaches have been proposed for implementing this indexation, but the principle behind all of them is to insulate the finances of the system, at least to a degree, from further changes in life expectancy. Sound private and public decisionmaking will be aided by determining ahead of the fact how one source of risk, namely demographic developments, will be dealt with. The degree of uncertainty about whether future resources will be adequate to meet our current statutory obligations to the coming generations of retirees is daunting. The concern is not so much about Social Security, where benefits are tied in a mechanical fashion to retirees’ wage histories and we have some useful tools for forecasting future outlays. The outlook for Medicare, however, is much more difficult to assess. Although forecasting the number of program beneficiaries is reasonably straightforward, we know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. To be sure, technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in theory, reduce the costs of existing treatments. But because medical technology expands the range of treatment options, it also has the potential of adding to overall spending - in some cases, significantly. As a result, the range of possible outlays per recipient is extremely wide. This uncertainty is an important reason to be cautious - especially given that government programs, whether for spending or for tax preferences, are easy to initiate but can be extraordinarily difficult to shut down once constituencies for them develop. In view of this upward ratchet in government programs and the enormous uncertainty about the upper bounds of future demands for medical care, I believe that a thorough review of our spending commitments - and at least some adjustment in those commitments - is necessary for prudent policy. I also believe that we have an obligation to those in and near retirement to honor what has been promised to them. If changes need to be made, they should be made soon enough so that future retirees have time to adjust their plans for retirement spending and to make sure that their personal resources, along with what they expect to receive from the government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement needs. I certainly agree that the same scrutiny needs to be applied to taxes. However, tax rate increases of sufficient dimension to deal with our looming fiscal problems arguably pose significant risks to economic growth and the revenue base. The exact magnitude of such risks is very difficult to estimate, but they are of enough concern, in my judgment, to warrant aiming to close the fiscal gap primarily, if not wholly, from the outlay side. The dimension of the challenge is enormous. The one certainty is that the resolution of this situation will require difficult choices and that the future performance of the economy will depend on those choices. No changes will be easy, as they all will involve lowering claims on resources or raising financial obligations. It falls on the Congress to determine how best to address the competing claims. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy change but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and private saving. History has shown that, when faced with major challenges, elected officials have risen to the occasion. In particular, over the past twenty years or so, the prospect of large deficits has generally led to actions to narrow them. I trust that the recent deterioration in the budget outlook and the fast-approaching retirement of the baby-boom generation will be met with similar determination and effectiveness. 
T T Mboweni: The monetary policy framework of South Africa Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the International Investors Conference, Sun City, 24 March 2004. *      *      * 1. Introduction The main task of macro-economic policy is the promotion of sustainable high economic growth, the creation of employment opportunities, the containment of inflation, improvement of the living conditions of all the residents of a country, and the elimination of unjustifiable discrepancies in the distribution of income amongst our people. These economic objectives can best be obtained amongst other things in a stable financial environment. Financial instability is a major obstacle in the fulfilment of this task. Stable financial conditions should be maintained throughout the various phases of the business cycle to attain maximum economic development. 2. Primary objective of monetary policy The role of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) in this process is to achieve and maintain price stability and to develop and supervise a healthy banking sector. This objective is spelled out in both the Constitution of South Africa and in the SARB Act. In section 224 of the Constitution and section 3 of the SARB Act it is stated that the primary objective of the Bank is to protect the value of the currency of the Republic in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth. This, in our view, means price stability. These laws therefore recognise that only by protecting the currency can balanced and sustainable economic growth be achieved. It is believed in the Bank, and indeed in most other central banks in the rest of the world, that the potential growth rate of an economy and the optimum creation of employment opportunities can only by attained under stable financial conditions. By fulfilling this primary objective, the SARB will be making its contribution to sustainable high economic growth in South Africa.  Section 224(2) of the Constitution determines further that the SARB, in pursuit of its primary objective, must perform its functions independently and without fear, favour or prejudice. Regular consultation must, however, take place between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the SARB. In addition to this legal requirement, section 10(2) of the SARB Act clearly states that “the rates at which the Bank will discount or rediscount the various classes of bills, promissory notes and other securities shall be determined and announced by the Bank from time to time”. This gives the Bank the right to determine the official rate, or as it is now called the repo rate. These laws therefore provide the executive management of the Bank with complete instrumental independence, with the one precondition that regular consultation should take place with the Minister of Finance. The Bank can accordingly perform its work in an autonomous manner. Having established that the task of the Bank is the achievement and maintenance of price stability, what does the term price stability convey? In the economic literature price stability is normally regarded as a situation wherein changes in the general price level do not materially affect the economic decision-making process. Although relative price movements still have an impact on production, consumption and investment, the rate of inflation in such conditions is no longer an important factor in the decisions taken by producers, consumers and investors. Price stability is heavily dependent on stability in the financial sector. The Bank has accordingly also been tasked to promote the soundness and management of domestic banks through the effective application of international best practise in the regulatory and supervisory area. The objective of banking supervision is to ensure that banks manage their risks in such a way that systemic risk in the banking sector is minimised, thereby ensuring the safety of depositor’s money. It is aimed at promoting the financial soundness of banks and the banking system as a whole.  In the fulfilment of its mission the Bank performs virtually the full range of functions and duties that are customarily carried out by central banks. The other main functions of the Bank are:  1) the issuing of banknotes and coin; 2) acting as banker to the government; BIS Review 18/2004 1 
3) acting as bank to private banks; 4) providing facilities for the clearing and settlement of claims between banks; 5) providing liquidity to banks and acting on a case by case basis as “lender of last resort”; 6) engaging in open-market operations; and 7) collecting, processing and interpreting economic statistics and other information. 3. The importance of price stability  The objective of achieving and maintaining price stability is based on the proposition that inflation is bad for economic growth, employment creation and the distribution of income. Is this indeed the case, or can more growth be attained by allowing an acceleration in inflation? It is often argued that there is a trade-off between inflation and growth based on the Philips-curve analysis. In this analysis it was argued that at a low level of inflation real economic growth can be stimulated through an expansionary monetary policy even if this policy should lead to higher inflation. There may be some truth in this analysis over the short term, but such a policy will not achieve long-term sustainable high economic growth and employment creation. An artificial stimulation of demand inevitably results in higher inflation rather than production over the long term. If demand is allowed to grow more rapidly than the production capacity of the economy, this leads to inflation. It also results in rising deficits on the current account of the balance of payment. If these deficits are not readily financed by means of financial inflows, the exchange rate of the currency could come under pressure. A depreciating currency can bring forth further pressures on domestic prices. A little bit of inflation once started can easily gain momentum, which could require very restrictive measures to again attain balance between demand and supply. Substantial swings in interest rates to achieve such a balance make business planning difficult and could lead to lower average economic growth over the long term.  The maintenance of price stability over the long term implies low and more stable interest rates. With low inflation, output increases become more dependent on increases in investment and the quantity and quality of labour, and on the way that these production factors are employed. Economic growth becomes propelled by healthy permanent factors and is not dependent on an artificial stimulation of demand. Low inflation is therefore an important factor for sustainable high growth. In such a stable environment demand and output will grow on a steady and sustainable basis. If price stability is not achieved, the well known disadvantages of inflation come into play. High inflation distorts the allocation of resources and favours investment in non-productive hedge assets rather than in capital formation. High inflation discourages saving and leads to more consumption. High inflation erodes the competitiveness of local manufacturers and other producers vis-à-vis foreign producers. High inflation leads to an unfair redistribution of wealth by penalising the poor more than the rich. The general conclusion is accordingly that high inflation in the medium to long term leads to lower growth, fewer jobs, more unemployment and a more unequal distribution of income and wealth. 4. Inflation targeting How do we achieve price stability? Inflation is a monetary phenomenon, i.e. inflation cannot take place without a more rapid increase in the quantity of money than in output, provided that the velocity of circulation of money remains unchanged. As Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, has coined it: “No money, no inflation.” An increase in the inflation rate can originate from many developments in the international and domestic economy and it is impossible for any individual institution to prevent these causes of inflation to take effect. The SARB can only use the powers at its disposal to reduce inflationary pressures. This consists basically of influencing liquidity in the banking sector and/or influencing the general level of interest rates. In pursuing price stability, the main operational variable that the Bank uses to influence prices is the repo rate, that is the interest rate at which the SARB meets the liquidity needs of banking institutions. By changing the repo rate, the Bank directly affects other domestic interest rates, the demand for money and credit, and eventually changes in prices. From February 2000 changes in the repo rate are based on the inflation targeting monetary policy framework. With the adoption of this framework, the Bank moved away from an eclectic monetary 2 BIS Review 18/2004 
policy framework or informal inflation targeting. In the eclectic monetary policy framework the growth in money supply and bank credit extension were used as intermediate guidelines for the determination of short-term interest rates. In addition, in deciding on the most appropriate monetary policy stance, developments in a number of other variables were also taken into consideration, because the monetary aggregates had lost some of their usefulness as indicators of future inflation due to structural changes in the economy.  The adoption of an inflation targeting framework reduced the role of these intermediate guidelines. Instead, the SARB adopted a strategy of determining directly what the likely path of inflation would be. This led to the detailed assessment of factors that could affect inflation based on past experience. The indicators that the SARB monitors include the growth in money supply and bank credit extension, the changes in nominal and real salaries and wages, the nominal unit labour costs, the gap between potential and actual domestic output, exchange rate developments, producer prices and import prices. Developments in a number of exogenous factors are also regarded as important in this analysis, such as oil prices, food prices and administered prices. Unfortunately the Bank has little control over these exogenous price changes, but they may have an important bearing on inflationary pressures. In analysing these factors the SARB is acutely aware of the long and variable lags of the effect of interest rate changes on inflation. This is generally believed to be about 18 to 24 months. These lags in monetary policy were an important consideration in the decision to determine directly what the likely path of inflation will be. In adopting an inflation targeting framework the Bank’s research has become increasingly focussed on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy in South Africa and the development of inflation forecasting models. In co-operation with the staff of other central banks a suite of models was developed, comprising a core model, a small-scale model, vector models, Philips-curve models and indicator models. The prediction of inflation is of the utmost importance in the implementation of monetary policy because changes in policy measures must always be based on likely future price developments. The fact that inflation targeting has to rely on forecasting has led to the criticism that this is a weakness of this framework as forecasts are inherently unreliable. This limitation, however, applies in the case of all other monetary policy frameworks. If the objective of a central bank is the attainment of price stability, it will always have to take a view on how its current policy stance will affect future price developments, whichever monetary policy framework it decides to pursue. The difference between inflation targeting and other monetary policy frameworks, is that inflation targeting should make forecasting explicit and transparent.  Although the forecasting of inflation is an important tool in deciding on the appropriate monetary policy stance, the SARB still applies discretion in reaching a decision. Every forecast is based on assumptions and no model is perfect. A careful analysis of all economic data and the risks involved is made to ensure that the correct decision is taken. For this reason the central bank also applies a suite of models to minimise these risks and possible limitations of the individual models. This analysis of current and possible future developments is important because the achievement of the target is the overriding objective of monetary policy in an inflation targeting monetary policy framework. Such a framework can only be successful if the public is convinced that the central bank is serious about the achievement of the target. Missing the target by a wide margin and consistently will lead to lost prestige and credibility for the central bank. The SARB also realises that exclusive emphasis on inflation goals over the short term could lead to a highly unstable real economy over the longer term. If a severe exogenous shock affects the economy, extreme measures to reach the inflation target could be very costly in terms of lost output and employment. In such cases, some discretion is applied by the Bank. The monetary policy framework at first made allowance for such occurrences by including an escape clause stipulating the circumstances under which the Bank did not need to meet the target. Experience showed that this escape clause created problems in communicating monetary policy decisions. It was accordingly replaced in November 2003 by the introduction of an “explanation clause”. In the case of a supply shock the Bank must now fully inform the public of the nature of the shock, the anticipated impact on inflation and the monetary policy response to ensure that inflation returns to the target. 5. The institutional arrangements The decision on the appropriate monetary policy stance is taken by a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). This committee was set up shortly before South Africa adopted the inflation targeting BIS Review 18/2004 3 
framework for monetary policy. It first met on 13 October 1999. The Committee at present consists of the Governor, three deputy governors and four senior officials of the Bank. Six meetings are held in a year with intervals of about two months between each meeting. These meetings are normally held over two days. On the first day members of the Bank’s staff inform the committee about international and domestic economic developments and present a forecast of likely future developments. On the second day a decision is taken about the monetary policy stance and the statement explaining this decision is finalised. This statement is then released at a press conference and broadcast live on SABC TV. This process has improved the transparency of monetary policy considerably. In order to further develop a better understanding of monetary policy, Monetary Policy Forums have been convened by the Bank. These forums provide a means for open discussion on monetary policy and recent international and domestic economic developments. The Monetary Policy Forums are held twice a year in the major centres of South Africa and representatives of labour organisations, the business, community and academic institutions are invited to attend them. The forums ensure that the views of interested parties are taken into account in the determination of monetary policy and that the monetary policy stance is explained in some detail to the public. In addition, the Bank publishes a Monetary Policy Review twice a year to increase the understanding of its conduct of monetary policy. The first review was published in March 2001. In these reviews a more detailed analysis is made of domestic and international economic developments and the way that inflation is and could be affected. The SARB’s core forecast of inflation is also published in the review in the form of a fan chart. Confidence bands in the fan chart show the varying degrees of certainty for projected rates of increase in the general price level. 6. Assessment of inflation targeting in South Africa The inflation target was originally specified as an average annual rate of increase of between 3 and 6 per cent in the consumer price index for metropolitan and other urban areas excluding mortgage interest costs (the CPIX) for the years 2002 and 2003. In November 2003 it was decided to terminate the annual average specification because it complicates the implementation of the inflation targeting framework and could lead to inconsistencies in monetary policy arising from excessive interest rate volatility and ineffective management of inflation expectations. It was then replaced by a continuous target of 3 to 6 per cent for the period beyond 2006. In other words, the target is specified as an inflation rate of between 3 and 6 per cent which must be obtained continuously over a twelve-month period in the coming years. In 2002 the rate of increase in the CPIX averaged 10 per cent, or 4 percentage points above the upper limit of the target range. Four exogenous factors were mainly responsible for this inflation outcome. Firstly, the nominal value of the rand on a trade-weighted basis declined by approximately 34 per cent from the end of June 2001 to the end of that year. Secondly, the prices of food increased by almost 17 per cent in 2002. Thirdly, the Brent price of oil rose from US$20 per barrel in February 2002 to US$28 per barrel in December 2002. Fourthly, administered prices increased at very high rates of about 10 per cent or more in 2002. In view of the effect of these extraordinary events on inflation, the Monetary Policy Committee opted to bring the inflation rate down to target levels in a gradual manner. In January 2002 the first corrective step was taken. At this meeting the Committee increased the repo rate by 100 basis points, followed by a further three increases of 100 basis points at the next three meetings. This brought the repurchase rate to 13,5 per cent in September 2002, at which level the rate was kept until June 2003. These corrective measures had the desired result. The twelve-month rate of increase in the CPIX slowed down from 11,3 per cent in November 2002, and moved below the 6 per cent upper limit of the inflation target range to 5,4 per cent in September 2003. CPIX inflation then decelerated further to a year-on-year rate of 4,0 per cent in December 2003, before increasing marginally to 4,2 per cent in January 2004. For the year 2003 as a whole CPIX inflation averaged 6,8 per cent. These developments allowed the SARB to reduce the repo rate by 5,5 percentage points in the second half of 2003. In bringing CPIX inflation down to these lower levels, the restrictive monetary policy stance was assisted by a number of other factors. Particularly important in this regard was the discipline in government finances that helped considerably to reduce inflation expectations. The monetary policy 4 BIS Review 18/2004 
stance was further assisted by a recovery in the exchange rate of the rand from the beginning of 2002 and slower rates of increases in food and energy prices. It can nevertheless be stated that the consistent application of the inflation targeting monetary policy framework was successful in bringing inflation down to the target range as it is now defined by government. Moreover, the inflation outlook remains favourable. Most analyst and economic commentators, including the SARB, expect CPIX inflation to remain within the inflation target range over the next two years. Inflation is projected to accelerate moderately in the course of 2004 to levels close to the upper limit of the inflation target, followed by somewhat slower rates of increase during 2005. This improved inflation performance should be accompanied by a pick-up in economic growth during 2004 and 2005.  The inflation targeting monetary policy framework not only assisted the Bank in bringing about a better inflation performance, but also strengthened the SARB’s mandate to focus on price stability. In previous policy regimes there was no explicit benchmark against which the performance of the Bank could be judged objectively. In the inflation targeting framework, a specific target range is set for a price index to be achieved over a specific time frame, subject to the structural reform of the economy. As already indicated, inflation targeting has also been accompanied by major improvements in the Bank’s communication with the public, making monetary policy more transparent. By the specification of a target range, the accountability of monetary policy has been improved. The fact that government decides on the level of the target range has improved the co-ordination between monetary policy and other economic policy measures. To some extent, inflation targeting is already leading to a weakening of the importance of backward-looking inflation in decision-making of business and labour. However, many wage demands are still based on historic inflation figures. It can nevertheless be stated that the introduction of inflation targeting in South Africa has been a big success. 7. Improvement in international liquidity position Before concluding this address on the inflation-targeting monetary policy framework of South Africa, I would also like to mention that the application of this framework has been accompanied by a consistent effort to improve the liquidity management of the South African SARB. At the end of September 1998 the net open foreign-currency position of the SARB (NOFP) still amounted to US$23,2 billion, i.e. the difference between an oversold forward book of US$25,3 billion and net gold and foreign exchange reserves of US$2,1 billion. At that stage a decision was taken to reduce the NOFP gradually to zero. Underlying circumstances allowed the Bank to reduce this position relatively rapidly to US$9,5 billion at the end of December 2000. Then a more gradual approach had to be adopted due to the weakness in the external value of the rand. Using only proceeds from privatisation and of funds raised abroad by government, the NOFP was brought down to US$4,8 billion at the end of 2001. In May 2003 the oversold NOFP was finally converted to an overbought position of US$0,7 billion. With the expunction of the oversold NOFP, the SARB shifted its focus to reducing its oversold forward book and to seeking over time to strengthen the official foreign exchange reserve position. The oversold forward book of the Bank amounted to US$4,7 billion at that time. This oversold forward book was closed out during February 2004. At the end of February 2004, the international liquidity position of the Bank was a positive US$4,7 billion. Although this is probably still relatively low in relation to some of our significant peers, the achievement of this positive balance has been a major accomplishment. The SARB’s focus in the coming years will be to increase this position gradually to higher levels. 8. Conclusion These improvements in the international liquidity position and the lower rate of inflation should provide a platform for the more rapid economic development of South Africa. Stability in interest rates and in the value of the rand are important pre-conditions for the attainment of high economic growth and employment creation. The focus of the SARB will therefore continue to be on the objective of price stability. We can only develop an environment favouring price stability and in this way contribute to the attainment of the other important objectives of economic policy. Welcome to South Africa. Welcome to the North West Province of South Africa. Enjoy! BIS Review 18/2004 5 
Thank you very much. 6 BIS Review 18/2004 
Birgir Isleifur Gunnarsson: Review of economic and financial development in Iceland in 2003 Address by Mr Birgir Isleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Bank's annual meeting, Reykjavík, 23 March 2004. *      *      * On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank’s 43rd annual meeting. The Bank’s financial statements for the year 2003 have been ratified today by the Prime Minister. The Bank’s annual report has also been published. It includes a survey of the Bank’s activities and performance, along with a detailed report on the Bank’s monetary policy and actions, the financial system, financial stability and the financial markets, and the main features of economic developments in the course of last year. Price developments Three years have now passed since Iceland’s monetary policy framework was changed and a formal inflation target was adopted with a joint declaration by the Government and the Central Bank. Under this framework, the target of monetary policy is price stability. The Central Bank is obliged to aim at an average rate of inflation, measured as the annual 12-month increase in the CPI, of as close to 2½% as possible. Since monetary policy aims at maintaining price stability, it will not be applied to achieve other economic targets such as a balanced current account or a high level of employment, except insofar as these are compatible with the Bank’s inflation target. Prices were stable in 2003. Over the year, i.e. from the beginning of January 2003 to the corresponding period in 2004, inflation measured 2.4%. This is just below the target. Excluding changes in the price of public services, the rate of inflation was somewhat lower. Until the closing months of 2003, goods prices were somewhat lower than the previous year, and the increase in prices of services slowed down significantly. Substantial increases were seen in housing prices, however, and the housing component of the consumer price index rose by much more than the CPI as a whole. Housing inflation began to inch downwards in the course of the year and this development has continued so far this year. The Central Bank can thus feel satisfied with the rate of inflation in the recent term, and bearing in mind the long lag in the transmission mechanism, price developments indicate that monetary policy over the preceding period has had the intended effect. The Central Bank lowered its policy interest rate to 5.3% in the beginning of February 2003. Its inflation forecasts did not warrant any further changes in the policy rate by the Bank. The policy rate was broadly neutral during the year, i.e. it neither stimulated nor dampened demand. In real terms the policy rate was therefore not far from the estimated equilibrium real interest rate during the year. Output growth Iceland experienced robust output growth from 1996 until 2002, when it was marginally negative. Output growth recovered last year. Latest estimates from Statistics Iceland put the figure at 4%, which is somewhat higher than the Central Bank assumed in its updated macroeconomic forecast published earlier this month. Statistical evaluation of output growth in 2003 could still change when estimates are revised, which illustrates the uncertainty that surrounds recent and current economic developments and compounds the uncertainty about the future that monetary policy formulation always faces. Be that as it may, output growth was clearly robust and is explained above all by a rapid increase in national expenditure after two years of contraction. Private consumption growth also picked up and investment soared after a sharp recession, primarily due to the impact of the hydropower and aluminium projects that were launched during the year, along with investment in housing. An interesting comparison can be made between output growth in Iceland and other countries, especially the euro area which is often used as a frame of reference. Roughly speaking, from 1996 to 2001 growth in Iceland was two to three times higher than in the euro area. In 2002 the euro area performed better, but in 2003 growth was estimated at 0.8% in the euro area while it was 4% in Iceland. The difference is even more pronounced between Iceland and the largest euro countries, Germany, France and Italy, whose economies have been sluggish for several years. This large BIS Review 18/2004 1 
difference in growth explains much of the interest-rate differential that has prevailed between Iceland and that area. In part the policy stance of the European Central Bank has to the extent possible been guided by efforts to drive growth with low interest rates, while the Central Bank of Iceland’s objective has by and large been to contain economic overheating. The current account deficit and the labour market Iceland’s external balance has been volatile in recent years. A current account deficit equivalent to 10% of GDP in 2000 was virtually eliminated within two years, but widened sharply again in 2003. After reasonable balance in the first quarter and a sizeable merchandise account surplus, the deficit in the second and third quarters was the largest since the beginning of 2001. For the year as a whole, the current account deficit was equivalent to 5½% of GDP. A recession in exports was a strong contributing factor, along with rising imports driven by private consumption, but much of the widening current account deficit may be ascribed to imports of investment goods for a hydropower project. In this respect the deficit is benign in origin, although the pace of increase so early on in the upswing is a cause of some concern. As is commonly the case at the onset of a growth episode, the increase in demand for labour was fairly slow during the year. The unemployment rate came down more slowly than had widely been expected given the surge in vacancies registered with employment agencies. Seasonally adjusted unemployment began to decline slowly from the autumn onwards. On the other hand, the number of vacancies doubled last year and demand for foreign labour picked up as the year wore on. In February 2004, seasonally adjusted unemployment was 2.9% and had gone down by 0.1% per month since September 2003. Productivity growth appears to have been exceptionally high last year. As in recent years, domestic wage rises outstripped those among Iceland’s main trading partner countries. Measured by the wage index, domestic wages rose by 5½% in 2003, which represents 3½% growth in real terms. Exchange rate developments and foreign reserves Under the new monetary framework, Iceland abandoned a fixed exchange rate regime and the króna was floated in the market. Every so often the argument is put forward that the Central Bank can determine the exchange rate, and some people criticise it if the exchange rate develops along different lines from what they had expected. Such debate was far less prominent in 2003 than the year before, which definitely indicates a growing awareness that the Central Bank cannot exert a decisive impact on the exchange rate of the króna. For the first part of the year the króna strengthened, probably as the result of expectations of currency inflows in connection with investments in hydropower and aluminium. Around the middle of the year the króna depreciated again. Uncertainty about revenues from the Keflavík NATO base and about the Norðurál aluminium smelter expansion, and perhaps to some extent stepped-up Central Bank currency purchases, are probable explanations. Around the same time, currency inflows diminished in connection with credit movements. The króna began to appreciate again in September, around the time of reports that the Norðurál expansion looked more likely to go ahead and less uncertainty about operation of the NATO base. Currency inflows and outflows were in fairly good balance during the last months of 2003 and the exchange rate settled down. Towards the end of the year the króna began strengthening again, until mid-January. The main explanation for this appreciation is probably inflows of borrowed funds in connection with a series of business mergers and takeovers. Changes in the exchange rate of the króna need to be examined in the context of the slide of the US dollar against the euro. One consequence has been that the exchange rate of the króna against the euro is roughly the same now as it was two years ago, while the dollar has weakened against the króna by one-third over the same period.  By law, one of the tasks of the Central Bank of Iceland is to maintain foreign exchange reserves in accordance with its objectives and role. At the end of 2001 the foreign reserves were largely sustained with foreign borrowing by the Central Bank, which left the external position unacceptably low on a long-term view. The reason was that under the fixed exchange rate regime, the Central Bank frequently intervened in the FX market in 2000 and 2001 by selling foreign currency in an effort to stem the slide of the króna. In 2002 the Central Bank began building up its foreign reserves again, purchasing foreign currency for the equivalent of 4.5 b.kr. Last year the Bank stepped up these purchases to the equivalent of 43.2 b.kr. Nonetheless, the Bank’s purchases only amounted to 3.6% 2 BIS Review 18/2004 
of total turnover in the FX market during the year. By mid-2003 the Central Bank had repaid its foreign short-term borrowing in full and at the end of the year the foreign reserves amounted to more than 58 b.kr. This year the Bank has continued to purchase currency in the market, but on a smaller scale than in 2003. It thereby aims to strengthen its foreign reserves even more this year. Ample foreign reserves are an obvious prudential measure and one of the factors that international ratings agencies consider when evaluating the creditworthiness of Iceland’s sovereign and corporate debt. However, a high level of reserves does leave the Central Bank’s operations much more exposed to changes in the exchange rate, as reflected in the minor operating loss reported for last year, which was described earlier at this meeting. Financial stability The Central Bank is obliged by law to promote price stability and also an efficient and safe financial system, including payment systems domestically and with foreign countries. In most countries these are he main objectives of central banks. This role is important because shocks to the banking and financial system are closely linked to changes in the value of financial assets, interest rates and the exchange rate. The Central Bank’s monetary policy measures and information systems enable it to evaluate the risk of financial shocks and warn against them.  The Central Bank published two reports on financial stability in Monetary Bulletin last year, in May and November. The broad finding was that the position of the financial system strengthened during the year, and a new report published last week indicates that the position of major financial companies and markets is relatively firm. Macroeconomic conditions are favourable on the whole. The main concerns are the expansion in largely foreign-financed lending, and high asset prices. There has been a noteworthy flurry of leveraged buyouts of listed and unlisted companies, which provide one explanation for the surge in lending by banks. These transactions have driven up equity prices of several listed companies, including financial companies, prompting the question of what the impact will be should share prices head back down. Housing prices in real terms have stopped climbing in the Greater Reykjavík Area, for the time being at least, but a substantial drop is unlikely in the near future. Asset price developments are an important factor for financial stability assessments and may also influence monetary developments, especially in an economic climate such as the present. A decline in equity and housing prices could serve to counter potential overheating of the economy in the next few years. The main shock to financial stability and monetary policy would be if asset prices were to drop sharply at the same time as the growth of real disposable income slows down at the end of the aluminium-related investment boom. Lending developments As I mentioned before, lending growth is a cause for concern, both for financial stability and the Central Bank’s inflation target. Domestic lending grew at a brisk pace in 2003 and this development appears to be heading in the same direction this year. Total domestic lending by deposit money banks over the twelve months to the end of January increased by about 23%, which is above a rate consistent with longterm price stability and economic stability. The period 1998 to 2001 provides a recent example of the consequences of heavy credit growth. Both arrears and loan losses rose in the wake of the credit boom, leading to a temporary tightening of the commercial banks’ and savings banks’ foreign funding. While the recession and the ensuing strain on the financial system are now over, it can be partly ascribed to relatively favourable economic conditions and the consequently sharp turnaround in the exchange rate of the króna that financial companies only sustained minor setbacks. Proportionally, the highest growth in deposit money banks’ lending has been to foreign borrowers, but foreign currency-denominated lending to domestic entities has also surged, by more than 45% over the past 12 months. By no means all this foreign currencydenominated credit has been provided to domestic businesses and households that have foreign currency income or other hedges against exchange risk. This poses a particular risk for borrowers and lenders alike. Foreign debt of deposit money banks at the end of January 2004 had risen year-on-year by almost 300 b.kr., or two-thirds. There are probably a number of explanations for this strong demand for foreign borrowing. Firstly, it is connected with changes in Icelandic business structures and ownership. Following the privatisation of state banks, investors have been actively involved in dissolving the old links in business ownership and forging new ones. Foreign funding, mediated by the banks, has played a key role in these events. Secondly, conditions in international finance markets have been BIS Review 18/2004 3 
favourable for such reshuffling. Foreign short-term interest rates are close to a historical low and foreign long-term interest rates are still very low, although they have risen above the nadir they reached around the middle of last year. Thirdly, Iceland enjoys economic stability and growth prospects are favourable for the next few years. In December last year the Central Bank sent a letter to chief executives of the commercial banks and largest savings bank expressing concern about the rapid increase in lending and high levels of foreign short-term financing. As is generally the case people responded in different ways, and some pointed the finger elsewhere. An encouraging aspect of subsequent developments, however, is that the banks have begun to extend the maturities of their foreign borrowing, so that the gap between their short-term and long-term liabilities has narrowed in recent weeks. This is crucial, because it may be imprudent to place excessive faith in the availability of shortterm funding. In its letter, the Central Bank echoed cautionary remarks from the agencies that award credit ratings to the Republic of Iceland and other Icelandic borrowers in foreign markets. Ratings agencies have stated that their chief concern and the main constraint on upgrading Icelandic ratings - or even a potential reason for downgrading them - is the high external debt position of the economy. Since the Treasury has been retiring its foreign debt over the past few years, the ratings agencies’ comments are addressed elsewhere, in particular to the banks. Cautionary remarks based on such arguments should of course be heeded by all the banks in Iceland that have been borrowing abroad recently. It is in everyone’s interest to safeguard Iceland’s credit ratings and, where possible, strengthen them. Payment and settlement systems At the Central Bank’s annual meetings in recent years I have outlined the work it has undertaken in development of payment and settlement systems. Two types of payment system are in operation in Iceland, both of them settlement systems, i.e. the Central Bank’s real-time gross settlement system and the netting system operated by Fjölgreiðslumiðlun hf. Settlements of securities transactions are processed by the former system. Participants are the commercial banks, savings banks and Central Bank. The Icelandic Banks’ Data Centre provides software services for both systems and the Central Bank acts as a settlement provider. These systems are described in detail in the Central Bank’s annual report. Since 2001, the Central Bank has been working in close collaboration with Fjölgreiðslumiðlun, the Icelandic Banks’ Data Centre and credit institutions on development of payment systems with the aim of bringing them into compliance with the BIS Ten Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems. This work has focused on clarifying the qualifications and responsibility of management and netting system participants. Settlement processes have been reviewed with respect to finality of payments and timing of settlements. Risk management has been strengthened by defining and monitoring risks, making debt positions visible, restricting debt positions and requiring collateral for settlements. Arrangements for oversight, communication of information and contingency plans have also been reviewed. An important landmark in the development of these systems was reached last year when two sets of rules were adopted, on the Central Bank of Iceland’s real-time gross settlement system and on activities of netting systems. At the end of the year the systems were designated and notified to the EFTA Surveillance Authority. The real-time gross settlement system and netting system have thereby been recognised as legitimate payment systems in Iceland and across the European Economic Area. Also in 2003, the Central Bank and FME [Financial Supervisory Authority] signed a cooperation agreement on oversight and prudential supervision of payment and settlement systems. I would like to express my special thanks for the good cooperation with all parties involved on these important issues. Even though important milestones have been attained, sound operation of payment systems will remain an important and extensive task. A multicurrency country? Every so often the question has cropped up of whether Iceland is destined to become what has sometimes been called a multicurrency country. This apparently refers to when a large share of business transactions are conducted in more than one currency and liabilities of various kinds are mostly denominated in foreign currencies. Indications that have been cited include performance-related wages in the fisheries sector, which represent indirect indexation of wages to the exchange rate; an increasing trend for corporate accounting to be conducted in foreign currencies; 4 BIS Review 18/2004 
and the fact that recently even households have been offered foreign currency-denominated loans. Other factors mentioned have been greater globalisation, the growing importance of external trade, and of foreign investment. There is a tendency to paint a rather exaggerated picture of Iceland’s dependence on global trade. Admittedly, foreign trade has been on the increase, but is still quite small relative to the size of the economy. Direct foreign investment is proportionally much lower than in most advanced economies, while the scope of foreign indirect investment is similar to that in neighbouring countries. Foreign currency deposits are an established feature of the banking system in Iceland. They are well within the reference limits that the IMF, for example, applies in classifying countries according to whether the use of foreign currencies is important for them or not. Accounting in foreign currencies is confined to a handful of companies with multinational operations and generally speaking the króna is overwhelmingly predominant. However, it is true that among the advanced economies, Iceland has one of the highest levels of external debt and exchangerate sensitivity. Bearing all this in mind, there is hardly any question about the solid position of the króna in the Icelandic economy. Nothing gives us any reason to expect that to change. As in other countries that earn considerable revenues from tourism, foreign currencies are always used to some extent, but this is probably a much more common practice in countries with long borders with other currency areas, such as Canada or Switzerland. It seems highly unlikely that the króna’s position as a trading currency would be so severely undermined that other currencies would be preferred in domestic transactions. Continual movements in the exchange rate of the króna would create a broad risk in using other currencies, unless all liabilities - and that includes wage settlements - were to be converted into the same foreign currency at virtually the same time. Because it is more economical for business transactions and liabilities to be denominated as far as possible in the same currency, a fundamental change in the position of the króna is unlikely, except directly by an act of government, or indirectly in the highly improbable event that economic policies were to collapse and erode all confidence in the króna, with accompanying hyperinflation, as has happened in some Latin American countries that have adopted the dollar or others that have been forced to adopt another currency. It has sometimes been claimed that the heavy level of external debt means that interest rate decisions by the European Central Bank possibly have even more impact in Iceland than domestic monetary policy. There is nothing new about the impact of foreign interest rate developments being felt in Iceland - and the same applies to other countries as well - although the scale of Iceland’s foreign debt leaves its economy more susceptible to foreign interest rate movements. It is worth remembering that while foreign interest rate developments mostly affect Iceland’s national income, economic cycle and current account balance, they can never have a crucial impact on the domestic rate of inflation. A heavy weight of foreign currency-denominated borrowing in domestic debt may complicate the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In the long run, however, only domestic monetary policy measures can determine a deteriorating value of the domestic currency vis-à-vis goods and services - or to put it plainly, inflation. Prospects Finally, I shall turn to economic and monetary prospects. Last week the Central Bank published its quarterly Monetary Bulletin, which included an updated macroeconomic and inflation forecast. This is not a comprehensive new forecast, which henceforth is scheduled to be published twice a year, in June and December. Inflation is now forecast to remain below the target until the second half of 2005. Around that time it can be expected to rise above the target, on the assumption that the exchange rate and the Central Bank’s policy interest rate remain unchanged. In assessing price developments and the inflation outlook it is important to bear in mind that the recent strength of the króna has probably been unsustainable in the long run. Recent price developments and forecasts based on the assumption that the króna will remain strong may therefore underestimate latent inflationary pressures. Capital inflows over the next two years may bolster the króna, but this cannot be taken for granted given that conditions could change. A sizeable increase in productivity last year appears to have contributed to the recent low rate of inflation, despite higher output growth in 2003 than forecast in November. If productivity continues to grow at an unusually brisk pace, it will ease inflationary pressures in the near term. The recently concluded wage settlements, which broadly speaking seem copatible with the inflation target, include provisions that could induce greater efficiency in business operations and boost productivity. Another recent factor that has served to ease inflationary pressures is that rapid growth in national expenditure BIS Review 18/2004 5 
has primarily been channelled into increased imports. It has therefore exerted less pressure on domestic factors of production than otherwise, but is reflected in a widening current account deficit, as I have discussed. In the long run, an excessive current account deficit could undermine the exchange rate and fuel inflation, although this does not appear to be much of a threat within the horizon of the latest forecast. The Bank’s macroeconomic forecast now assumes that the Norðurál aluminium smelter expansion will go ahead, which raises projected output growth to 3½% in 2004 and 4½% in 2005. The appreciation of the króna, strong increase in productivity in 2003 and large share of foreign labour employed on hydropower and aluminium projects will result in less pressure on domestic factors of production and prices than would otherwise be the case. As I mentioned earlier, it is likely that some of the appreciation of the króna in the first half of last year was connected with planned investments in aluminium and hydropower projects. Had these plans not materialised, it is almost certain that the Central Bank’s policy rate would be lower today. Due to the strengthening of the króna in 2003 and the proposed tightening of the fiscal stance implied by the budget for this year, the Central Bank’s policy interest rate has remained unchanged since February last year. The Central Bank does not consider that there are grounds for raising the policy rate yet, but all things being equal the inflation forecast calls for a higher policy rate in the coming months, even though the inflation outlook is favourable until some time next year. Because monetary policy needs to be forward-looking, this could well mean that the Central Bank will raise its interest rate even though inflation is still below the target. Largescale investments over the next few years mean that monetary decisions need to take into account a longer horizon than usual. Considerations of financial stability call for the same approach.  Ladies and Gentlemen: Inflation forecasts play a key role in the Central Bank’s monetary policy decisions. Looking into the future is always difficult, but I think that the Central Bank can feel satisfied with how accurate its inflation forecasts have turned out to be. I would like to conclude by thanking the Office of the Prime Minister and other government authorities for their pleasant cooperation. I also thank the financial institutions for their good collaboration. Last but not least, I would like to thank the employees of the Central Bank for their fine work, without which the Bank could not have achieved such impressive results. 6 BIS Review 18/2004 
Malcolm D Knight: The financial system and the global recovery - what lies ahead? Speech by Mr Malcolm D Knight, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Annual Congress of the Swiss Society for Economics and Statistics “International Money and Finance”, Basel, 18 March 2004. *      *      * Thank you for the opportunity to address this plenary session of your Society. Since the Bank for International Settlements is an international financial institution that is based in Switzerland, it is of key importance for us to maintain close ties with the community of professional economists in this country. Indeed, the fundamental raison d’etre of the BIS is closely aligned with the subject matter of this conference - international money and finance. The overarching goal of the BIS is to promote the twin objectives of sustainable non-inflationary economic growth and financial stability.  As a result, analysing the current economic picture and prospects for the period ahead, as well as assessing possible challenges for financial stability, are key elements of our work at the BIS. I want to cover these areas in my talk this morning. In particular, I want to outline what I see as the current issues for international financial stability and to touch on the role of the BIS in meeting these challenges. * * * The economic picture has brightened significantly over the past six months. A strong and broad-based global recovery is under way. China has become the second engine of global growth alongside the United States - and this buoyancy is evident throughout Asia. At present, consumer spending in Europe still lags, but there are some signs that confidence has strengthened. There are few indications of any generalised inflationary pressures, even if the recent surge in commodity prices does raise some questions.  The international financial system has recovered from a series of shocks - the collapse of the IT sector equity bubble, the global recession, the financial crisis in Argentina, and the demise of corporations like Enron, WorldCom and Parmalat. Global equity prices are well above the low point that was reached about a year ago. Interest rates are historically low across the whole maturity range. Credit spreads are tight, with many corporate and emerging market sovereign borrowers taking advantage of the unusually favourable funding conditions. Financial institutions are generally in much better shape than a year ago. Banks in many jurisdictions have reduced non-performing loans, and insurance companies have benefited from rising equity prices.  What should we be concerned about in this apparently benign environment? The thread of my argument is as follows: • Global growth is at present being driven by three powerful forces:  (1) very expansionary fiscal policies in some countries, notably of course the United States;  (2) accommodative monetary policies almost around the globe; and (3) an investment boom in China that is almost literally without precedent.  • Expansionary macroeconomic policies will, at some point, have to be reined in.  • Investment in China - and the credit expansion associated with it - needs to moderate to a pace that does not ignite an inflationary boom and bust. • How these adjustments evolve in the next few years will have a major influence on global bond markets, on asset prices in other financial markets, and on financial institutions throughout the world. These financial market effects - which are my main focus today - will matter a great deal for the prospects for sustaining non-inflationary global growth. * * * BIS Review 17/2004 1 
In the recent years of weak economic growth, fiscal policies in several large countries have provided a massive stimulus to aggregate demand. The cyclically adjusted fiscal balance in the United States has swung from a surplus of around 1% of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 5% of GDP this year - a fiscal boost equivalent to 6% of GDP. Fiscal deficits in Europe have also widened, but by much less than in the United States. The deficit in Japan has been running at over 5% of GDP since 1998 and is still high. The current stance of these fiscal policies cannot be sustained indefinitely. The large structural deficits add to a stock of public sector debt which, in many cases, is already high. As for the United States, under current policies the prospects are for significant fiscal deficits for many years. All this is even more worrisome as governments in industrialised countries must confront the extraordinary challenge of rapidly ageing populations over the next 15 years. Central bank policy interest rates are also at historically low levels. The decline in short-term interest rates has been particularly dramatic in the United States, where the federal funds rate has been lowered from 6.5% at the end of 2000 to only 1% at present. The ECB and other European central banks have also eased monetary policies, although less aggressively. The Bank of Japan has pursued a policy of zero nominal interest rates over the past couple of years, in an environment of falling output prices and a banking system encumbered with a large stock of non-performing loans. Historically low central bank policy interest rates suggest the need to return at some stage to a more “neutral” setting of monetary policy. There is still considerable slack in the major economies, suggesting that there is no imminent need for monetary tightening. But rising oil and commodity prices could suggest some emerging inflationary pressures, albeit at the very early stage of the production chain. This is not a problem now, perhaps, but it is certainly a development that needs watching. A related issue is that in order to slow their domestic monetary expansions, Asian central banks at some point will need to scale back interventions in foreign exchange markets that are currently holding down the appreciation of their currencies against the US dollar. The investment boom in China also raises important issues. The present boom is in part simply one manifestation of what is little short of a new industrial revolution. Millions of new workers are being brought into the international economy. This promises to bring great benefits to all - and could provide a sustained boost to global growth. But the long-term benefits of this process should not blind us to certain important near-term economic risks. One is that the current breathtaking pace of investment in China and elsewhere in Asia could be inflationary, as output bumps into the constraints imposed by the limited local infrastructure, and the constraints on the supply of raw materials and other non-labour factors of production. There are currently some important signs of overheating in the Chinese economy. And there is also some risk of overinvestment. The production capacities built up in some sectors may never be profitable, and an overhang of capacity could blight investment prospects in the future. As in every other country, sustainable growth in China depends on the implementation of effective macroeconomic and prudential policies. How these different policy challenges are met will have an important impact on growth, inflation, and the prospects for global financial markets. In particular, abrupt revisions of expectations by investors could translate into gyrations in financial markets. It is to these financial system issues that I now turn. * * * Global fixed income markets are likely to play a pivotal role in the way the global economy evolves. Current macroeconomic policies have significantly affected bond market conditions, and changing expectations regarding these policies could have a strong impact on the level and volatility of long-term interest rates.  Take the example of fiscal policies. Bond markets serve, among other things, as a yardstick of fiscal prudence. As a result, concerns about the future prospects for achieving sustainable fiscal policies are at some point likely to be reflected in higher interest rates in bond markets. Not immediately of course - in fact, deteriorating fiscal positions have not, to date, led to higher long-term interest rates. But the risk of an adverse impact on financial markets could increase, especially if fiscal deficits were expected to persist during a period of strong growth. Monetary policies also face a challenge. As the global recovery proceeds, policy interest rates will need to return to more “normal” levels. There is of course no precise benchmark for the “normal” level of interest rates. Assuming a 2% inflation rate, some observers would put the “neutral” rate of interest in the United States at around 5% in nominal terms. Whatever is the true number for this natural 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
interest rate, it is certainly well above the 1% federal funds rate that prevails at present. It is unusual for a gap of this size - and the associated steeply sloped yield curve - to persist for so long. The challenge is how to “exit” the current accommodative monetary policy stance without creating unnecessary uncertainty and generating excessive bond market volatility.  Equally, intervention by Asian central banks in foreign exchange markets is generating a heavy demand for US Treasuries and other dollar-denominated products, and is putting downward pressure on pivotal market interest rates. As intervention subsides from current exceptional levels - as it eventually must - market interest rates will probably rise. Nobody knows yet by how much of course - a lot will depend on how markets assess future inflation risks and the prospects for achieving sustainable fiscal policies in demanding medium-term conditions. * * * It goes almost without saying that a long period of very low interest rates like the one we’ve been experiencing creates new types of risks in the financial system. One aspect of such risks is high leverage. There is evidence that carry-trades are indeed rising as various players take on increased duration risk financed with very low interest rate short-term liabilities. And with long-term interest rates on risk-free government bonds so low, many investors, whether leveraged or not, have been increasingly tempted to “search for yield”. This has resulted in a large net flow of funds into risky credits. Improved fundamentals appear to explain only part of the narrowing in credit spreads for corporate and emerging market government borrowers. One piece of evidence that suggests that markets are to some extent driven by favourable liquidity conditions is the unusually high correlation of price movements across a very broad range of assets. An additional challenge arises from the wider international imbalances resulting from uneven global growth. The main issue here is, of course, when, and how, the historically large US current account deficit - which is running at well over $500 billion a year - will narrow. The downward trend in US bond yields over the past couple of months provides no indication of increasing concerns among investors at present. But the strong depreciation of the US dollar against the euro and several other currencies over the past 12 months could be an indication of increasing pressure to adjust. And the increased volatility in financial markets may well indicate a marked degree of uncertainty as to what that adjustment process might entail. * * * Nevertheless, indications are that key internationally active financial institutions are generally well placed at present to cope with higher interest rates. They are also better prepared to withstand increased volatility in financial markets, and structural improvements have enhanced the stability of the financial system. Better allocation and management of financial risks should provide a buffer against shocks. Let me highlight three observations that support this assessment. First, the global financial system absorbed massive losses during the global economic downturn of recent years. Market-based intermediation has improved the dispersion of financial risks. For example, widely dispersed equity holdings have avoided a concentration of losses in the financial sector. Moreover, financial institutions appear to have used credit risk transfer markets quite effectively to manage their credit portfolios, and to diversify their risks regionally. This seems to have contributed to a better allocation of credit risk.  Second, the international financial system has already weathered the sharp rebound in bond yields that took place during June and July 2003, without experiencing systemic problems. Admittedly, this setback occurred from very low interest rate levels. Nevertheless, the global financial system did exhibit a noteworthy capacity to cope with a period of extreme volatility. This may reflect improvements in risk management. The dynamics of the increases in bond yields last summer were similar to those in the spring of 1994 - an episode so painful for the financial sector that it has become a standard scenario in the stress tests that major financial institutions perform to check their risk management systems. Hence banks and others have been able to learn from such past episodes. Third, financial institutions have shown a greater capacity to absorb shocks than in the past. Of course, there have been significant differences in performance across major countries. Nevertheless, banking systems today are better capitalised overall than at any time in the 1990s.  This reassuring picture does not mean that the present situation is without risks. It is not difficult to paint a much less encouraging scenario. For instance, any sudden unwinding of positions by leveraged investors would itself accentuate volatility, and perhaps trigger further adjustments by the BIS Review 17/2004 3 
wider investor community. Higher interest rates could well undermine present asset valuations. Debt service burdens of households and corporations could rise and lead to a deterioration in loan quality across the financial system.  Whether this scenario is plausible or not depends on the answers to several questions. How far are borrowers and financial institutions prepared for higher interest rates? What would be the effect of a sharp, discontinuous adjustment? Could this phase of low interest rates and strong liquidity growth be creating new problems that may be difficult to discern just now? These questions need to be kept clearly in mind, even if one is broadly optimistic about near-term prospects. * * * These issues underline the truly global challenge of maintaining financial stability, and the relevance of international cooperation among central banks and financial supervisors. So let me close with just a few remarks on the role of the BIS in addressing these - and of course other - issues relating to financial stability. Generally, the BIS contributes in two areas: One is the exchange of information and the discussions that take place among central banks and other authorities who are responsible for financial stability. Central banks are not directly responsible for each and every aspect of financial stability, but they are the guardians of the overall soundness of their national financial systems. They are also seen as the lender of last resort - whatever that means in practice. Central banks therefore attach great importance to careful monitoring of the various building blocks of the financial system. The standing committees of experts hosted by the BIS - the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on the Global Financial System, and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems - cover these building blocks. And last but not least, financial stability issues occupy a prominent place on the agenda of the central bank governors when they meet every other month at the BIS, right here in Basel.  The other area of interest to the BIS comprises efforts to improve the structural resilience of the financial system. The challenge is to promote sound risk management practices in a way that ensures that financial institutions are adequately capitalised and prudently managed - while not hindering their ability to pursue opportunities and profits responsibly. To achieve this goal, BIS committees are involved in the formulation of various internationally accepted codes and standards for both financial institutions and markets.  The most important initiative in this regard is the New Basel Capital Accord, perhaps better known as “Basel II”. The Accord is intended to reflect the improvements in banks’ abilities to identify their risks. It is also intended to align regulatory capital requirements more closely with the actual degree of risk that banks face. But equally important, the New Accord will provide incentives for banks to improve their management of risks.  * * * Let me conclude. Very accommodative macroeconomic policies and the rise of China have been supporting global growth. These forces will at some point have to be brought onto a sustainable path in a way that avoids abrupt changes in expectations in financial markets. The main risk is high volatility in global bond markets, perhaps with an “overshooting” of bond yields. The chances that financial institutions can absorb higher interest rates are at present good, thanks to improvements in recent years in their identification and management of financial risks. The BIS has played its part in this process. And it will continue to do so. Ensuring monetary and financial stability is a permanent challenge which demands that policymakers keep their eyes open to risks and are prepared to address them. 4 BIS Review 17/2004 
Michael C Bonello: Central bankers’ view of the new challenges Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at a conference entitled “The Challenges for Central Banks in an Enlarged EMU” organised jointly by the European Community Studies Association (ECSA Austria), Research Institute for European Affairs (IEF) and Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 20-21 February 2004. Mr Bonello was a panelist on the discussion regarding “Central Bankers’ View of the New Challenges”. *      *      * When ten countries, including Malta, join the European Union (EU) on 1st May, they will assume the status of “Member States with a derogation”, meaning that they are exempt from the stricter rules of EMU. This may seem to imply that the transition to EMU is thereby rendered easier, but a careful examination of the conditions attached to the process reveals that the policy issues involved are anything but straightforward. This is particularly true of a small open economy like Malta’s in which macroeconomic policy is strongly conditioned by the external environment, but which has nevertheless succeeding in reconciling a hard currency peg with relative exchange rate stability for over thirty years. Malta has a population of only 400,000. Its nominal GDP of €4.5 billion, or less than 0.1% of that of the EU, translates into a per capita income which is around 69% of the EU average. Market services, including tourism and finance, account for nearly two-fifths of GDP, while manufacturing contributes almost a quarter. Given its size and lack of natural resources, it is not surprising that Malta has one of the most open economies in the world, with imports and exports each almost as large as the GDP. The EU is Malta’s main trading partner, accounting for over two-fifths of exports and two-thirds of imports in 2003. It is an even more important market for the tourism industry and is a major source of capital investment. For Malta, therefore, the prospect of being anchored in the relative safety of the world’s second largest economy and of using that economy’s currency represents a considerable advantage. Perhaps the foremost benefit of euro area membership is being able to share in the credibility of a Europe-wide monetary policy. This will not only mean reduced exchange risks and less uncertainty for economic operators, but also the elimination of the risk premium on the Maltese lira. The resulting reduction in interest rates, moreover, would be of direct benefit in terms of price competitiveness, as would also be the lower currency conversion costs and the increased price transparency. The euro should also act to spur the integration process with the EU since it is known that trade and investment flows tend to increase in the absence of exchange rate volatility, and also that the trade of countries sharing a common currency can be as much as three times higher than that of countries with different currencies. The Maltese economy is relatively well placed to secure these benefits of monetary union. For a start, the adoption of the euro should not involve any major regime shift. In fact, since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system the Maltese lira has been pegged to a basket of major currencies. Since then the lira was only devalued once, in the wake of the ERM crisis in 1992. Apart from that episode, the currency has enjoyed relative stability. In each of the past five years, for example, fluctuations in the euro/lira rate have moved within a band of between 1.4% and 3.3% around the average rate for the year. The fact that the currency peg has been successfully maintained for so long - as testified by the underlying upward trend in the external reserves, which today represent nine months of imports - suggests that this is a viable exchange rate regime for Malta. The choice of a fixed exchange rate as the intermediate target of monetary policy is dictated by the key characteristics of the economy. First, Malta’s size implies that it is a price taker and cannot hope to influence its terms of trade through nominal exchange rate movements. In addition, because of the economy’s openness, the conduct of monetary policy must take the exchange rate into account. This also means that the main cost of joining the euro area - the loss of monetary policy independence - has already been largely incurred as the euro carries a 70% weight in the currency basket and the progressive lifting of exchange controls has reduced the central bank’s ability to set interest rates independently of world markets. Second, the Maltese economy is already closely integrated with the euro area. This is borne out not only by trade patterns, but also by the similarity of Malta’s sectoral distribution of value added and employment. Our business cycle, too, has become increasingly correlated with that of the euro area. BIS Review 16/2004 1 
This synchronization is likely to grow further as exchange rate volatility declines and transactions costs fall and, if the correlation between business cycles is indeed endogenous in a monetary union, as our trade with the euro area intensifies. In addition, differences in productivity levels between Malta and the euro area in the traded goods sector appear to be minor, which suggests that the Balassa-Samuelson effect is unlikely to be strong. Similarities are also to be found in the financial system. For example, the degree of financial intermediation in Malta is comparable to that of the euro area, and the long-term interest rate is well within the Maastricht reference value. Further evidence that the economy seems well prepared to join a monetary union is the fact that nominal wages have been sufficiently flexible to carry the burden of adjustment implicit in a fixed exchange rate regime. The absence of extended periods of high unemployment in the face of significant adverse developments suggests that labour markets have been able to adjust. Indeed, unemployment in Malta has been less volatile than in the euro area. The exchange rate peg has also been a valuable nominal anchor, restraining price increases. In fact, inflation has averaged just 2.4% in the past five years (1.3% in 2003), indicating a considerable measure of nominal convergence with our major trading partners, and with the euro area in particular. Taken together, these features of the Maltese economy suggest that the likelihood of experiencing an asymmetric shock is small; and they lead us to believe that the exchange rate peg provides a suitable framework for joining ERM II and that the country should be able to adopt the euro sooner rather than later. We are also aware, however, that the peg will have to be maintained during the lira’s passage through what is essentially uncharted territory. Professor Eichengreen’s words of admonition to last November’s East-West Conference here in Vienna readily come to mind, “… prescribing bands for the new EU members for an extended period is the worst form of macroeconomic malpractice. Bands are fragile and difficult to manage. Their fragility is clear from Europe’s own experience in 1992.” In order to ensure a smooth transition towards, and through ERM II, therefore, it will be necessary to convince the markets that ERM II is indeed a natural culmination of the lira’s currency basket regime. In this regard, given our track record and assuming a strong national commitment to the convergence process, our strategy should also benefit from the added credibility which the prospect of support by the ECB and other NCBs would confer on it. On the basis of similar considerations, a leading credit rating agency has concluded that ERM II participation can be a rating strength. While we believe this to be a viable approach to euro area membership, it is clear that new, and possibly uncomfortable situations cannot be ruled out. International capital movements, for example, may well present a challenge for monetary policy during the ERM II phase. While econometric evidence and recent experience since the liberalization of capital controls suggest that the Maltese economy has already coped successfully with significant capital outflows, it must nevertheless be clear that monetary policy will have to stand ready to neutralise any pressures on the exchange rate should these develop. Higher interest rates, of course, would not be helpful for economic activity; and they could compromise progress towards the achievement of the convergence criteria. Successfully managing the exchange rate will thus be a major challenge. And it is not the only one. There are others at the broader, macroeconomic policy level and which arise because the tools available for economic adjustment are limited compared to the many reforms that need to be undertaken. Many of the tasks to be accomplished, moreover, are subject to tight deadlines. As a result, tradeoff situations will inevitably arise, and this will complicate the simultaneous pursuit of nominal and real convergence. One such case is that of public finances. Here the task is to achieve further convergence in economic structures and income levels without endangering fiscal sustainability. The recent experience of some existing Member States suggests an inherent incompatibility between these two objectives. On the one hand, the acceding countries must undertake the structural reforms necessary to create a congenial business environment and achieve an efficient allocation of resources, which would facilitate the implementation of the single monetary policy. On the other hand, they have to ensure that the expenditure associated with such reforms does not drive up fiscal imbalances beyond a level which is sustainable, or which in any case is considered excessive in terms of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). In Malta’s case another factor to be considered is the persistent weakness in our major export markets and its impact on the growth rate. Subdued growth does not only constrain the tax base, but through its negative effect on employment could generate opposition to the necessary structural reforms. The pursuit of fiscal balance is further burdened by the co-financing requirement built into most of the EU’s 2 BIS Review 16/2004 
funding programmes; by demographic trends which are beyond the control of policy makers, especially population ageing; and by the implementation of acquis-related obligations. I dwell at some length on this issue because the state of public finances is currently the only significant impediment to Malta’s membership of the euro area. While it is encouraging to know that we have been able to reduce the fiscal deficit/GDP ratio from 11% in 1998 to its current level of around 6%, getting to the Maastricht reference value of 3% by 2006, as the Government plans to do, will require unrelenting efforts and a greater emphasis on expenditure-cutting. This is not only because taxation levels are already relatively high for an economic downturn, but also because of the tradeoffs involved in pursuing further fiscal consolidation. Indeed, the Government’s resolve to trim the deficit will be a key determinant of the degree of exchange rate stability that it will be possible to achieve during ERM II. This, in turn, will depend on how much economic operators, taxpayers and recipients of social benefits and other transfer payments are prepared to give up today in exchange for sustainable public finances tomorrow. In the final analysis, therefore, the success of the euro strategy will hinge on consensus being reached on the implementation of the necessary reforms. In this context, discussions are underway in the Malta Council for Economic and Social Development with a view to reforming the pension and health systems, currently two major sources of pressure on public finances. If the social partners do indeed take ownership of the reforms, the credibility of the country’s overall economic strategy will be considerably enhanced. Agreement on the reforms is also important because in an ERM II context the room for manoeuvre available to central banks is restricted. The implied commitment to a high degree of exchange rate stability - and for countries like Malta which have experienced limited day-to-day exchange rate movements, the concept of stability has taken on a very specific meaning - means that monetary policy cannot be used for demand management purposes. The onus of adjustment must then fall on fiscal and structural policies. The implementation of effective policies must also be ensured because the financial markets will be quick to spot any incoherence between a country’s exchange rate and its underlying economic condition. Since market behaviour, however, also has the potential to produce volatility to a degree unwarranted by the economic fundamentals, the exchange rate stability assessment at the end of the ERM II phase should take appropriate account of country-specific circumstances. Another precondition for maintaining the exchange rate peg and ensuring a smooth transition to the euro is financial sector stability. In this respect, a regulatory and supervisory framework based on best international practice is already in place in Malta, and the legislation incorporates almost all the features of the corresponding EU directives. Institutional responsibilities are divided between the Malta Financial Services Authority, which is responsible for the regulation and supervision of banking, insurance and investment services; and the Central Bank of Malta, which is charged with ensuring the financial stability of the system and is also responsible for the domestic payment system. In this regard it is reassuring that the recently concluded IMF/World Bank FSAP exercise found Malta’s financial system to be healthy and well supervised, with a comprehensive legal framework and strong adherence to most international standards and codes. An issue of special significance for central bankers is the need to preserve the integrity of their institutions. Although the experience of current euro area Member States already provides useful insights into the appropriate exchange rate strategies to be pursued prior to, and during ERM II, the acceding countries will have to arrive at this judgment on the basis of expectations of the future path of the economy. Expectations, however, are just that. This means having to stand ready to give satisfactory accounts of the rationale for the policy choices made, to explain deviations from targets and to ensure that governments introduce corrective measures without undue delay. Unfortunately, however, the information reaching economic operators, and financial markets in particular, is not always accurate. And yet, with only a few months to go to EU accession, the markets will be looking out for indications regarding the strategies we intend to pursue with respect to ERM II and entry in the euro area. It will be important, therefore, to be constantly on guard against any imprecise information which could provoke untoward market reactions. This highlights the importance of an effective communications strategy and of appropriate coordination between central banks and governments. In Malta the joint working committee established to elaborate the strategy for adopting the euro fulfils this role. BIS Review 16/2004 3 
Simultaneously with the need to contribute to the promotion of economic convergence within the EMU parameters, our central banks are engaged in the task of integrating themselves into the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). The challenge here is multifaceted in that it involves infrastructural and organisational changes that profoundly affect not only the central bank and the financial markets, but also the players in those markets. The technical aspects of ESCB membership represent a special challenge for small acceding countries like Malta. The domestic financial markets in most of our countries are small and less liquid that those of existing EU members, and typically less sophisticated. And yet, upon membership we will be expected to function on the same level as the long-standing and, in most cases, larger members of the System. Ensuring that the transition takes place with the least possible disruption has entailed a comprehensive reform of institutions and operating systems. For example, a real time gross settlement payment system (RTGS) has been put in place instead of the existing payment infrastructure. The standards of the securities settlement system have been upgraded to a fully ESCB-compliant ‘delivery versus payment’ system, which ensures the risk-free transfer of collateral and, where necessary, of securities. Cross-border payment systems have been adapted to ensure that they meet today’s ‘straight through processing’ standards. Similarly, with regard to statistics there has been an overhaul of methodologies and databases. The development of systems capable of delivering the quality-assured statistics necessary for the successful participation in EMU has understandably been a priority of the reform process. But the challenge of EMU extends beyond the Bank’s operational framework. For example, while we aim to participate effectively in the operational structures and decision-making bodies of the ESCB alongside much larger central banks, we only have some 250 people to perform the tasks involved. We are, therefore, undertaking a critical analysis of each of the Bank’s areas of operation in order to devise ways of coping with the increased workload. The development of new skills in work areas that will become key to the Bank’s operations as a member of the ESCB is another objective. The Bank’s management structure, too, is being reviewed. The policy-making process has been reinforced in order to respond to the growing need to analyse issues and take decisions in a more timely fashion. Line management has been strengthened and authority delegated more extensively to allow the managerial and technical staff to dedicate more time to ESCB-related activities. It has additionally been felt necessary to introduce a more efficient and rapid exchange of information across the Bank, particularly information acquired through participation in ESCB committees and working groups. While it is helping the Bank to become a more focused and efficient institution, effective participation in the ESCB undoubtedly represents a heavy claim on its limited human and financial resources. We do appreciate that the System is still in a developmental phase and has yet to reach its ideal configuration. The arrival of ten new members, moreover, will not make things any easier for a time. I would nevertheless like to suggest that a collective effort be undertaken to rationalise the work of the ESCB, not least by containing the number of meetings in Frankfurt and elsewhere. The challenges posed by EMU are clearly diverse and vary from country to country as well as across time, depending on a host of factors ranging from the extent of catching-up that needs to be done and the tools available to policymakers, to the degree of cross-sectoral linkages and of consensus on the respective national strategies. In practice, however, the underlying economic causes are probably quite similar across countries, often being manifestations of macroeconomic imbalances and structural inefficiencies. As such they must be addressed sooner rather than later. Only in this way will it be possible for our countries to derive full benefit from EU membership. That probably hardly needs emphasizing in this forum because central bankers understand the importance of coherent policies designed to achieve a more efficient allocation and use of resources. At the same time, however, we are also conscious of the difficulties involved in reconciling what is conceptually desirable with what is feasible in practice. It is to be hoped, therefore, that our countries’ considerable efforts to integrate successfully and without undue delay into EMU will receive a sympathetic response and not be perceived as a potential source of instability. 4 BIS Review 16/2004 
Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 18 March 2004. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 11 March and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen First of all, I would like to thank you for taking the time to attend this event, which provides me with an opportunity to present Norges Bank’s view of the economic outlook. Growth in the Norwegian economy is rising. Unemployment has stabilised. An economic turnaround has occurred, with a soft landing after a long period of high cost inflation. Monetary policy has contributed to stabilising output and employment - but inflation is low. The interest rate level is in line with the level among our trading partners. Short-term interest rates in other countries have been unusually low over the past 2½ years, and there is little prospect of a sharp increase in the near term even if the world economy is expanding. Activity in the Norwegian economy is expected to pick up in the coming years. The past and ongoing rationalisation in the business sector may enable enterprises to increase production considerably in the short term without strong employment growth. This suggests that there is room for somewhat stronger growth in the economy without pressures on real resources emerging. The low inflation environment we have witnessed in Norway lately reflects global phenomena and trends. Globalisation, new technology and increased trade among countries are key forces affecting the Norwegian economy, in addition to exchange rate developments. A global financial market Cross-border capital flows have increased considerably in recent decades. Bond markets have moved more in tandem, particularly since the mid-1990s. This also applies to equity markets. Investors are increasingly spreading their investments across countries. They are diversifying risk, and seeking high returns. In parallel, governments, banks and companies are issuing more debt externally. Currency trading has increased markedly since the 1980s. This trend was reversed when the number of currencies was reduced due to the introduction of the euro. Large trading volumes enhance market liquidity. The growth in currency trading reflects an increase in portfolio investment, higher foreign direct investment and growth in world trade. The forward exchange and options market have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces transaction costs, and it is easier to find counterparties. This has provided companies with greater scope for hedging against foreign exchange risk. The use of instruments that reduce the risk associated with a floating krone is also increasing in Norway. A considerably larger portion of credit in other countries is now channelled via the bond market. Less risk is being accumulated in banking systems. The development of new markets and instruments, for example credit derivatives, has also led to a broader risk spread than earlier. The improved diversification of risk is probably one of the reasons that world financial markets have coped with the stock market decline and the accounting scandals with limited damage to the wider economy. This is probably one reason why the downturn following the stock market decline in 2000 was considerably less pronounced than during earlier downturns. The new instruments spread risk, but do not eliminate it. Financial markets have become highly complex. This alone entails an operational risk, which is a challenge to participants and the supervisory authorities. BIS Review 16/2004 1 
Increased trade promotes growth and lays a basis for prosperity. A number of Asian countries have experienced strong, export-led growth - Japan from the 1950s and several countries in Southeast Asia from the 1960s. In recent years, China has become an important player in international trade, and is now probably the world’s fourth largest trade nation. The Asian economies and the rest of the world have become more integrated. Technological advances and a sharp fall in prices in the IT and telecommunications sectors have exposed a number of services that were previously sheltered from competition from low-cost countries. EU enlargement this spring, with ten new members, is also influencing the division of labour in Europe. Implications for the Norwegian economy Intensified competition from Japanese and Korean shipyards had serious implications for Norwegian shipbuilding in the 1970s and 1980s. However, Japan has also become an important market for Norwegian products. From the considerable deficits of earlier years, trade in traditional goods with Japan has moved into near balance. Strong growth in Asia is probably one of the prominent factors contributing to high oil prices in spite of low growth in the OECD area in recent years. China accounted for close to 50 per cent of growth in world oil consumption in 2002 and 2003. Trade in Asia has stimulated Norwegian shipping. The Chinese economy could continue to expand at a brisk pace for a longer period, which would open a large market that can also be entered by Norwegian enterprises. Norwegian exports to China have increased, but are still limited. Over several years, enterprises in Central European countries have been a source of competition for Norwegian jobs. Integration is also opening new markets and providing new sources of income for Norwegian enterprises. At the same time, tender requirements and the freedom of establishment have increased the competition facing Norwegian industries that were previously sheltered. A steadily larger share of Norway’s consumer goods imports come from China and Central European countries. Growth in imports from China was provided with an additional impetus after China became a member of the World Trade Organization in 2001. Imports from Eastern Europe have also continued to grow. There are many economic agents in Norway that are benefiting from globalisation. Consumers are enjoying lower prices for goods and services. Input prices have fallen and companies can sell their products in new markets. But there are also costs. Norwegian businesses and jobs may lose in the competition. The challenge lies in moving idle resources to new business activities. This requires adaptability and a sound cost policy. The Norwegian economy is unique in being both a fully developed economy and a major oil exporter. Norway is the world’s third largest oil exporter. In the future, we will become an increasingly important exporter of natural gas. The petroleum sector accounts for 44 per cent of exports and 17 per cent of GDP. The present value of remaining petroleum reserves has been estimated at close to NOK 2 000 billion (present rate of net cash flow). The bulk of Norway’s petroleum wealth will be extracted over a period of 40 years, from 1990 to 2030. We are now in a phase where petroleum wealth is being converted from natural resources under the seabed to financial assets abroad. The Government Petroleum Fund was established in 1990 with a view to promoting an even distribution of wealth across generations. The intention behind the Petroleum Fund is that the cash flow from petroleum production should be channeled to the Fund and invested abroad. By doing so, changes in oil prices have little effect on the mainland economy. This chart illustrates how petroleum activity is separated from the mainland economy. 2 BIS Review 16/2004 
Oil companies’ revenues are in foreign currency. The government net cash flow from taxes and direct ownership in oil companies is transferred directly to the Petroleum Fund. The return on the Petroleum Fund investments also adds to the capital. Of the total capital accumulated last year, NOK 59 billion was spent over the fiscal budget. The Petroleum Fund invests only in foreign markets. The Fund serves as a buffer against shocks. Changes in petroleum revenues are absorbed in the Fund - not in the domestic economy. The Petroleum Fund is owned by the government. At the end of 2003, the market value of the Petroleum Fund’s assets was NOK 845 billion as indicated by the dark blue bars. The Ministry of Finance has defined a clear mandate for Norges Bank’s management of the Petroleum Fund. Norges Bank shall seek to achieve an excess return in relation to a benchmark portfolio. The return on the Petroleum Fund was 0.59 percentage point higher than the return on the benchmark portfolio in 2003. This is the sixth consecutive year with an excess return. The return on the Government Petroleum Fund was 12.6 per cent in 2003. This is the Fund’s highest return ever. The solid result is due to a high rate of return on equity investments, at 22.8 per cent. The return on the fixed-income portfolio was 5.3 per cent. Since 1997, the average annual real return after management costs has been 3.7 per cent, measured in a common currency. The Ministry of Finance has set a benchmark index for the Petroleum Fund. It has two functions. First, it expresses in a precise manner the strategy chosen by the Ministry. Second, it is a basis for comparison for the active management of the Fund. The benchmark index is a global securities portfolio, specified down to percentage holdings of individual securities. The equity allocation is probably the most important decision in the composition of the benchmark index. The Petroleum Fund bases its choice on the fact that equities yield a higher expected rate of return than fixed-income investments. Equities account for 40 per cent of the Petroleum Fund’s strategic benchmark portfolio, and fixed-income instruments account for 60 per cent. In 2003, the equity portion of the benchmark consisting of securities listed in Europe was 50 per cent and the remaining 50 per cent in the Americas, Asia and Oceania. The Petroleum Fund’s average ownership in listed companies has increased. At end-2003, the average ownership interest in European companies, where the share is highest, was close to 0.5 per cent. Macroeconomic policy in Norway rests on two pillars; • The Storting issued formal guidelines to limit over time the annual use of petroleum revenues to the expected real return on the Fund - estimated at 4 per cent annually. That means that the government will not spend the capital itself - but only the return. In that way, the capital is saved for future generations. • Monetary policy is aimed at ensuring low and stable inflation. Monetary policy The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. It is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target also provides a framework for monetary policy’s contribution to stabilising output and employment. The economy grows thanks to increases in the supply of labour and capital and technological progress. Average growth over time is referred to as trend growth. Owing to shocks to the economy, actual growth fluctuates around trend growth. The chart shows actual mainland GDP growth and trend GDP growth. BIS Review 16/2004 3 
Normally, Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to achieving inflation of 2½ per cent two years ahead. A two-year horizon is applied because it takes approximately two years for an interest rate change to have a full impact. A flexible exchange rate Norway is a small open economy with a floating exchange rate. The Norwegian krone does not stand out as particularly volatile. On the contrary, in countries like Sweden, the UK, Switzerland, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, the exchange rate fluctuates just as much - or more - than the Norwegian krone. There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is stable - but too strong - also entails costs in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - but weak - is a source of high inflation. Petroleum revenues generally provide substantial, but uneven currency inflows into Norway. The currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and wide variations in the exchange rate. This tendency is countered when the annual use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget is predictable and independent of annual revenue inflows, and the remainder is invested abroad. The capital outflow through the Petroleum Fund contributes to both curbing the appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability. Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact on inflation and output. Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, it will generally stabilise over time. When inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading partners for a longer period, the krone has generally depreciated. When inflation in Norway is expected to be broadly in line with that of other countries, the exchange rate will normally also return to its long-term average following periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak. This provides a basis for stable exchange rate expectations. Economic developments and prospects As I mentioned in the introduction, the current picture is a broad-based economic recovery with low inflation. Expectations of a global recovery have boosted stock markets over the last year. The Norwegian stock market index, OBX, has increased more than US, German and Japanese stock market indexes. Oil prices and other commodity prices are also high. Normally, higher growth expectations are accompanied by higher interest rate expectations. This has not been the case lately. On the contrary, market expectations have fallen. The red line shows that in October last year, the market expected that the economic recovery would lead to higher interest rates. The green and yellow line shows the fall in expectations, and that the market now expects interest rates to remain low for a period ahead. The reason behind the change in expectations is the absence of inflationary pressures. In Norway, inflation is low. In February, annual core inflation fell to minus 0.1 per cent. It is particularly prices for imported consumer goods - the yellow line in the chart - that have fallen sharply. But prices for goods and services produced in Norway have also declined. Increased competition and productivity growth have probably contributed to low inflation. Higher productivity growth is a global trend and in particular in the US the phenomenon has been the subject of lively debate. The current economic recovery has in fact been labelled the “jobless recovery”, an indication that companies can increase production without new recruitment. A change in trade patterns and external economic conditions have resulted in an unexpectedly sharp fall in import prices, even when measured in terms of what Norwegian importers pay in foreign currency. 4 BIS Review 16/2004 
Consumer price inflation in Norway declined sharply through 2003 due to cheaper import as the exchange rate strengthened. In addition, prices for imported goods have fallen measured in foreign currency as shown in the next chart. Chart 18. Price indicator for imported consumer goods. Foreign currency. Index Again, this is a sign of the global trends I have mentioned earlier. The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices for clothing and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological advances have also pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment. In Norway, competition has probably increased in the retail industry and other service sectors in recent years. Initially, stronger competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises will respond by reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the individual enterprise, but subcontractors will also be required to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. Therefore, increased competition usually triggers higher productivity growth in the economy. Low inflation may therefore be matched by growth in productivity. The prospect of low inflation, (due to a cyclical downturn last winter, low pay increases last year, fiscal discipline and an unexpected decline in inflation), has resulted in a considerable easing of monetary policy. The key interest rate has been reduced by 5¼ percentage points and is now approximately the same as among our trading partners. The krone has depreciated over the past year, and is in line with the average for the 1990s. Monetary policy is expansionary. This is reflected in low after-tax real interest rates as shown in the chart. The low interest rate level has reduced household net interest expenses. This has increased household purchasing power considerably. Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in the Norwegian economy in the period ahead. Private consumption has a considerable impact on overall demand and activity and accounts for 60 per cent of mainland GDP. Low inflation and reduced interest expenses will support strong growth in household real income. Even with a moderate wage settlement, real income growth may reach about 5%. In addition, improved labour market conditions will strengthen job security and lead to expectations of higher income growth. Against the background of high real income growth, improved job security and expectations of continued low interest rates ahead, household consumption is expected to exhibit strong growth. Growth in private consumption is projected at 5¼% between 2003 and 2004. Given this path, consumption will grow at a pace that is broadly in line with real income, with little change in the saving ratio. After falling last year, house prices edged up in autumn. At the end of 2003, house price inflation was high. There are prospects that house prices may show a fairly sharp rise between 2003 and 2004. Buoyant activity in the housing market and high house prices are contributing to strong growth in credit to households. The household debt burden has shown a considerable increase and is expected to rise further in the period ahead. A high debt burden means that an increase in interest rates to a more normal level may have a relatively pronounced impact on household income and hence consumption growth. The difference in growth in credit to households and non-financial enterprises is a good illustration of Norway’s dual economy. Over the past few years, credit growth has been far higher for households than for enterprises. The level of household credit growth has remained high recently. An important reason is the sharp rise in house prices in recent years. Low investment demand is reflected in credit to non-financial enterprises, which has declined to a very low level. Developments in prices for commercial property compared with house prices also indicate that the situation is better for households. Developments in mainland enterprises have been characterised by low output growth, falling investment and declining profitability in many industries. In order to boost returns on invested capital, enterprises have taken steps to reduce costs, primarily by reducing their workforce or relocating parts of their production abroad. By way of conclusion, I would like to present a summary of the economic outlook for the Norwegian economy. BIS Review 16/2004 5 
Growth in the Norwegian economy is projected to pick up this year, primarily fuelled by higher private consumption. There are signs of high productivity growth, which means that companies can produce more with the same workforce. The high cost level in Norway and strong competition will probably induce many industries to continue reducing costs and rationalising. Against this background, the output potential of the Norwegian economy is assumed to increase more than normal in 2004. As demand edges up, enterprises’ profitability will improve. At the same time, they may meet capacity constraints. Investment is therefore expected to pick up gradually and become a more important driving force behind the upturn. Mainland GDP growth is projected to pick up markedly this year and remain relatively high in 2005 and 2006. Thank you for your attention. 6 BIS Review 16/2004 
Alan Greenspan: Banking Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Independent Community Bankers of America Convention, San Diego (via satellite), 17 March 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure once again to participate in the annual meeting of the Independent Community Bankers Association. I particularly hoped to attend this meeting in person, but events made such a trip infeasible. I wanted to be at your meeting to join in honoring the contributions of Ken Guenther. As everyone knows who has ever received Ken’s notes - known fondly to one and all as “Guenther-grams” - he thinks deeply and broadly about banking and financial matters. Having reflected on the kinds of issues that Ken has on his mind, I thought it would be fitting today if I shared with you some ideas about where the banking industry is today and about a few trends we see evolving. Asset growth and quality The weakness in credit quality that accompanied the recent recession has clearly been mild for the banking system as a whole, and the system remains strong and well positioned to meet customer needs for credit and other financial services. During the past three years or so, the industry extended its string of high and often record quarterly earnings, retained its historically high equity and risk-based capital ratios, and generally enjoyed robust asset growth. The industry and its supervisors had begun exceptionally early to address slippage in credit standards that accompanied the maturing of the last expansion, and their timely intervention was reflected in modest subsequent write-offs relative to earnings. Indeed, for each of the past several quarters the volume of problem assets at commercial banks has declined, and the size and the number of bank failures in recent years have been exceptionally small. Although the demand for business loans has remained weak, the banking industry has continued to benefit from strong demand for household credit, not least for residential mortgage products. The outlook for asset quality is also favorable. As economic activity continues to grow and businesses become more confident about their customers’ demands, business loan demand should increase, and pressures on banking margins should begin to ease. During the period of weakness and recovery, quite a large amount of core deposits flowed back into banks of all sizes reflecting lower interest rates on alternative assets, the softness of the stock market, and the public’s desire for safe assets. As a result, banks had ample liquidity and the resources to fund asset growth. More recently, with renewed interest in market securities and a slowing of mortgage re-financings - and their associated buildup in deposits - core deposits have weakened. History suggests that, as the economy strengthens further, deposit substitutes again will become more attractive to bank customers, requiring competitive responses in bank deposit offering rates and reliance on non-core sources. Community bankers in the last half of the nineties demonstrated their skill in competing successfully in such markets. Although their deposit patterns have been similar, community and larger banks have seen some interesting differences developing in their portfolios in the past two or three years that are worth noting. Banking commentary generally has emphasized the extent to which residential mortgage finance and consumer credit extensions have dominated the portfolio expansion of the banking industry. In fact, that growth, which dominates the aggregate statistics, has been mainly a large bank phenomenon. At community banks, the residential mortgage, credit card, and consumer installment loan portfolios have declined in each of the last three years. To be sure, this change may be a matter of choice. The data suggest, for example, that community banks have originated a significant volume of mortgage loans for securitization by others, continuing to acquire in the process a large amount of mortgage-backed securities. But some observers have noted that in the market for new originations of mortgages community banks are also under continued competitive pressure from mortgage bankers, BIS Review 16/2004 1 
nationwide mortgage lenders, and real estate agent relationships with out-of-market lenders, often through the Internet. The declining importance of traditional consumer credit business at community banks appears to stem from both sustained competition from captive finance companies and community banks’ withdrawal from the credit card market, where significant scale is required to service the resultant portfolios. Community bankers, however, continue to have success with home equity loans as a substitute for more traditional consumer lending and have experienced growth in such loans comparable to that at larger institutions. Particularly noteworthy is the longer-term trend at community banks that seems to have accelerated in the past three years - the increasing share of asset growth accounted for by nonresidential real estate finance, particularly construction and land development loans and commercial and industrial real estate financing. Last year these categories accounted for more than 90 percent of the net asset growth of banks with less than $1 billion in assets; multifamily real estate and farmland finance would bring the total to more than 100 percent, offsetting the declines in other categories. Such credit exposures are a natural evolution of community banking and are quite profitable, helping to sustain both the earnings and growing equity capital of community banks. Moreover, the evidence suggests that community banks have avoided the underwriting mistakes that led to so many problems ten to fifteen years ago. Borrower equity is much higher and credit criteria are much stricter. In the last recession and during the early weak recovery, we saw very few delinquencies in these credits. Nonetheless, bankers need to be aware of the historical real estate cycle that, in the past, placed such exposures under severe stress. One hopes these improvements in underwriting standards are lasting. But the painful lessons of banking history underscore the ever-present need for vigilance in managing geographic and business line concentrations. Consolidation Mergers and acquisitions in banking continue, driven by technology, reduced barriers to entry, relaxation of interstate banking restrictions, and globalization. Although attention has been focused on the larger banks, roughly 90 percent of mergers over the past decade have involved a target with less than $1 billion; three-quarters have involved an acquiree with assets of less than $250 million. Largely as a consequence, the number of banking organizations with assets of less than $1 billion has fallen since the mid-1990s by more than one-fifth. Neither the aggregate decline in the number of banking organizations of all sizes nor the increase in aggregate concentration ratios tells us much about the competitive effects of consolidation. Competition in banking is fought on the battlefield of the local market, especially for households and small and medium-sized businesses. By that test, concentration in local markets has actually declined somewhat since the mid-1990s in both urban and rural local markets. The apparent contradiction between aggregate consolidation and the virtually unchanged local market structure reflects the fact that many of the mergers and acquisitions by all sizes of banks have been out-of-market, or geographic-expansion, mergers. In addition, when consolidation occurs, it often induces de novo entry to take advantage of the inefficiencies or transition difficulties of the newly consolidated enterprise. Over the past five years, for every four bank mergers that have been approved, three de novo bank charters have been granted. To be sure, expansion by large banks through acquisitions and branching has increased the number of local markets - urban and rural - in which a large institution is a rival. Last year, 99 percent of the urban markets and 54 percent of the rural markets had an office of a banking organization with deposits of $25 billion or more. Such an increase in the presence of large banking organizations at the local level has occurred while community banks continue to face competition from thrifts, credit unions, securities firms, and loan production offices from out-of-market lenders, not to mention the Internet. These trends are irreversible. Nonetheless, as evidenced by their performance, community banks have the competitive skill of innovation and the competitive edge of local market knowledge not just to survive against such competition but to continue to prosper. Basel II Every indication to date also suggests that the proposed application of Basel II in the United States to only large banks should not be a matter of concern to community bankers. Indeed, your comments on 2 BIS Review 16/2004 
our proposal to revise the Basel Accord suggest that you are comfortable, to say the least, with not having to invest in the institutional infrastructure to be required of the largest banks. The agencies believe that the generally strong capital position and straightforward balance sheets of most of the other banks make a wider application of Basel II neither cost effective nor necessary on prudential grounds. Of course, supervisors will continue reviewing credit-granting and risk-management policies at banks of all sizes, and I suspect that, in the years ahead, market-driven spin-offs from the new procedures at larger banks will be adopted by community banks. Apparently another fear exists. The comments received from some of you indicated a concern that perhaps the lower regulatory capital that some large banks may incur under Basel II on some portfolios may distort the competitive balance between adopters and non-adopters of the proposed new accord. The banking agencies and the Congress take such risks seriously. Indeed, we have indicated that if we see evidence supporting competitive distortions, we will make the necessary modifications to blunt them by doing one of the following: changing Basel II rules in the United States, where national discretion is allowed; modifying the proposed U.S. bifurcated application; or changing the capital rules that apply to non-adopters. In short, if we have evidence of a potential competitive problem, we will not be precluded from proposing any measure that we believe is necessary to retain a more level playing field. Two weeks ago, the Federal Reserve published the first two of four empirical studies on this issue that our staff is conducting. One addresses the concern that regulatory capital reductions at adopters of Basel II might induce more mergers and acquisitions, with the adopters acquiring the non-adopters. That paper finds little empirical evidence that, in the past, excess regulatory capital at the acquirer had been a significant factor in boosting consolidation. The second paper evaluates the fear that the lower on average, risk-based capital charges on loans to small- and medium-sized enterprises by Basel II adopters would put non-adopters at a competitive disadvantage. This study concludes that the empirical evidence suggests that, indeed, a competitive issue in this market might arise between adopters and large bank non-adopters, both of which make the same types of loans in the same markets. This potential effect must be addressed. But the study also concludes that, on the basis of empirical review, the types of small business loans generally made by community banks - relationship-based loans, which community banks do so well - are so different from the types of loans made by larger banks, and so differently priced, that the competitive effects on community banks of Basel II application to large banks are likely to be insignificant. Two other studies, exploring the competitive effects in the residential mortgage and credit card markets will be available in the next few months. The results of all four studies will be reviewed when we conduct later this year another Quantitative Impact Study on the revised Basel II now being developed. And, again, if updates of the completed studies or the analyses in the new studies demonstrate competitive problems, we will modify the proposals to address them. Summary In summary, the banking system is in a strong and profitable position to finance the credit demands of the current expansion. As that expansion continues, both large and community banks will have to once again look beyond their core deposit base to fund those demands. The competitive environment for banks, especially community banks, will continue to intensify. Both history and current behavior suggest, however, that community banks can innovate and meet these competitive challenges. The merger trends of both large and small banks will undoubtedly continue, but both public policy and new entry will also continue to limit concentration in local markets. If evidence shows that a bifurcated application of Basel II would distort competitive markets in the United States, the agencies are pledged to make whatever modifications are necessary to either the proposal or the current capital rules. And, finally, once again: Ken, I wish you a productive and enjoyable retirement. BIS Review 16/2004 3 
Adrian Orr: Excerpt on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s exchange rate intervention proposal Address by Mr Adrian Orr, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, as part of a presentation to the Meat New Zealand Annual Conference in Whangarei, 25 March 2004. *      *      * I wish to make a few comments about the Reserve Bank’s proposal to have the capacity to intervene in the foreign exchange market. These comments relate to what the proposal is, what it is not, and what it implies for business people. There are two legs to the Bank’s foreign exchange intervention objectives which are likely to be used in very different circumstances.  First, the Bank has a long standing objective to restore order to any actual or potential dysfunction in the foreign exchange market. If, for some exceptional and disturbing event, liquidity in the New Zealand dollar exchange rate dried up, the Bank would be prepared to support liquidity until some sense of normality returned. This objective is not about bailing-out speculators, or facilitating ‘hot money’ flows. It is about ensuring that the foreign exchange market continues to function in an orderly manner and essential transactions can occur. To meet this objective, the Bank currently holds and manages a portfolio of liquid, high quality, foreign currency assets that would be used in exceptional times.  The Bank, last month as part of its ongoing legal commitment to advise the Minister of Finance on foreign exchange matters, recommended that the Bank hold more foreign currency reserves as ‘insurance’. More reserves appear necessary because the foreign exchange market globally has grown significantly since 1984 - when the Bank’s reserves level was largely set - as has the New Zealand economy. While it is an unlikely event for a well managed economy with a floating exchange rate, the New Zealand economy can not afford to face a situation of a non-convertible currency. Our foreign currency reserves need to be sufficient to ensure such a situation has a very low probability. The Minister of Finance has agreed with our advice and will be moving to increase significantly the level of foreign currency reserves the Bank will manage for such ‘insurance’ purposes. In addition, and again as part of the Bank’s ongoing legal commitment to advise the Minister of Finance on foreign exchange matters, we recommended having the capacity to intervene in the foreign exchange market to affect the level of the exchange rate in certain circumstances. That is, we would contemplate intervening if the exchange rate is exceptionally and unjustifiably high or low, and we think an opportunity exists that would ensure such intervention was effective.  By exceptionally high or low, we mean when the exchange rate is nearing its cyclical extremes, as has been seen in New Zealand over recent decades on a 3 to 5 year cycle. By unjustifiable, we mean when the exchange rate has moved well in excess of any relevant economic fundamentals, such as relative productivity, commodity prices, growth, or inflation.  It should be noted that most of the time a floating exchange rate, like New Zealand’s, performs important economic functions such as acting as a buffer against shocks to the terms of trade or relative business cycle pressure. We believe our floating exchange rate serves New Zealand well. However, at times, the exchange rate has varied by far more than can be justified by relevant economic fundamentals. It is at these exceptional and unjustifiable levels of the exchange rate that the Bank would consider buying or selling foreign currencies for NZ dollars in an effort to influence the level of the exchange rate. There is no mechanical rule underlying this new objective - such decisions are made in context. An important part of the Bank’s consideration to intervene would be the dynamics of the foreign exchange market at the time and whether we feel our actions will be effective. In other words, the Bank would intervene at opportune times, not when the currency’s direction is being dominated by strong international trends or consensus opinions.  We do not intend wasting our reserves by defending a particular exchange rate level, nor do we intend standing in the way of strong market trends or beliefs. We also do not expect to attract speculators who think they can ‘take the Bank on’. If we are not defending a particular level of the exchange rate, BIS Review 17/2004 1 
we have no mechanical rule, and we intervene consistent with our monetary policy objectives at opportune times, then it is unclear what nature of speculator would be attracted by our actions. By way of example, we are not recommending a Bank of Japan style intervention, where they use significant funds with the aim of influencing the long-term trend of the exchange rate, or by standing in the path of strong trends in the exchange rate. And we are certainly not recommending defending a particular level of an exchange rate that is clearly over or under-valued. This was the case, for example, in many East Asian economies during the late-1990s Asian financial crisis.  Instead, the Bank believes strongly in the virtues of a floating exchange rate within a well managed economy. What we are recommending is intervening when the moment is justified and opportune, with the outcome of, at best, trimming the extreme tops and bottoms of the NZ dollar exchange rate cycle.  Such an intervention strategy would be consistent with the Bank’s primary objective of achieving and maintaining price stability. Hence, foreign exchange intervention can be viewed as another instrument for the Bank, consistent with achieving our monetary policy objectives, albeit a very secondary instrument to our most powerful one of the Official Cash Rate. Intervention would be considered in reasonably infrequent circumstances, that is, when the exchange rate level is exceptional and unjustified by economic fundamentals, and when we believe an opportunity to be effective exists.  We do not anticipate having a substantial or large impact on the level of the exchange rate. However, we believe there will be positive benefits that exceed any of the relatively small and manageable risks of such a policy. Given the prominence of the level and cyclical variability of the exchange rate in investment, output, employment, and inflation decisions, even a small impact from intervention on the exchange rate can have widely dispersed economic benefits.  The Bank’s advantage in this intervention strategy is not its ‘weight of money’. Instead it is the Bank’s investment horizon, information, and alignment of policy objectives that brings advantages and opportunities. To be successful, we need to be in the business for the long-term. This is why we have appealed for multi-party political support of the policy. That said, the Bank already has the ability - legal and operational - to intervene in the foreign exchange market, consistent with achieving and maintaining its primary goal of price stability. What we have requested from the Minister is additional foreign reserves for intervention purposes, over and above the minimum we recommended for avoiding dysfunction. In addition, we have requested that the Government inject additional capital into the Bank’s balance sheet so that we can absorb any potential temporary, unrealised, marked-to-market losses in our foreign exchange positions. This is prudent management. Such an intervention strategy, over the relevant medium-term horizon, should even prove profitable or, at the least, reduce the cost of holding foreign currency reserves for avoiding market dysfunction.  The Bank’s intention to buy foreign currencies (sell NZ dollars) when the exchange rate is exceptionally and unjustifiably high, and to sell foreign currencies (buy NZ dollars) when the exchange rate is significantly and unjustifiably low, makes good portfolio management sense - as long as we are in the business for the long-term. On average, over the medium term we would anticipate having no exposure to foreign exchange swings.  The Reserve Bank’s management of foreign reserves is a long-term business. It is very common for central banks internationally to manage their foreign currency reserves in such a manner - just as any fund manager or business in the game for the long-term would do. Our assessment as to the benefits of foreign exchange intervention of the nature outlined is the result of considerable analysis over several years. This includes analysing experiences internationally, and academic and empirical literature. It is not a knee-jerk reaction to the recent level of the exchange rate, nor a response to political pressure. We take our operational independence seriously, and for this reason we have recommended that this new intervention policy operates under the Bank’s own legal purposes, so that any intervention decisions are made within the Bank, and are consistent with our primary objective of achieving and maintaining price stability. We have not recommended such an intervention capacity lightly. As part of our operational independence, we stand prepared to be held accountable for the outcomes, as we do with monetary policy in general. But, exporters, importers and anybody else dealing with foreign exchange, need to be clear that ongoing and considerable cyclical variability in the exchange rate will continue even if our interventions 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
are successful. Our intervention policy is talking about, at best, knocking the extreme tops and bottoms off the NZ dollar exchange rate cycle. By far the bulk of foreign exchange risk management responsibility remains in the hands of the businesses and individuals within NZ. We are not offering a panacea to these cycle, we are simply saying we think we can make a small positive difference that makes sense. BIS Review 17/2004 3 
Andrew Large: Puzzles in today’s economy - the build up of household debt Speech by Sir Andrew Large, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the Association of Corporate Treasurers’ Annual Conference, Newport, 23 March 2004. *      *      * Leverage & debt: benefit & vulnerability A key economic debate of the day is whether we, as a society, should be concerned about the level of debt borne by families, businesses and, indeed, governments. We are all aware of the positive role of debt in the development of market economies and social well-being. But equally we are aware that increasing leverage can give rise to vulnerabilities - think of LTCM in 1998 - and increase the possibility that external shocks or changes in perceptions will lead to unexpected results that impact on the stability of the financial system and the setting of monetary policy.  On the whole the increasing availability of debt is beneficial. Debt helpfully allows households, companies and even countries to smooth their spending patterns. But as with many things in life, there are potential downsides. It is often said that central bankers and regulators tend to look on the pessimistic side and to see “the glass as half empty”. As a former regulator, and now a central banker, I am perhaps likely to be doubly cautious and to focus on the potential vulnerabilities! Improved access to debt may indeed be beneficial overall, although high levels of debt can cause difficulties for companies and for countries. Evidence also suggests that the burden of debt does pose a genuine problem for a minority of households. And, as I will discuss in more detail below, an increase in indebtedness may increase the sensitivity of households - and the economy in general - to future shocks, although by how much is very uncertain. For public policymakers, the evaluation of these vulnerabilities and the appropriate policy response is a matter of continued debate. What levels of debt are sustainable? And what could be the impact of a break-down or crisis of one sort or another?  At the Bank of England we take an interest in this subject at several levels. We look at it from the points of view of governments or sovereign countries; corporate entities; and individuals or households. At each level there are two aspects that we consider. First, what are the implications for financial stability oversight? We look for vulnerabilities that could lead to pressures on counterparties, with the possible failure of institutions and ultimately financial instability. Such crises can lead to immense social and economic cost, as financial intermediation is disrupted and confidence in the monetary system is weakened.  Second, we look at debt from the point of view of monetary policy. In this case we look at the possible impact on our ability to meet the inflation target set by the Chancellor via, for example, its effect on overall levels of demand and supply. At the level of sovereign entities we have two different types of concern about the working out of sovereign debt positions. First the potential implications of sharp exchange rate movements for countries that borrow in their own currencies (for example the USA). Second for countries that borrow large amounts in foreign currency concerns about debt sustainability which lead to our working on crisis prevention and resolution issues in the sovereign area, including the role of the IMF and issues raised by the present Argentinean default. At the corporate level, the question you all face is what amount of debt is not only sustainable, but will lead to maximisation of shareholder value over time? Here our interest is in trying to spot vulnerabilities, or debt concentrations across the market place, which could give rise to problems down the track. In the face of shocks such factors could have an impact on demand in the economy and on the stability of the financial system. BIS Review 17/2004 1 
Household debt: introduction It is the third level of our interest - household debt - which I would like to focus on today. It is clearly significant for all of us. For you in the corporate world through your customers. And for us in the world of public policy.  I would like to examine, first, why has debt built up in the way it has? Second, what are the facts and how great are the vulnerabilities? And, third, what are the implications for those of us involved in financial stability oversight and monetary policy, quite apart from society as a whole?  The household debt build-up: why has it happened? It is worth reflecting on why the build-up in household debt has occurred. On one side there have been a series of demand factors. Lower real and nominal interest rates have held out the prospect that interest costs and debt-servicing burdens will remain within acceptable bounds - in terms of the burdens on both real incomes and households’ cash flows. And lower inflationary expectations have held out the prospect that nominal interest rates will remain low. The lower inflation environment has also increased predictability and made it easier for households to plan ahead. Risks seem more acceptable to households because of confidence in a stable economy, and secure job prospects, perhaps in part due to the current accommodatory monetary policy.  In the meantime, wealth has risen and stocks of financial assets have built up. In the light of this, it is not surprising that households, taken together, are happy to have higher debts relative to their incomes. And the rise in house prices, combined with a high level of owner occupation, has encouraged equity-enabled homeowners to borrow accordingly. These factors have given households the confidence that present levels of debt are quite rational from the point of view of their balance sheets. In addition, the rise in house prices has itself necessitated an increase in borrowing as the average mortgage size increases.  There have been supply-side factors too. Competition amongst lenders has been intense. There have been new entrants to the market. Not only the traditional lenders but specialist providers of credit cards and the like. Liberalisation of markets has meant new approaches to lending and new credit instruments, enabling credit to be available to a wider variety of participants and reducing credit constraints.  I will come to the vulnerabilities in a moment, but overall this combination of demand- and supply-side factors has led debt to rise to today’s historically high levels. The debt build-up: what are the facts? How great is the vulnerability? It is not just in the UK that domestic indebtedness has risen: its build-up, alongside globally lower levels of inflation, has been a global phenomenon. The ratio of household debt to annual household income has increased in most industrial countries - reflecting over the longer term increased financial liberalisation, the greater efficiency of financial intermediaries and, in some countries, housing market developments. While the ratio in the UK is high, at over 130%, there are other countries where it is higher, and where it has grown more quickly.  2 BIS Review 17/2004 
Chart 1: Household debt-to-income ratios 60801001201401601802008890929496980002Per centNetherlandsGermanyUnited StatesJapanUK(a)(b)Australia(b) Sources: Eurostat, national central banks and statistical agencies, and Bank calculations. (a) Ratio differs from that in Chart 2 because disposable income used here is not adjusted for changes in net equity in pensions. (b) Data for 2003 are as at 2003 Q3. In the UK household debt to income amounts to just under 18 months worth of household disposable income. Mortgage debt is the biggest component of this, and total secured debt accounts for about 75% of total debt.  Unsecured debt - personal loans, credit card debt and the like - is still a much lower proportion, but has nearly doubled over the past decade.   Chart 2: Consumer secured debt and total household debt  as a proportion of post-tax income(a)(b) 50607080901001101201301408788899091929394959697989900010203Total(c)Per centSecured Sources: ONS and Bank Calculations. (a) Annualised household post-tax income. (b) Debt data are not seasonally adjusted. (c) Total household debt. The actual statistics of stocks and flows are of course one thing. But the real question is in relation to sustainability: sustainability of debt servicing burdens and sustainability of consumption growth.  BIS Review 17/2004 3 
Household debt in the UK has been increasing more rapidly than post-tax income since the end of 1997, and the difference in annual growth rates over the past year has been around eight percentage points. This has been one of the factors which has permitted consumer spending growth to outstrip income growth on average over the past few years. Mortgage equity withdrawal, in particular, has risen sharply relative to consumption. Some of this will have helped to finance consumer spending even though much is used to pay off other debts or build up other assets.  Chart 3: Twelve-month growth rate of total household debt and post-tax income  051015202588899091929394959697989900010203Total household debtPost-tax incomeAnnual percentage change  Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. We also consider questions of gearing. First, capital gearing - the ratio of debt to gross assets - changes in which one can regard as a rough and ready indicator of pressures on solvency in the household sector. It is perhaps noteworthy that despite the large increase in debt, the increase in asset prices, not least house prices, has meant that there has been only a slight increase in capital gearing. But the data do suggest that household capital gearing could rise to historically high levels if there was, for instance a sharp downturn in the housing market or a significant fall in equity markets. I’m not saying that these are likely to happen - simply that there is an upside risk to households’ capital gearing.  Chart 4: Household sector capital gearing(a)(b) 4681012141618208788899091929394959697989900010203Capital gearing (per cent)Unsecured debt(d)/financial assetsDebt/total assets(c) 4 BIS Review 17/2004 
Sources: ONS and Bank of England. (a) Dashed lines indicate averages of series from 1987 Q1 to 2003 Q3. (b) Data are not seasonally adjusted. (c) Financial wealth plus housing wealth. (d) Total debt minus lending secured on dwellings. Second, we need to look at income gearing. Changes in aggregate income gearing provide a crude proxy for pressures on households’ ability to service their debts, although such measures do not take account of who benefits from the interest receipts.  Having peaked in 1990, aggregate household income gearing fell sharply, mostly reflecting the fall in nominal interest rates, and it has been steady since 1993 at a relatively low level. If, as we expect, debt continues to grow faster than income, as a result of turnover in the housing market, income gearing in the UK will rise in the future - even on the conditioning assumption of constant interest rates which the Monetary Policy Committee makes in its inflation projection. If, for the sake of argument, one takes the future path of interest rates implied by market yield curves - the path expected in the markets - income gearing is likely to pick up towards the peak last seen in 1990 particularly if, in addition, one takes account of regular repayments not only of mortgage principal, but also of unsecured debt. The possible build-up in income gearing could under this scenario require vigilance.  So overall, we may not have an absolute answer about whether today’s levels appear sustainable. I feel, however, that since there are at present relatively high levels of debt and these are rising faster than income, it is likely that potential vulnerabilities from increased gearing are rising. And we know from experience that unexpected shocks from one source or another can upset individuals’ predictions and behaviour.  Does it matter? The general approach. The question is does this all matter? Should we really worry about it? Perhaps I can get into this by examining the two schools of thought.  On the optimistic side, as I referred to earlier, you can argue that the rise in debt is a logical response to a more stable economic environment and the relaxation of credit constraints. Households consider the wisdom of given levels of debt after taking into account their assets and prospective income. House prices and the value of financial assets have risen. Accordingly some rise in debt is quite understandable and for many house buyers necessary. In addition, it is a logical response to a number of factors. First, the lower initial cash-flow costs of servicing in the low-nominal-interest-rate environment of the past decade. And second, to the lower real interest burden recently as monetary policy has reacted to weaker aggregate demand growth. And it is understandable for households to wish to spread consumption over their lifetimes. Furthermore, from an overall macro-economic point of view, the increase in household spending financed by borrowing has been consistent with overall monetary stability and our inflation target because other elements of demand have been weak. In other words, it has been a logical accompaniment to monetary stability at a time of imbalances in the composition of the growth of demand and has reflected an ‘acceptable’ imbalance needed to keep the economy growing. The pessimistic school points first to the fact that leverage adds to vulnerabilities. There will always be unexpected shocks, and levels of debt are at historical highs and rising. Second, it warns that reliance on wealth to justify levels of debt and provide the collateral can be a circular argument. Demand for housing itself has to an extent been increased by the availability, at the time that it is contracted at least, of affordable credit. Increases in house prices and secured debt have tended to reinforce each other. If either has ‘overshot’ - for instance, because of unrealistic expectations of income growth - the other is likely to have overshot too.  And, third, there is a timing issue. Perhaps the borrowers’ realisation of the implications of higher debt take time to sink in. When interest rates are falling- the case in the UK in terms of our repo rate from February 2001 to July last year - borrowers may feel better placed to service higher loans and might increase borrowing accordingly. However, if rates rise - as they have at the official level - the cost of servicing the outstanding debt will tend to rise and can cause repayment difficulties. BIS Review 17/2004 5 
While there are elements of truth in both schools of thought, the balance of probability lies with the optimists. The optimistic school reflects the central case, whereas the pessimists are more inclined to focus on the risks - the tail of the distribution if you like. But even if the probabilities of things going wrong in the near future may not be high, there are nonetheless credible threats, and over time the risks might mount. Remembering our public policy role, I would like to drill down a bit and ask the question “does this matter?” from three aspects: financial stability; monetary policy; and the socio-economy.  Financial stability issues First financial stability, the oversight of which is one of the Bank’s key responsibilities. Here we need to focus on mitigating the potential impact on the financial system from vulnerabilities that might arise from high levels of debt. Will they give rise to concerns over repayment strains, to financial failures or liquidity withdrawal? Could strains lead to defaults of multiple borrowers, leading in turn to problems for the intermediaries and providers?  From the point of view of lenders I detect that there is on the whole a feeling of confidence, with few overall concerns about the asset portfolios of secured and unsecured household debt. There has been a significant improvement in risk management systems: at the retail level, for example, information technology has enabled the development of sophisticated modelling techniques. Data suggest that: UK-owned banks’ capital ratios are strong by international and historical standards; that the proportion of new mortgages granted at high loan-to-value ratios has dropped; and that the loan-to-value ratios on existing mortgages have fallen. Mortgage arrears are around their all-time low. Such factors help to boost the resilience of the United Kingdom’s financial system.  There are, however, potential hazards - in particular relating to poor lending decisions or to changes in the behaviour of borrowers. There have been examples in other countries, for example the US, of potential changing attitudes to personal bankruptcy and defaults. Under some scenarios, such changes could put pressure on the balance sheets of lenders. Furthermore, it is possible for the behaviour of lenders to trigger a response in borrower behaviour. If lenders get nervous about the credit status of borrowers, and turn off the supply of credit, this could cause failure or default of borrowers. The lenders seek to anticipate such issues, partly by pricing expected losses into the lending products they offer and also through the development of risk management tools and stress testing. The strength of the financial system is increasingly reliant on the effectiveness of risk management.  As I mentioned earlier, there is a potential concern that the wealth itself, on the basis of which increased indebtedness has been made possible, may not be wholly dependable. It could be affected greatly by, for example, a downturn in the housing market, or by difficulties in the corporate sector triggering a reduction in people’s wealth via their direct or indirect holdings of shares. Not everyone will be affected by the same scenarios, but a reduction in wealth could reduce an ability or willingness to repay debts and at the same time reduce lenders’ access to collateral.  So, with all these caveats, just what are the implications of this for the oversight of financial stability? First, of course, we need to be vigilant and watch for emerging signs of weakness. But, second, there are a number of mitigants. We can give warnings to enhance awareness of the implications of the indebtedness increasing.  The financial system itself can be strengthened through adherence to a high quality prudential framework. That is why the current review of the Basel Capital Accord is so important. Remember that this is designed to improve risk assessment by lenders, not just at the wholesale level but at the retail level as well. And risk management techniques and supervisory processes more generally are in the process of significant enhancement. In earlier days one might have considered other potential mitigants. These might have included credit controls or deliberate prudential measures increasing the cost of lending. The fact, however, is that with today’s liberalised capital markets and with the existence of derivatised products these would in all likelihood be rendered impractical.  6 BIS Review 17/2004 
Monetary policy issues Turning to monetary policy, the key focus is the extent to which vulnerabilities from the debt build-up could trigger changes to demand or supply in the economy with direct implications for monetary stability and meeting the inflation target. Higher levels of leverage could make demand more susceptible to external shocks which might lead to precautionary saving: this in turn could reduce demand. Equally, socio-economic factors could also cause changes in behaviour, even though these might be more gradual and are unlikely to affect all members of society at once.  In assessing the potential impact of debt build-up on demand and supply, there seem to me to be several important factors. First, is the fact that demand in general is boosted by increases in asset prices themselves. But what would happen if external events broke the cycle of asset price increases, particularly in relation to house prices? A sudden realisation that the wealth cushion supporting levels of secured debt was deflating could trigger behaviour that would reduce demand.  Second, for some people consumption has been growing more rapidly than disposable income, and some of the increase is likely to have been financed by increased borrowing. If such people decided to readjust their balance sheet this could impact on demand.  Third, precautionary saving could increase - for example, if households decide they need to make greater provision for their future retirement income. This could alter the desire to take out or to repay debt. Although this would only be likely to affect a particular part of the population, the extent of its impact would be hard to assess in advance.  This, of course, is of direct relevance to monetary policy. Changes in the level of debt can result in changes to demand, and also to the level of vulnerabilities. These in turn have an important bearing on the state of the economy. And the higher the leverage, the greater the vulnerability to any given shock becomes. Furthermore, the price of, and hence demand for, new debt will be affected by the policy decision itself. Demand might also be affected by the impact of the decision on people’s expectations about future rate movements.  It may be true that we do not fully understand the transmission mechanism that could lead to changes in demand. Even though the price of debt is directly influenced by overall interest rate levels, we cannot evaluate with precision how much effect a given change in interest rates will have on levels of debt. But we do watch this from month to month, and are quite well positioned, thanks to the data we regularly look at, to judge the emerging impact of policy decisions. It is important to remember that we need to consider the fulfilment of our monetary policy remit over time. Not just over the next two years for which our forecast is given, but over the longer term as well. Sudden unexpected shocks of course could threaten monetary stability and might make keeping to the target trickier. We need to ensure that threats of instability from such a shock do not call this into question.  With this in mind, each month when we on the MPC make our policy decision I am conscious of the debt situation. In particular the possibility that the potential vulnerabilities stemming from higher debt levels do in fact crystallise at some point and trigger a sharp demand slowdown that could have an adverse impact on monetary stability and make it more difficult to meet the inflation target over time. So in considering the whole gamut of demand and supply data that we receive and evaluate, I do allow these factors to weigh in the difficult balance all of us face each month in relation to the monetary policy decision. I mentioned my tendency to think about the risks, however conscious I am of the central case. And this explains why on several occasions over recent months I have found myself voting for a rise; with a view to discharging our mandate to stabilise inflation at the target level, with stability in the monetary arena.  Conclusion I have focused this morning on the issues that are of direct relevance to the Bank’s own remit: monetary and financial stability. But a discussion on household indebtedness would not be complete without a brief mention of the significant longer term socio-economic issues, which I certainly give thought to, raised by demographics and a longer living population. BIS Review 17/2004 7 
On the one hand we can see, as discussed, many households increase their borrowing levels, encouraged as this is by willing lenders, low inflation and interest rates, and social acceptability. On the other hand people are increasingly going to be confronted, at some stage in their lives, by the realities of the need for extra saving to cater for pension provision, long term care provision, and increased longevity. The question is how can these two factors be reconciled without a significant impact on the real economy? Or will today’s generation in effect transfer leverage to the next generation - calling into question the issue of intergenerational fairness? The reconciliation could be exacerbated, given the demographic trend of smaller numbers entering the job market. We can certainly hope that the issue can be resolved by gradual adjustment over time without a significant impact on monetary and financial stability.  But this aspect of the socio economic scene provides a real dilemma. It is not a short term issue, and not one that is for MPC. But the issues will surely be addressed and the contribution that we can make is to provide a stable and economic and financial backdrop against which this can be done.  8 BIS Review 17/2004 
Joseph Yam: APEC initiative on development of securitisation and credit guarantee markets Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Second High-Level Policy Dialogue, APEC Initiative on Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets, Hong Kong, 22 March 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure to welcome you all to this Second High-Level Policy Dialogue under the APEC Initiative on Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets. We are honoured that Mr Gwang-Lim Kim and Mr Jamil Kassum will be opening this Dialogue, and the excellent list of participants promises a very constructive and lively discussion. Hong Kong, China is pleased to co-chair, with Korea and Thailand, the APEC Initiative on Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets. On behalf of all three co-chairs, I would like to extend our sincere thanks to the World Bank for its considerable contributions to this Initiative. These contributions range from active participation to sponsoring experts to provide technical advice to APEC member economies on how to develop their domestic securitisation and credit guarantee markets. It is generally recognised that there is considerable room for improvement in the efficiency of financial intermediation in this region. The bulk of savings find their way back to the region largely in the form of foreign portfolio flows and short-term banking credits, which present risks to financial stability. Local corporations have been relying too much on bank credits and equity markets as the major sources of financing. Among the various measures that have been put forward to address the structural impediments to the development of the bond market, securitisation, coupled with credit enhancement, provides the most effective and immediate solution. Securitisation enables borrowers to issue asset-backed securities that can enjoy a credit rating higher than a single borrower can obtain on its own. When combined with credit enhancement and guarantee arrangements, these securities can further attain a credit rating high enough to meet the requirements of investment managers. Securitisation will also help smaller corporations gain access to regional bond markets and reduce their reliance on short-term commercial bank finance. Securitisation is gradually gaining momentum in Hong Kong. The Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (HKMC) has been issuing mortgage-backed securities since 1999. More recently, synthetic securitisation and credit card receivables securitisation transactions began to appear. Not only is securitisation a tool for developing the bond market, it is also useful for financing infrastructure projects. The Hong Kong SAR Government intends to securitise the income receipts of five toll tunnels and the Tsing Ma Bridge to raise more than HK$6 billion in the coming months. It is against this background that the idea for this APEC Initiative was conceived. The objectives of the Initiative are to promote the understanding and awareness of the importance of securitisation and credit guarantees to bond market development in the region, and to assist APEC member economies in identifying market impediments and taking concrete steps to remove them. We tackle the impediments in the domestic bond markets first, so that the regional bond market can be developed from liquid and deep domestic bond markets. The Initiative comprises two core parts. The first part involves expert panel visits to the APEC economies interested in developing their domestic securitisation and credit guarantee markets. The first panel visits, to China and Mexico, were launched in 2003, and a second panel visit was made to Thailand earlier this month. Draft action plans have been prepared for the economies receiving expert advice. The second part of the Initiative involves the holding of policy dialogues to promote understanding and exchange views about securitisation and credit guarantee markets. The first policy dialogue under the Initiative was held in April 2003 in Seoul, Korea. We are delighted that Hong Kong is now the host for this second policy dialogue. This APEC Initiative aims at developing the bond markets from the supply perspective. Two other initiatives in the region tackle the issue in a complementary way. An initiative by ASEAN+3 focuses on facilitating access for a wide variety of issuers to the regional bond markets and on creating an environment conducive to the development of bond markets. Working groups have been established BIS Review 17/2004 1 
to examine the creation of new securitised debt instruments, issuance of debt by international financial institutions, regional credit guarantees and enhancement facilities, as well as the establishment of local and regional credit rating and credit enhancement agencies. Meanwhile, a group under EMEAP is developing the Asian Bond Fund (ABF). The first phase of ABF, or ABF1, has a size of about US$1 billion and was launched in June 2003. The Fund is now fully invested in US dollar denominated bonds issued by sovereign and quasi-sovereign issuers in EMEAP economies. ABF1 is an important step forward in promoting the efficiency of financial intermediation in the region. It helps to channel a small portion of the very sizeable official reserves held by the Asian economies back into the region. After the launch of ABF1, the EMEAP Group is now studying the extension of the ABF concept to local currency-denominated Asian bond funds, or ABF2. ABF2 will have a positive impact on the demand and supply of local currency bonds in the region, as well as improving the market infrastructure. On the supply side, ABF2 will provide a new asset class to international investors who wish to have a well-diversified exposure to Asia’s bond market. On the demand side, the investment of EMEAP Group in ABF2 will help foster an increased interest in Asian currency bonds amongst domestic and regional investors. Individual EMEAP economies can also leverage on the interest and momentum generated from the collective investment of the EMEAP central banks to further develop their domestic bond markets by improving their market infrastructure and removing market impediments. This should further contribute to the broadening and deepening of local currency bond markets in the region. I think you will agree with me that the heterogeneous nature of the bond markets in this region presents considerable difficulties to developmental efforts. However, I am very pleased to note the many initiatives now in place, and governments have moved from “words” into “action”. Academics and market practitioners have also been supporting the public sector initiatives by providing valuable and practical advice on the action plans to remove market impediments. The timing for development has never been better. Let us continue to work closely together, through bond market development, to enhance the diversity, and therefore the stability and efficiency, of financial intermediation in the region. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 17/2004 
Linah K Mohohlo: 2004 Monetary Policy Statement Statement by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, Gaborone, 17 February 2004. *      *      * Introduction The 2004 Monetary Policy Statement I am presenting to you tonight is the sixth in a series issued on an annual basis by the Bank of Botswana. The Statement and its mid-year review play a central role in the Bank’s efforts to convey to stakeholders and the public at large information on inflation and monetary developments. The Statement also presents an opportunity for the Bank to outline in detail the monetary policy framework, to communicate the annual objective for inflation, and to state the approach that will be taken in formulating the Bank’s response to inflation-related developments, so as to ensure that the inflation objective will be met. In this respect, the Monetary Policy Statement provides an opportunity for the Bank to be transparent, with a view to influence economic and financial expectations of economic agents. The Bank aims specifically to engender an expectation of low and stable inflation, consistent with the broad objective of macroeconomic balance as a basis for sustainable growth in the country. In line with past practice in delivering the Monetary Policy Statement, I will present only the main highlights, and ask that you find time to read the full Statement, copies of which will be provided shortly, in order to derive its full benefit. I will begin by briefly reviewing current trends in inflation and their underlying causes, before assessing the extent to which monetary policy succeeded in achieving related objectives in 2003. I will then present the Bank’s analysis of the economic and financial factors likely to have a bearing on inflation in Botswana through the year ahead, as a basis for the policy outlook. The Bank’s monetary policy framework and objectives For a start, I wish to remind you of the Bank’s policy objectives and the framework in which they are formulated and pursued. The principal objective of monetary policy in Botswana is the control of inflation, as it is for most central banks. Specifically, it is the achievement of a sustainable low and predictable level of inflation. Precisely how low inflation should be is a matter for debate; what is not debatable (you will concur) is that we have not yet achieved the goal in Botswana. Be that as it may, achieving domestic price stability is not just an end in itself; it is also the means by which the Bank contributes, along with other government policies, to the fundamental objectives of a stable macroeconomic environment and rising incomes and living standards for Botswana. It is important to point out that this task is not pursued in isolation; it is aimed at supporting other national objectives, such as economic diversification. In broad terms, this means being mindful of the needs of both savers and investors when pursuing the inflation objective, by setting domestic interest rates high enough to provide a positive return to savers but not so high that they discourage private sector investment. It also means taking account of expected inflationary developments in trading partner countries in setting the annual inflation objectives, such that monetary policy will contribute, along with other policies, to maintaining Botswana’s international competitiveness. The Bank can do this by seeking to achieve, at a minimum, a rate of inflation that is no higher than the average inflation rate of the major trading partner countries. Given that the Bank’s primary concern is controlling inflation, it is important that the sources of change in the rate of inflation are examined closely, so that the Bank responds only to those changes that are due to domestic demand pressures, and not those that may be due to transitory factors or supply fluctuations over which monetary policy has little or no direct influence. Hence, in addition to the inflation data published by the Central Statistics Office, the Bank examines measures of the underlying inflation trend (core inflation), which exclude the impact of transitory factors and exceptional changes in administered prices or indirect taxes. This is not to suggest that these price developments are ignored. The Bank recognises the need to be prepared to respond, if necessary, to any impact these items might have on underlying inflation through inflation expectations and second-round effects. BIS Review 15/2004 1 
Other indicators of progress in meeting the inflation objective include the rate of growth of commercial bank credit to the private sector and changes in government spending. Commercial bank credit is monitored because it is an important contributor to the growth of private consumption and investment and can be directly influenced by monetary policy through interest rates. Government spending is important for monetary policy because of its large contribution to overall domestic demand. It is this continuing large role of the Government in the economy that underscores the need for complementarity between fiscal and monetary policies in achieving the inflation objective. Domestic inflation trends in 2003 Let me briefly review monetary policy developments and actions undertaken last year, and share with you what the Bank believes is possible for 2004. This will include a comment on the monetary policy implications of the actual and potential developments. You will recall that in the context of its longer-term objective of low and stable inflation, the Bank’s inflation objective for 2003 was 4 - 6 percent. Through this objective, the Bank sought to influence and maintain expectations of sustainable low inflation in an environment of a high risk of a VAT-induced increase in inflationary expectations. Moreover, the Bank considered that aiming for an inflation level lower than what was expected in trading partner countries would help regain some of the competitiveness that was lost in 2002 as a result of higher relative inflation in Botswana. The external environment was generally supportive of these efforts. Imported inflation fell as global inflation stayed low, while in South Africa inflation declined. Here at home, domestic demand pressures eased as the earlier high rates of credit growth came down and the growth in government expenditure was contained. The combination of low global inflation and reduced domestic demand pressures led to a lower rate of inflation in Botswana as the year progressed, most notably from July onwards, once the effect of VAT on inflation had run its course and began to drop out of the inflation calculation. VAT had a major impact in the initial 2 - 3 months following its introduction in July 2002. By the end of that year, inflation had risen from the annual rate of 6 percent, where it had been in the months prior to the introduction of the tax, to just over 11 percent. It rose further in the first half of 2003, peaking at an annual rate of 12.2 percent in June; inflation then began to decline as the effect of VAT waned, and demand pressures eased. By December 2003, inflation was almost back to pre-VAT levels, at 6.4 percent - just above the upper end of the Bank’s inflation objective of 6 percent. When the impact of VAT is discounted, which the Bank has estimated increased consumer prices by 4 to 5 percent, underlying inflation was slightly above the upper end of the inflation objective for most of 2003. Monetary policy implementation during 2003 While a major concern for monetary policy in 2003 was to contain the inflationary impact of the introduction of VAT, it was also important that policy continued as much as possible to support the downward trend in underlying inflation that had begun to develop in 2000 and 2001. In the circumstances, monetary policy remained relatively restrictive for much of the year. However, as credit growth slowed and inflation rates declined, as had been expected, and the global inflation outlook remained supportive of continuing low inflation abroad, the Bank took the opportunity to reduce its lending rate (Bank Rate) twice, by 50 basis points in October and by another 50 basis points in December, taking it to 14.25 percent. These reductions in the Bank Rate were followed by reductions in commercial bank lending and deposit interest rates. Indeed the prime lending rate was reduced in two steps by a full one percentage point to 15.75 percent, to match the reduction in the Bank Rate. Deposit interest rates, on the other hand, were reduced by a lesser amount; for instance, the average 88-day deposit rate fell by 65 basis points to 9.5 percent. Despite this decline in domestic short-term nominal interest rates, inflation-adjusted (or real) interest rates remained high as inflation declined. By year-end, the real three-month Bank of Botswana Certificate (BoBC) middle rate was 6 percent, and higher than comparable rates in major economies and in South Africa. The Bank’s operations in the money market were conducted during the year to ensure that short-term interest rates, in particular the yield on three-month BoBCs, were consistent with this policy stance. 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
Market operations were also used to sterilise the large increase in liquidity arising from the continued funding by the Government of the Public Officers Pension Fund. However, the growth in outstanding BoBCs slowed towards the end of 2003, as an increasing volume of funds shifted to government bonds and to offshore markets. As most of you will know, P2.5 billion worth of government bonds were issued in 2003 with maturities of 2 years, 5 years and 12 years. By the end of the year, the resulting yield curve was downward sloping and all yields had fallen, which was an indication that the market expected that a decrease in inflation would increase the possibility of a further easing of monetary policy. I have already noted (with some satisfaction, I must say) that inflation in Botswana had fallen by year-end to levels close to the upper end of the Bank’s desired range. Inflation in trading partner countries had also declined, even well beyond levels that had been expected earlier in the year. By December 2003, average inflation in trading partner countries was more than 2 percentage points lower than the earlier estimates of between 5.5 percent and 6 percent. As a result, the relatively high inflation in Botswana, compared to that of trading partner countries, meant that there was a further increase through the year in the real effective exchange rate, a development that raised concern that it was contributing to a deterioration of Botswana’s international competitiveness and, in turn, undermining diversification efforts. This is a valid concern, because it is important that Botswana continues to pursue a development policy aimed at diversifying the economy away from its current dependence on relatively few products, especially diamonds. Of course, there are different ways of achieving this policy goal, and while an exchange rate strategy aimed at real exchange rate stability and international competitiveness can be part of whatever approach is taken, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that real and durable competitiveness and diversification must ultimately come from improvements in productivity. It is in this context that, earlier this month, the Government took the decision to devalue the Pula by 7.5 percent against the basket of currencies to which it is pegged (South African rand, US dollar, Japanese yen, UK pound sterling and euro). For its part, the Bank will continue to pursue a monetary policy that complements this development and I will highlight in a moment the detail of what this means for the Bank’s policy stance for 2004. I hasten to emphasise at this point that the most sustainable way to achieve and maintain a competitive real exchange rate is through the maintenance of low and stable inflation, and the Bank’s focus on bringing inflation down to low and sustainable levels reflects both the national objective of export-led economic growth and diversification, as well as the Bank’s own statutory objective of achieving and maintaining monetary stability. The outlook for inflation in 2004 Looking ahead, global economic recovery is expected to gather momentum in 2004, with current estimates of world GDP growth moving up to around 4 percent and higher, compared to an estimated range of 2.5 - 2.75 percent for 2003. Global inflation, however, is expected to remain low and may even decline further in the face of continuing excess capacity in major industrial economies. Although oil prices continue to be volatile, they are currently not expected to move much outside OPEC’s target price range. Inflation in South Africa, which is the most important external influence on inflation in Botswana, declined sharply in 2003, with the South African Reserve Bank’s target measure of inflation (CPIX) falling within the 3 - 6 percent target for the first time since its inception in 2000. It is expected that inflation in South Africa will remain within the target range for most of 2004 in response to low international inflation and the strength of the rand, although it is uncertain whether the appreciation of the rand that has taken place recently will be sustained in 2004. Despite this relatively supportive external environment, it is a fact that Botswana’s import prices will rise because of the recent devaluation of the Pula. The timing and extent of the rise will depend on how much and how quickly importers adjust to the higher costs of their products. On the basis of the proportion of imports in the consumer price index, it is estimated that higher import costs could directly add up to 4 percentage points to inflation over the next 6-12 months, in the absence of any offsetting declines in inflation elsewhere in the economy. There is also a danger that traders could exploit the devaluation by raising prices across a range of goods and services by more than is justified by the change in import costs, although this will be constrained to the extent that competition is effective. BIS Review 15/2004 3 
Against this background, prospects are mixed. Domestic demand pressures, as indicated by the growth of commercial bank credit and government expenditure, were lower in 2003, and the budget for the 2004/05 fiscal year projects a welcome further reduction in spending growth. It remains to be seen, however, whether this will be sufficient to offset the demand effects of the pickup in credit growth likely to result from the 15 percent average wage increase for the public sector, which may spread to the broader economy as private businesses concomitantly adjust their wage levels. Another risk to the outlook for domestic inflation is the stronger expectations of higher future inflation that the devaluation will engender. However, this year’s increases in administered prices are not expected to exceed average underlying inflation and this should mitigate the impact on the overall price level. In the circumstances, it is possible that, despite the effects of the devaluation on imported inflation, the more positive environment I have noted will prevail during the first half of the year, thus offsetting the initial inflationary impact of the devaluation. Beyond this period, the balance of risks is much less favourable. While the global impact on domestic prices is likely to be benign, the impact of the devaluation on import prices will feed through to prices of domestically produced goods and services. Furthermore, there is uncertainty with respect to the value of the rand, a depreciation of which may lead to an increase in inflation regionally. Domestically, acceleration in the rate of credit growth outside the range consistent with the Bank’s inflation objective is likely, given the imminent increase in civil service salaries and a consequent similar action by the private sector. However, the impact of the likely credit expansion on domestic demand will be mitigated to some extent if the rate of growth of government expenditure does not increase by more than the forecast 5 - 6 percent contained in the 2004/05 fiscal year budget, and businesses take measures to offset any possible wage rises. Monetary policy stance in 2004 All of these factors must be considered when setting the monetary policy objective for 2004. Importantly, in order to achieve a level of inflation that will contribute to maintaining relative stability in the real effective exchange rate, the objective for the year must reflect expectations of inflation for trading partner countries. The forecast inflation for these countries this year is lower than the 2003 estimate that was used to establish last year’s inflation objective of 4 - 6 percent. This implies a need for the Bank to lower its 2004 inflation objective in order to meet the goal of a stable real effective exchange rate. You will agree that it would be unrealistic and costly, in terms of output and employment, for the Bank to try and counter the full inflationary fall-out of the devaluation completely over too short a period of time. It will be necessary, as a result, to accept some of the direct rise in inflation from higher import costs, while focusing on preventing these costs from spilling into underlying inflation and into inflation expectations. To accommodate all these considerations, the Bank has concluded that an inflation objective of 4 - 7 percent during 2004 is appropriate. This will allow room and time for the economy to adjust to the higher imported inflation arising from the devaluation, while ensuring that the potential gain in competitiveness will not be eroded by higher inflation. The widening of the range (in an upward direction) should not be seen as a loosening of monetary policy. If anything, it implies the contrary, since it only allows overall inflation to rise by about 1 percentage point as a result of the recent devaluation of the Pula, notwithstanding the fact that import prices are likely to rise by significantly more than this amount. The key task for monetary policy, given this inflation objective, will be to prevent these import price increases from feeding through to the prices of domestically produced goods and services. Inflation for these commodities will have to be significantly lower than it would have been without the devaluation. Without a relatively tight monetary policy stance, there is a real danger that inflation will rise, driven by higher import prices and inflation expectations, to the point where the initial benefits to international competitiveness resulting from the devaluation would be dissipated. It is essential that this is avoided if the potential benefits of devaluation are to be realised. In this regard, it will help as well if other policies that affect aggregate demand are tightened to help keep demand-related inflationary pressures in check. As I have already noted, the Government’s budget for 2004/05 goes some way in this direction by limiting expenditure growth. Restraint by parastatals in raising their prices would further help moderate inflationary pressures that arise from such administered price increases. As I indicated earlier, the Bank’s principal intermediate target is the rate of growth of bank credit to the private sector, which is an important contributor to the growth of consumption and investment, and hence to aggregate demand. A desired range for credit growth is specified in order to facilitate keeping 4 BIS Review 15/2004 
it at levels that are consistent with the Bank’s inflation objective. The range for the growth rate of commercial bank credit that is considered to be compatible with achieving the 2004 inflation objective of 4 - 7 percent is 12 - 15 percent. This range is derived from the Bank’s expectation of the rate of growth of the non-mining sector of the economy (aggregate supply), and the desired inflation for the year, with an allowance for the process of financial deepening as the economy develops. Conclusion I wish to conclude by underscoring the fact that this year’s inflation target of 4 - 7 percent will prove to be challenging. As you know, the path to price stability is neither smooth nor easy, and the Bank’s inflation objectives need to take this into account. The raising of the upper end of the range in 2004 is a short-term tactical measure in response to a specific set of factors relating to inflation in 2004. The expectation is that future inflation objectives will again relate directly to expected trading partner inflation rates, in order to ensure real exchange rate stability and the Bank’s longer term objective of low and stable inflation. Against the background of the recent devaluation, it will be difficult to ensure that the downward trend in inflation that occurred in the second half of 2003 is sustained throughout 2004, but I can assure you that the Bank will conduct monetary policy with the objective of ensuring that inflation falls within the desired range of 4 - 7 percent by the end of 2004. The Bank remains committed to respond as necessary and appropriately to monetary and inflation developments, in particular to any deviation of credit and government spending growth from levels that are consistent with the inflation objective. I thank you for both your patience and attention. BIS Review 15/2004 5 
European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 4 March 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, welcome again to our monthly press conference. The Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. Overall, the Governing Council confirmed its previous assessment of a favourable outlook for price stability in the euro area over the medium term. Against this background, we concluded that the current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate. The key ECB interest rates have therefore been left unchanged at their low levels. Our monetary policy stance provides support to the economic recovery in the euro area. We will continue to monitor carefully all developments that could affect our assessment of risks to price stability over the medium term. Let me now turn to the details of our economic analysis. According to Eurostat, in the fourth quarter of 2003 real GDP in the euro area grew by 0.3% quarter on quarter, following growth of 0.4% in the third quarter. These data confirm that a gradual recovery in economic activity in the euro area took place in the second half of 2003. More recent indicators point to moderate economic growth also in early 2004. While growth has been relatively modest so far, both external and domestic factors give reason to expect a strengthening of the recovery through 2004 and beyond. On the external side, all recent indications confirm that global economic growth in 2004 will be robust and broadly based across different regions of the world. Overall, euro area exports should grow significantly this year and next. On the domestic side, the conditions for a recovery in private demand are in place. Over recent months there have been signs of a stabilisation in investment. According to Eurostat, fixed capital investment grew again in the last quarter of 2003, after recording three successive quarter-on-quarter declines. Corporate earnings have generally improved in the euro area, following a protracted restructuring of corporate balance sheets over the last few years. The financing conditions faced by corporations in the euro area are very favourable at present. All of these factors should support a further recovery in investment. There are also reasons to expect a gradual increase in consumption growth during this year, following the subdued developments of last year. In the short term, growth in real disposable income is supported by lower import prices and tax cuts, while later on the gradual improvement in labour market conditions should become an additional factor supporting income growth and confidence. The financial situation of households in the euro area is sound, not least in comparison with a number of other industrial economies, and there is no financial impediment to a pick-up in private consumption. For all these reasons, our main scenario of a continued gradual recovery in the course of 2004 and 2005 remains valid. This view is shared by available forecasts and projections, and is also broadly reflected in financial market developments. We continue to see the risks to this scenario as broadly balanced. However, there are uncertainties related to euro area private consumption and the persistent imbalances in some regions of the world and their potential repercussions on the sustainability of global economic growth. Turning to price developments, according to the Eurostat flash estimate, the annual HICP inflation rate declined to 1.6% in February 2004, from 1.9% in January. This fall was mainly due to base effects stemming from energy prices, as a sharp increase in oil prices which occurred in early 2003 dropped out of the calculation of the annual rate in February 2004. Over the coming months, volatility in annual inflation rates is likely to be observed, mainly due to further base effects from energy prices as well as to increases in indirect taxes. Related to this, annual inflation rates are likely to edge up again temporarily in the second quarter of 2004. Looking beyond short-term fluctuations in the most volatile components of the HICP, we expect inflation to remain in line with price stability. At the current juncture, we see little upward pressure on inflation. Given the anticipated gradual nature of the recovery in economic activity and the high level of unemployment in the euro area, wage developments should remain moderate. BIS Review 15/2004 1 
While our assessment is in line with available forecasts and projections, we are aware of the conditional nature of such exercises. We will therefore continue to monitor all indicators closely. Inflation expectations, in particular, deserve close attention. Turning to the monetary analysis, M3 growth has moderated over recent months. However, it appears that the reallocation of economic agents’ portfolios into longer-term assets is proceeding rather cautiously. In this respect, the generally low level of interest rates continues to support the demand for liquid assets. The low level of interest rates also supports the growth of loans to the private sector. The high liquidity in the euro area needs to be assessed with caution. Its effects on inflation over the medium term will greatly depend on the extent and pace of the future reversal of past portfolio shifts and on the future strength of economic growth. Should excess liquidity persist, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. To sum up, the economic analysis continues to indicate that the main scenario for price developments in the coming years is in line with price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis does not alter this picture for the time being. With regard to fiscal policies, we noted the progress in fiscal consolidation envisaged in countries’ stability programmes. Nonetheless, there continues to be reason for concern. In some countries, contrary to their commitments, adjustment efforts are insufficient to mitigate the risk of excessive deficits. Moreover, several countries do not plan to attain sound budgetary positions by the end of their respective programme horizons, despite favourable growth prospects. This would risk a repetition of the policy errors of the last economic upswing, when insufficient consolidation efforts and tax cuts without adequate expenditure restraint laid the foundations for the recent fiscal difficulties. All countries would benefit from the strengthening of the sustainability of their public finances, especially in the expected upward phase of the cycle, by eliminating imbalances over the coming years and avoiding or correcting as soon as possible excessive deficits. Moreover, the determined implementation of comprehensive structural reforms, on both the expenditure side and the revenue side, will bring additional medium-term rewards in the form of higher growth and more sustainable public finances. Such consolidation and reform strategies are needed to secure a sound macroeconomic environment in the euro area. The euro area also requires further structural reforms in financial, product and labour markets. The Lisbon Strategy provides the appropriate blueprint for progress. We welcome that the forthcoming spring meeting of the European Council is set to give renewed impetus to the Lisbon agenda, speed up the pace of reforms, and strengthen the effectiveness of the decision-making process. Structural reforms will have enormous benefits for the citizens of the euro area. These reforms are crucial for sustained non-inflationary growth and employment, and they are therefore also important for maintaining social cohesion in the long run. Confidence among European citizens in the future is vital for a stronger economic recovery and sustained growth. The Governing Council recognises that the still low level of consumer confidence is related to prevailing uncertainties, including the debate about the appropriate path for structural reforms in many countries of the euro area. It is also partly linked to the continued perception by European citizens of higher inflation than measured by official indices. The Governing Council notes that inflation is now back at a level consistent with price stability. The European public can rest assured about our determination to preserve the purchasing power of our money in the years to come and thus make our contribution to enhance confidence in the future. Stable prices, together with further progress in the implementation of necessary structural reforms, are the key to stronger confidence, and they create the conditions for increased consumption and investment and thus for growth and job creation. We are now at your disposal for questions. 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Paris seminar on the EU accession process (address) Address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Paris seminar on the EU accession process, Paris, 4 March 2004. *      *      * Colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, I speak to you on the eve of an inspiring moment in the history of Europe. In less than two months from now, the European Union will complete its largest ever expansion. What was originally a Community of six countries in western Europe will become a Union of 25 countries. A Union of some 450 million people. This enlargement will be the EU’s greatest: not just in terms of size, but also because of its historical significance. Tomorrow it will be 58 years to the day that Winston Churchill gave a speech in Fulton, Missouri, in which he spoke of an iron curtain descending across Europe. Today, not only has that curtain been torn down; the edifice that had been painstakingly built on one side is being expanded to house those who once lived on the other side. The members of the East will finally join the members of the West as members of the same European Union. As European central bankers, our destiny is intertwined with the destiny of our continent. As Europe is being rebuilt and reunited, so we are reinforcing and uniting its monetary foundations. We have already created a single European currency and a European System of Central Banks (ESCB). And with it we are providing the monetary stability that eluded Europe for much of the last century. But we still face the task of eventually fully integrating new Member States into our common monetary area. This is indeed a challenging task. Challenging because we must ensure that the process runs smoothly, without jeopardising the monetary stability that is our ultimate duty to European citizens. Challenging, also, because of the logistics involved. * * * Enlargement of the euro area is, first and foremost, a challenge for the new Member States seeking to join. If I may address directly those of us who come from the acceding countries, I would say that you face the challenge of preparing your economies for life in Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). In this respect, let us not forget that a great deal has already been achieved, especially in those countries that have had to undertake a transition from planned to market-based economies. The fact that this major round of EU enlargement is taking place in less than two months’ time bears witness to your achievements. You have fulfilled the “Copenhagen criteria”. You have stable democracies. You have functioning market economies. You have adopted the acquis communautaire. But this is no time to rest on one’s laurels. Having travelled the road set out in “Copenhagen”, it is time to drive on; time to travel along the road mapped out in “Maastricht”. Along this road the watchword will be stability. For central banks, this means maintaining price stability and preserving financial stability. For governments, it means pursuing stability-oriented economic policies and, in particular, sound fiscal policies. Overall, these efforts should lead to a high degree of sustainable convergence, characterised by the fulfilment of the Maastricht convergence criteria. At the same time, these efforts must be made in the context of a parallel process of real convergence of economic structures and income levels. We all know that this will be no easy task. The road to the euro will be long and demanding. But at least it is a road that has been travelled along before. And you can benefit from the experience of those who have already travelled along it. We, the Eurosystem, can also help this process by making sure that the right signposts are there along the way. As you know, last December, we published the policy position of the Governing Council on exchange rate issues relating to the acceding countries. In this document we have set out what are, in our view, the principles which should guide participation in ERM II and the adoption of the euro. I do not need to summarise this document during this dinner as it will no doubt be touched upon tomorrow. Let me just say that it is a product of ongoing efforts by the Governing Council to steer the process of monetary integration in the right direction. * * * BIS Review 15/2004 1 
Guiding this process is, of course, not all we must do. For our part, we must also make sure that everything is ready and in place for you when you arrive. This has been, and will continue to be, a challenge for the ECB and the ESCB. To be ready: first for enlargement of the EU and later for enlargement of the euro area. The operational framework, the IT infrastructure, TARGET. I could go on. It all needs to be ready in time for you to “move in”. Let me assure you that we do not underestimate the scale of this task. And let me also reassure you that we have a good track record in meeting such logistical challenges. Prior to the introduction of the euro, the European Monetary Institute, the ECB’s predecessor, established a Master Plan. A plan setting out the regulatory, organisational and logistical preparations necessary for the ESCB to perform its tasks in Stage Three of EMU. Inspired by this, last year we devised a new Master Plan. An Accession Master Plan to guide all activities necessary for the enlargement of the ESCB and later the Eurosystem. Things are well on track. Indeed they have been for some time. For years now cooperation between the central banks of the Eurosystem and the central banks of the accession countries has been intense. There have been regular meetings, visits and exchanges. These have covered the policy and technical aspects of all central banking activities. I am told that there have been more than 1,000 such “central bank cooperation activities” in the last four years. * * * Since the outset, the Eurosystem has been very committed to supporting the enlargement process and to ensuring its success. This is why we decided back in 1999 to organise a seminar bringing together the governors and senior officials of the ESCB and the central banks of accession countries. And we have met on an annual basis since then. Over the years, these seminars have proved to be a very useful forum for policy dialogue on the monetary, exchange rate and financial aspects of enlargement. They have also helped the ECB and the Eurosystem to develop and present their views and so, as I mentioned earlier, to steer the process in the right direction. After Helsinki, Vienna, Berlin and Genval, it is a great honour for me to welcome you to our fifth seminar on the accession process here in Paris. And this time it is also a particular pleasure because it will be the last of these seminars. When I say this, it is not because I don’t enjoy these seminars or sharing your company in such wonderful cities. And it is not because I have lost interest in the accession process. Certainly not. It is because for 10 of the 12 accession countries the process of EU accession is now effectively complete. From 1 May this year, the ten central banks of the acceding countries will become part of the ESCB. Part of the same monetary team. Since May last year, the governors of the acceding country central banks have already participated, as observers, in meetings of the General Council. The relevant experts from acceding countries have participated in meetings of ESCB committees. You are already effectively part of our team. And let us hope that those of you from the remaining accession countries will also be joining our team in the not too distant future. * * * Fellow members and future members of our team, ladies and gentlemen, on the eve of this historic moment in European history, I raise my glass to you, and look forward to our seminar on the EU accession process. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 15/2004 
Mark W Olson: US Banking industry performance highlights - 2003  Speech by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Annual Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, 1 March 2004. *      *      * The banking industry enjoyed a very good year in 2003, one in which banks were able to adapt to a changing environment and still generate record profits. Several factors contributed to this favorable setting: low interest rates, a boom in mortgage banking and deposit-gathering, and favorable trends in market-sensitive businesses as the year went on.  We are just getting our first look at year-end financial information from Call Reports. Although the figures are still preliminary, there are some interesting findings. In 2003, for the first time, insured commercial banks earned $100 billion dollars. These impressive profits were 14 percent higher than in 2002, which to that point was itself a record year for earnings. The industry's return on assets was almost 1.40 percent, and its return on equity was 15.3 percent.  The level of earnings, even at $100 billion, may not be the most remarkable aspect of the industry's 2003 results. The industry not only earned record profits but, as the year progressed, changed the way they earned these profits. In other words, the industry adapted to changes in the business and economic environment and did well.  Changes really began over the summer, when mortgage originations began to taper off as longer-term interest rates rose. For eight large bank holding companies with major mortgage banking operations, the collective mortgage loan origination volume fell 50 percent to about $200 billion in the fourth quarter. This rate of decline parallels what other market sources indicate. Naturally, the fees associated with these originations declined as well, although not as much as one might have expected. Mortgage originations of $200 billion were still strong for these institutions by historical standards, and income was aided by favorable developments in mortgage servicing, namely the accumulated buildup of servicing portfolios from the surge in mortgage lending and the revaluation of servicing assets due to slower prepayments. Net interest margins had been narrowing rather steadily since early 2002. A couple of things appeared to be at work. Typically, margin pressure tends to arise at banks facing stiff competitive pressure on loan yields and funding costs, perhaps an escalation in funding costs at banks experiencing rapid asset growth. The current situation is not a typical or normal environment.  The low-interest rate environment had a lot more to do with this narrowing, along with sluggish loan demand. Historically low interest rates have significantly reduced the yields banks earn on their assets, especially mortgages. Banks built up their holdings of mortgages as market conditions generated such remarkable volumes of these loans, and as weak demand for commercial loans left a void in bank balance sheets and income. Historically low rates on new mortgage loans, together with rapid prepayment of higher-rate mortgages, have sharply reduced yields on bank mortgage portfolios. The preliminary data for 2003 indicate that the effective yield on mortgage-backed securities, including adjustable-rate products, fell to 4.22 percent; by late in the year, yields had fallen to only about 3.90 percent. Along with this pressure on yields, banks have faced an interesting new pressure on funding costs. For much of the last two years, households have been inclined to keep their assets very liquid and flexible. Interest rates have been low by historical terms, and didn't seem to provide much incentive for households to tie up their assets in time deposits. The stock market - at least through the spring of last year - was on a downward track and certainly not providing attractive returns. Flexible bank deposits offered a comfortable compromise, providing positive returns, deposit insurance, and flexibility to redeploy funds if alternative investments became more attractive.  In this setting, bankers have valued core deposits even more highly, and have paid up for them. In particular, they have favored nonmaturity deposits such as money market or savings accounts. Smaller-denomination certificates of deposit, in contrast, have declined steadily over a period of some years. Influenced by the low interest rate environment, banks reduced the rates on their nonmaturity deposits by far less than money market rates had fallen. The result has been tighter margins, but with an important potential side benefit. The success that bankers had in raising these nonmaturity deposits created opportunities to reclaim some of the market share that bank deposits had lost over BIS Review 14/2004 1 
the previous decade or two. Money market and savings accounts, in particular, now fund 30 percent of bank assets. Remarkably, despite these pressures, it now appears that bank margins recovered to some degree late in 2003. The improvement was only about six basis points, but appears to be significantly influenced by slower prepayments and the resulting increases in mortgage asset yields. There were a host of other forces at work, suggesting that the improvement in margins may or may not be sustainable. Still, banks were able to turn around their shrinking margins. Perhaps the biggest contributor to strong earnings has been steady improvement in asset quality - consistent with a gradually improving economy - that allowed for lower charge-offs and lower provisions. By the end of 2003, problem assets had fallen to 0.94 percent of loans, down considerably from the peak level for this credit cycle of 1.27 percent in September 2002. Improvement in economic conditions is a key reason for the sustained decline, along with the liquidity and depth of secondary markets for troubled loans. We also think that better risk management - in particular, better diversification - contributed to this decline. With charge-offs and problem assets declining for more than a year, credit quality is on track to improve further, more so as the economy improves. As a result, we can expect that banks will be able to take their provisions still lower and maybe their reserves as well.  One area in which bank profits lost ground was securities gains. Low interest rates had increased the market value of bank securities holdings, creating the opportunity for banks to sell these securities and take the resulting gains into income. Booking such gains significantly enhanced near-term profits, but of course at the price of lowering future net interest earnings. In any case, increases in longer-term interest rates over the summer meant that the opportunities for securities gains-taking faded. So did the current contribution to earnings from securities gains.  Banks still have not seen significant relief from weak business loan demand. In this business cycle, firms have been reluctant to borrow - in part because of uncertainty about future prospects. The commercial loan business often carries attractive spreads, especially in the middle market. We have seen only the very early signs of recovery in loan demand, including a pickup in bond issuance and syndicated lending.  By one indicator, at least, small business confidence appears to be improving; a development that should be important for community banks. The National Federation of Independent Businesses surveys its members regularly about their sales outlook for the coming three-month period. Those surveys show optimism rising since the summer of 2003. In fact, since November the number of firms expecting an increase in sales exceeds those expecting a decline by more than 30 percentage points. The survey hasn't shown that wide a margin with such a positive outlook for four years. At this point, the available indicators suggest that banks' earnings prospects are favorable. The market seems to share that outlook, perhaps one reason why bank stock valuations have been improving. Ongoing consolidation in the industry also plays a role, and we have seen a recent wave of merger announcements among the largest bank holding companies. Based on what I hear from community bankers, mergers and acquisitions among big institutions have historically created opportunities for community banks.  I wouldn't be a bank regulator if I neglected to mention that bank capital ratios remain very strong. Nearly 99 percent of banks in the United States are well-capitalized, which is a higher proportion than we have ever seen. Some analysts have expressed concern that bankers would reduce their capital buffers in order to increase dividend payments, especially as the tax treatment of dividend income became more favorable to stockholders. But in spite of these changes in the tax code, the aggregate dividend payout ratio at commercial banks increased only modestly, from 76.4 percent of income to 77.4 percent of income.  Conclusion In conclusion, the U.S. banking industry is healthy, strong, profitable and well-positioned to play its proper role in supporting growth and prosperity in our economy. Many of the factors that made 2003 such a remarkable year for the industry look like they will carry over into 2004 as well. New challenges will arise as we move ahead, of course, and perhaps some new opportunities as well. Adapting to change is an important aspect of the banking business, and the industry's ability to respond well to 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
BIS Review 14/2004 3 changing circumstances was a key to last year's record-setting results. I believe we can look forward with confidence to continued strong performance from the banking industry.  
Ben S Bernanke: Money, gold and the Great Depression Remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the H Parker Willis Lecture in Economic Policy, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Virginia, 2 March 2004. The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. *      *      * I am pleased to be able to present the H. Parker Willis Lecture in Economic Policy here at Washington and Lee University. As you may know, Willis was an important figure in the early history of my current employer, the Federal Reserve System. While he was a professor at Washington and Lee, Willis advised Senator Carter Glass of Virginia, one of the key legislators involved in the founding of the Federal Reserve. Willis also served on the National Monetary Commission, which recommended the creation of the Federal Reserve, and he went on to become the research director at the Federal Reserve from 1918 to 1922. At the Federal Reserve, Willis pushed for the development of new and better economic statistics, facing the resistance of those who took the view that too many facts only confuse the issue. Willis was also the first editor of the Federal Reserve Bulletin, the official publication of the Fed, which in Willis's time as well as today provides a wealth of economic statistics. As an illustration of the intellectual atmosphere in Washington at the time he served, Willis reported that when the first copy of the Bulletin was presented to the Secretary of the Treasury, the esteemed Secretary replied, “This Government ain't going into the newspaper business.” Like Parker Willis, I was a professor myself before coming to the Federal Reserve Board. One topic of particular interest to me as a researcher was the performance of the Federal Reserve in its early days, particularly the part played by the young U.S. central bank in the Great Depression of the 1930s.1 In honor of Willis's important contribution to the design and creation of the Federal Reserve, I will speak today about the role of the Federal Reserve and of monetary factors more generally in the origin and propagation of the Great Depression. Let me offer two caveats before I begin: First, as I mentioned, H. Parker Willis resigned from the Fed in 1922, to take a post at Columbia University; thus, he is not implicated in any of the mistakes that the Federal Reserve made in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Second, the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.  The number of people with personal memory of the Great Depression is fast shrinking with the years, and to most of us the Depression is conveyed by grainy, black-and-white images of men in hats and long coats standing in bread lines. However, although the Depression was long ago - October this year will mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the famous 1929 stock market crash - its influence is still very much with us. In particular, the experience of the Depression helped forge a consensus that the government bears the important responsibility of trying to stabilize the economy and the financial system, as well as of assisting people affected by economic downturns. Dozens of our most important government agencies and programs, ranging from social security (to assist the elderly and disabled) to federal deposit insurance (to eliminate banking panics) to the Securities and Exchange Commission (to regulate financial activities) were created in the 1930s, each a legacy of the Depression. The impact that the experience of the Depression has had on views about the role of the government in the economy is easily understood when we recall the sheer magnitude of that economic downturn. During the major contraction phase of the Depression, between 1929 and 1933, real output in the United States fell nearly 30 percent. During the same period, according to retrospective studies, the unemployment rate rose from about 3 percent to nearly 25 percent, and many of those lucky enough to have a job were able to work only part-time. For comparison, between 1973 and 1975, in what was perhaps the most severe U.S. recession of the World War II era, real output fell 3.4 percent and the unemployment rate rose from about 4 percent to about 9 percent. Other features of the 1929-33 decline included a sharp deflation - prices fell at a rate of nearly 10 percent per year during the early 1930s - as well as a plummeting stock market, widespread bank failures, and a rash of defaults and bankruptcies by businesses and households. The economy improved after Franklin D. Roosevelt's inauguration in March 1933, but unemployment remained in the double digits for the rest of the                                                       1 My professional articles on the Depression are collected in Bernanke (2000).  BIS Review 14/2004 1 
decade, full recovery arriving only with the advent of World War II. Moreover, as I will discuss later, the Depression was international in scope, affecting most countries around the world not only the United States. What caused the Depression? This question is a difficult one, but answering it is important if we are to draw the right lessons from the experience for economic policy. Solving the puzzle of the Depression is also crucial to the field of economics itself because of the light the solution would shed on our basic understanding of how the economy works. During the Depression years and for many decades afterward, economists disagreed sharply on the sources of the economic and financial collapse of the 1930s. In contrast, during the past twenty years or so economic historians have come to a broad consensus about the causes of the Depression. A widening of the geographic focus of Depression research deserves much of the credit for this breakthrough. Before the 1980s, research on the causes of the Depression had considered primarily the experience of the United States. This attention to the U.S. case was appropriate to some degree, as the U.S. economy was then, as it is today, the world's largest; the decline in output and employment in the United States during the 1930s was especially severe; and many economists have argued that, to an important extent, the worldwide Depression began in the United States, spreading from here to other countries (Romer, 1993). However, in much the same way that a medical researcher cannot reliably infer the causes of an illness by studying one patient, diagnosing the causes of the Depression is easier when we have more patients (in this case, more national economies) to study. To explain the current consensus on the causes of the Depression, I will first describe the debate as it existed before 1980, and then discuss how the recent focus on international aspects of the Depression and the comparative analysis of the experiences of different countries have helped to resolve that debate. I have already mentioned the sharp deflation of the price level that occurred during the contraction phase of the Depression, by far the most severe episode of deflation experienced in the United States before or since. Deflation, like inflation, tends to be closely linked to changes in the national money supply, defined as the sum of currency and bank deposits outstanding, and such was the case in the Depression. Like real output and prices, the U.S. money supply fell about one-third between 1929 and 1933, rising in subsequent years as output and prices rose. While the fact that money, prices, and output all declined rapidly in the early years of the Depression is undeniable, the interpretation of that fact has been the subject of much controversy. Indeed, historically, much of the debate on the causes of the Great Depression has centered on the role of monetary factors, including both monetary policy and other influences on the national money supply, such as the condition of the banking system. Views have changed over time. During the Depression itself, and in several decades following, most economists argued that monetary factors were not an important cause of the Depression. For example, many observers pointed to the fact that nominal interest rates were close to zero during much of the Depression, concluding that monetary policy had been about as easy as possible yet had produced no tangible benefits to the economy. The attempt to use monetary policy to extricate an economy from a deep depression was often compared to “pushing on a string.”  During the first decades after the Depression, most economists looked to developments on the real side of the economy for explanations, rather than to monetary factors. Some argued, for example, that overinvestment and overbuilding had taken place during the ebullient 1920s, leading to a crash when the returns on those investments proved to be less than expected. Another once-popular theory was that a chronic problem of “under-consumption” - the inability of households to purchase enough goods and services to utilize the economy's productive capacity - had precipitated the slump. However, in 1963, Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz transformed the debate about the Great Depression. That year saw the publication of their now-classic book, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. The Monetary History, the name by which the book is instantly recognized by any macroeconomist, examined in great detail the relationship between changes in the national money stock - whether determined by conscious policy or by more impersonal forces such as changes in the banking system - and changes in national income and prices. The broader objective of the book was to understand how monetary forces had influenced the U.S. economy over a nearly a century. In the process of pursuing this general objective, however, Friedman and Schwartz offered important new evidence and arguments about the role of monetary factors in the Great Depression. In contradiction to the prevalent view of the time, that money and monetary policy played at most a purely passive role 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
in the Depression, Friedman and Schwartz argued that “the [economic] contraction is in fact a tragic testimonial to the importance of monetary forces” (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, p. 300). To support their view that monetary forces caused the Great Depression, Friedman and Schwartz revisited the historical record and identified a series of errors - errors of both commission and omission - made by the Federal Reserve in the late 1920s and early 1930s. According to Friedman and Schwartz, each of these policy mistakes led to an undesirable tightening of monetary policy, as reflected in sharp declines in the money supply. Drawing on their historical evidence about the effects of money on the economy, Friedman and Schwartz argued that the declines in the money stock generated by Fed actions - or inactions - could account for the drops in prices and output that subsequently occurred.2 Friedman and Schwartz emphasized at least four major errors by U.S. monetary policymakers. The Fed's first grave mistake, in their view, was the tightening of monetary policy that began in the spring of 1928 and continued until the stock market crash of October 1929 (see Hamilton, 1987, or Bernanke, 2002a, for further discussion). This tightening of monetary policy in 1928 did not seem particularly justified by the macroeconomic environment: The economy was only just emerging from a recession, commodity prices were declining sharply, and there was little hint of inflation. Why then did the Federal Reserve raise interest rates in 1928? The principal reason was the Fed's ongoing concern about speculation on Wall Street. Fed policymakers drew a sharp distinction between “productive” (that is, good) and “speculative” (bad) uses of credit, and they were concerned that bank lending to brokers and investors was fueling a speculative wave in the stock market. When the Fed's attempts to persuade banks not to lend for speculative purposes proved ineffective, Fed officials decided to dissuade lending directly by raising the policy interest rate. The market crash of October 1929 showed, if anyone doubted it, that a concerted effort by the Fed can bring down stock prices. But the cost of this “victory” was very high. According to Friedman and Schwartz, the Fed's tight-money policies led to the onset of a recession in August 1929, according to the official dating by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The slowdown in economic activity, together with high interest rates, was in all likelihood the most important source of the stock market crash that followed in October. In other words, the market crash, rather than being the cause of the Depression, as popular legend has it, was in fact largely the result of an economic slowdown and the inappropriate monetary policies that preceded it. Of course, the stock market crash only worsened the economic situation, hurting consumer and business confidence and contributing to a still deeper downturn in 1930. The second monetary policy action identified by Friedman and Schwartz occurred in September and October of 1931. At the time, as I will discuss in more detail later, the United States and the great majority of other nations were on the gold standard, a system in which the value of each currency is expressed in terms of ounces of gold. Under the gold standard, central banks stood ready to maintain the fixed values of their currencies by offering to trade gold for money at the legally determined rate of exchange. The fact that, under the gold standard, the value of each currency was fixed in terms of gold implied that the rate of exchange between any two currencies within the gold standard system was likewise fixed. As with any system of fixed exchange rates, the gold standard was subject to speculative attack if investors doubted the ability of a country to maintain the value of its currency at the legally specified parity. In September 1931, following a period of financial upheaval in Europe that created concerns about British investments on the Continent, speculators attacked the British pound, presenting pounds to the Bank of England and demanding gold in return. Faced with the heavy demands of speculators for gold and a widespread loss of confidence in the pound, the Bank of England quickly depleted its gold reserves. Unable to continue supporting the pound at its official value, Great Britain was forced to leave the gold standard, allowing the pound to float freely, its value determined by market forces. With the collapse of the pound, speculators turned their attention to the U.S. dollar, which (given the economic difficulties the United States was experiencing in the fall of 1931) looked to many to be the next currency in line for devaluation. Central banks as well as private investors converted a substantial quantity of dollar assets to gold in September and October of 1931, reducing the Federal Reserve's gold reserves. The speculative attack on the dollar also helped to create a panic in the U.S. banking                                                       2 Bernanke (2002b) gives a more detailed discussion of the evidence presented by Friedman and Schwartz.  BIS Review 14/2004 3 
system. Fearing imminent devaluation of the dollar, many foreign and domestic depositors withdrew their funds from U.S. banks in order to convert them into gold or other assets. The worsening economic situation also made depositors increasingly distrustful of banks as a place to keep their savings. During this period, deposit insurance was virtually nonexistent, so that the failure of a bank might cause depositors to lose all or most of their savings. Thus, depositors who feared that a bank might fail rushed to withdraw their funds. Banking panics, if severe enough, could become self-confirming prophecies. During the 1930s, thousands of U.S. banks experienced runs by depositors and subsequently failed.  Long-established central banking practice required that the Fed respond both to the speculative attack on the dollar and to the domestic banking panics. However, the Fed decided to ignore the plight of the banking system and to focus only on stopping the loss of gold reserves to protect the dollar. To stabilize the dollar, the Fed once again raised interest rates sharply, on the view that currency speculators would be less willing to liquidate dollar assets if they could earn a higher rate of return on them. The Fed's strategy worked, in that the attack on the dollar subsided and the U.S. commitment to the gold standard was successfully defended, at least for the moment. However, once again the Fed had chosen to tighten monetary policy despite the fact that macroeconomic conditions - including an accelerating decline in output, prices, and the money supply - seemed to demand policy ease. The third policy action highlighted by Friedman and Schwartz occurred in 1932. By the spring of that year, the Depression was well advanced, and Congress began to place considerable pressure on the Federal Reserve to ease monetary policy. The Board was quite reluctant to comply, but in response to the ongoing pressure the Board conducted open-market operations between April and June of 1932 designed to increase the national money supply and thus ease policy. These policy actions reduced interest rates on government bonds and corporate debt and appeared to arrest the decline in prices and economic activity. However, Fed officials remained ambivalent about their policy of monetary expansion. Some viewed the Depression as the necessary purging of financial excesses built up during the 1920s; in this view, slowing the economic collapse by easing monetary policy only delayed the inevitable adjustment. Other officials, noting among other indicators the very low level of nominal interest rates, concluded that monetary policy was in fact already quite easy and that no more should be done. These policymakers did not appear to appreciate that, even though nominal interest rates were very low, the ongoing deflation meant that the real cost of borrowing was very high because any loans would have to be repaid in dollars of much greater value (Meltzer, 2003). Thus monetary policy was not in fact easy at all, despite the very low level of nominal interest rates. In any event, Fed officials convinced themselves that the policy ease advocated by the Congress was not appropriate, and so when the Congress adjourned in July 1932, the Fed reversed the policy. By the latter part of the year, the economy had relapsed dramatically. The fourth and final policy mistake emphasized by Friedman and Schwartz was the Fed's ongoing neglect of problems in the U.S. banking sector. As I have already described, the banking sector faced enormous pressure during the early 1930s. As depositor fears about the health of banks grew, runs on banks became increasingly common. A series of banking panics spread across the country, often affecting all the banks in a major city or even an entire region of the country. Between December 1930 and March 1933, when President Roosevelt declared a “banking holiday” that shut down the entire U.S. banking system, about half of U.S. banks either closed or merged with other banks. Surviving banks, rather than expanding their deposits and loans to replace those of the banks lost to panics, retrenched sharply. The banking crisis had highly detrimental effects on the broader economy. Friedman and Schwartz emphasized the effects of bank failures on the money supply. Because bank deposits are a form of money, the closing of many banks greatly exacerbated the decline in the money supply. Moreover, afraid to leave their funds in banks, people hoarded cash, for example by burying their savings in coffee cans in the back yard. Hoarding effectively removed money from circulation, adding further to the deflationary pressures. Moreover, as I emphasized in early research of my own (Bernanke, 1983), the virtual shutting down of the U.S. banking system also deprived the economy of an important source of credit and other services normally provided by banks. The Federal Reserve had the power at least to ameliorate the problems of the banks. For example, the Fed could have been more aggressive in lending cash to banks (taking their loans and other investments as collateral), or it could have simply put more cash in circulation. Either action would have made it easier for banks to obtain the cash necessary to pay off depositors, which might have stopped bank runs before they resulted in bank closings and failures. Indeed, a central element of the Federal Reserve's original mission had been to provide just this type of assistance to the banking 4 BIS Review 14/2004 
system. The Fed's failure to fulfill its mission was, again, largely the result of the economic theories held by the Federal Reserve leadership. Many Fed officials appeared to subscribe to the infamous “liquidationist” thesis of Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, who argued that weeding out “weak” banks was a harsh but necessary prerequisite to the recovery of the banking system. Moreover, most of the failing banks were relatively small and not members of the Federal Reserve System, making their fate of less interest to the policymakers. In the end, Fed officials decided not to intervene in the banking crisis, contributing once again to the precipitous fall in the money supply. Friedman and Schwartz discuss other episodes and policy actions as well, such as the Federal Reserve's misguided tightening of policy in 1937-38 which contributed to a new recession in those years. However, the four episodes I have described capture the gist of the Friedman and Schwartz argument that, for a variety of reasons, monetary policy was unnecessarily tight, both before the Depression began and during its most dramatic downward phase. As I have mentioned, Friedman and Schwartz had produced evidence from other historical periods that suggested that contractionary monetary policies can lead to declining prices and output. Friedman and Schwartz concluded therefore that they had found the smoking gun, evidence that much of the severity of the Great Depression could be attributed to monetary forces. Friedman and Schwartz's arguments were highly influential but not universally accepted. For several decades after the Monetary History was published, a debate raged about the importance of monetary factors in the Depression. Opponents made several objections to the Friedman and Schwartz thesis that are worth highlighting here. First, critics wondered whether the tightening of monetary policy during 1928 and 1929, though perhaps ill advised, was large enough to have led to such calamitous consequences.3 If the tightening of monetary policy before the stock market crash was not sufficient to account for the violence of the economic downturn, then other, possibly nonmonetary, factors may need to be considered as well. A second question is whether the large decline in the money supply seen during the 1930s was primarily a cause or an effect of falling output and prices. As we have seen, Friedman and Schwartz argued that the decline in the money supply was causal. Suppose, though, for the sake of argument, that the Depression was the result primarily of nonmonetary factors, such as overspending and overinvestment during the 1920s. As incomes and spending decline, people need less money to carry out daily transactions. In this scenario, critics pointed out, the Fed would be justified in allowing the money supply to fall, because it would only be accommodating a decline in the amount of money that people want to hold. The decline in the money supply in this case would be a response to, not a cause of, the decline in output and prices. To put the question simply, we know that both the economy and the money stock contracted rapidly during the early 1930s, but was the monetary dog wagging the economic tail, or vice versa? The focus of Friedman and Schwartz on the U.S. experience (by design, of course) raised other questions about their monetary explanation of the Depression. As I have mentioned, the Great Depression was a worldwide phenomenon, not confined to the United States. Indeed, some economies, such as that of Germany, began to decline before 1929. Although few countries escaped the Depression entirely, the severity of the episode varied widely across countries. The timing of recovery also varied considerably, with some countries beginning their recovery as early as 1931 or 1932, whereas others remained in the depths of depression as late as 1935 or 1936. How does Friedman and Schwartz's monetary thesis explain the worldwide nature of the onset of the Depression, and the differences in severity and timing observed in different countries? That is where the debate stood around 1980. About that time, however, economic historians began to broaden their focus, shifting from a heavy emphasis on events in the United States during the 1930s to an increased attention to developments around the world. Moreover, rather than studying countries individually, this new scholarship took a comparative approach, asking specifically why some countries fared better than others in the 1930s. As I will explain, this research uncovered an important role for international monetary forces, as well as domestic monetary policies, in explaining the Depression. Specifically, the new research found that a complete understanding of the Depression requires                                                       3 There was less debate about the period 1931-33, the most precipitous downward phase of the Depression, for which most economists were inclined to ascribe an important role to monetary factors.  BIS Review 14/2004 5 
attention to the operation of the international gold standard, the international monetary system of the time.4  As I have already mentioned, the gold standard is a monetary system in which each participating country defines its monetary unit in terms of a certain amount of gold. The setting of each currency's value in terms of gold defines a system of fixed exchange rates, in which the relative value of (say) the U.S. dollar and the British pound are fixed at a rate determined by the relative gold content of each currency. To maintain the gold standard, central banks had to promise to exchange actual gold for their paper currencies at the legal rate. The gold standard appeared to be highly successful from about 1870 to the beginning of World War I in 1914. During the so-called “classical” gold standard period, international trade and capital flows expanded markedly, and central banks experienced relatively few problems ensuring that their currencies retained their legal value. The gold standard was suspended during World War I, however, because of disruptions to trade and international capital flows and because countries needed more financial flexibility to finance their war efforts. (The United States remained technically on the gold standard throughout the war, but with many restrictions.)  After 1918, when the war ended, nations around the world made extensive efforts to reconstitute the gold standard, believing that it would be a key element in the return to normal functioning of the international economic system. Great Britain was among the first of the major countries to return to the gold standard, in 1925, and by 1929 the great majority of the world's nations had done so. Unlike the gold standard before World War I, however, the gold standard as reconstituted in the 1920s proved to be both unstable and destabilizing. Economic historians have identified a number of reasons why the reconstituted gold standard was so much less successful than its prewar counterpart. First, the war had left behind enormous economic destruction and dislocation. Major financial problems also remained, including both large government debts from the war and banking systems whose solvency had been deeply compromised by the war and by the periods of hyperinflation that followed in a number of countries. These underlying problems created stresses for the gold standard that had not existed to the same degree before the war. Second, the new system lacked effective international leadership. During the classical period, the Bank of England, in operation since 1694, provided sophisticated management of the international system, with the cooperation of other major central banks. This leadership helped the system adjust to imbalances and strains; for example, a consortium of central banks might lend gold to one of their number that was experiencing a shortage of reserves. After the war, with Great Britain economically and financially depleted and the United States in ascendance, leadership of the international system shifted by default to the Federal Reserve. Unfortunately, the fledgling Federal Reserve, with its decentralized structure and its inexperienced and domestically focused leadership, did not prove up to the task of managing the international gold standard, a task that lingering hatreds and disputes from the war would have made difficult for even the most-sophisticated institution. With the lack of effective international leadership, most central banks of the 1920s and 1930s devoted little effort to supporting the overall stability of the international system and focused instead on conditions within their own countries. Finally, the reconstituted gold standard lacked the credibility of its prewar counterpart. Before the war, the ideology of the gold standard was dominant, to the point that financial investors had no doubt that central banks would find a way to maintain the gold values of their currencies no matter what the circumstances. Because this conviction was so firm, speculators had little incentive to attack a major currency. After the war, in contrast, both economic views and the political balance of power had shifted in ways that reduced the influence of the gold standard ideology. For example, new labor-dominated political parties were skeptical about the utility of maintaining the gold standard if doing so increased unemployment. Ironically, reduced political and ideological support for the gold standard made it more difficult for central banks to maintain the gold values of their currencies, as speculators understood that the underlying commitment to adhere to the gold standard at all costs had been weakened significantly. Thus, speculative attacks became much more likely to succeed and hence more likely to occur.                                                       4 Critical early research included Choudhri and Kochin (1980) and Eichengreen and Sachs (1985). Eichengreen (1992, 2002) provides the most extensive analysis of the role of the gold standard in causing and propagating the Great Depression. Temin (1989) provides a readable account with a slightly different perspective.  6 BIS Review 14/2004 
With an international focus, and with particular attention to the role of the gold standard in the world economy, scholars have now been able to answer the questions regarding the monetary interpretation of the Depression that I raised earlier. First, the existence of the gold standard helps to explain why the world economic decline was both deep and broadly international. Under the gold standard, the need to maintain a fixed exchange rate among currencies forces countries to adopt similar monetary policies. In particular, a central bank with limited gold reserves has no option but to raise its own interest rates when interest rates are being raised abroad; if it did not do so, it would quickly lose gold reserves as financial investors transferred their funds to countries where returns were higher. Hence, when the Federal Reserve raised interest rates in 1928 to fight stock market speculation, it inadvertently forced tightening of monetary policy in many other countries as well. This tightening abroad weakened the global economy, with effects that fed back to the U.S. economy and financial system. Other countries' policies also contributed to a global monetary tightening during 1928 and 1929. For example, after France returned to the gold standard in 1928, it built up its gold reserves significantly, at the expense of other countries. The outflows of gold to France forced other countries to reduce their money supplies and to raise interest rates. Speculative attacks on currencies also became frequent as the Depression worsened, leading central banks to raise interest rates, much like the Federal Reserve did in 1931. Leadership from the Federal Reserve might possibly have produced better international cooperation and a more appropriate set of monetary policies. However, in the absence of that leadership, the worldwide monetary contraction proceeded apace. The result was a global economic decline that reinforced the effects of tight monetary policies in individual countries. The transmission of monetary tightening through the gold standard also addresses the question of whether changes in the money supply helped cause the Depression or were simply a passive response to the declines in income and prices. Countries on the gold standard were often forced to contract their money supplies because of policy developments in other countries, not because of domestic events. The fact that these contractions in money supplies were invariably followed by declines in output and prices suggests that money was more a cause than an effect of the economic collapse in those countries. Perhaps the most fascinating discovery arising from researchers' broader international focus is that the extent to which a country adhered to the gold standard and the severity of its depression were closely linked. In particular, the longer that a country remained committed to gold, the deeper its depression and the later its recovery (Choudhri and Kochin, 1980; Eichengreen and Sachs, 1985).  The willingness or ability of countries to remain on the gold standard despite the adverse developments of the 1930s varied quite a bit. A few countries did not join the gold standard system at all; these included Spain (which was embroiled in domestic political upheaval, eventually leading to civil war) and China (which used a silver monetary standard rather than a gold standard). A number of countries adopted the gold standard in the 1920s but left or were forced off gold relatively early, typically in 1931. Countries in this category included Great Britain, Japan, and several Scandinavian countries. Some countries, such as Italy and the United States, remained on the gold standard into 1932 or 1933. And a few diehards, notably the so-called gold bloc, led by France and including Poland, Belgium, and Switzerland, remained on gold into 1935 or 1936.  If declines in the money supply induced by adherence to the gold standard were a principal reason for economic depression, then countries leaving gold earlier should have been able to avoid the worst of the Depression and begin an earlier process of recovery. The evidence strongly supports this implication. For example, Great Britain and Scandinavia, which left the gold standard in 1931, recovered much earlier than France and Belgium, which stubbornly remained on gold. As Friedman and Schwartz noted in their book, countries such as China - which used a silver standard rather than a gold standard - avoided the Depression almost entirely. The finding that the time at which a country left the gold standard is the key determinant of the severity of its depression and the timing of its recovery has been shown to hold for literally dozens of countries, including developing countries. This intriguing result not only provides additional evidence for the importance of monetary factors in the Depression, it also explains why the timing of recovery from the Depression differed across countries. The finding that leaving the gold standard was the key to recovery from the Great Depression was certainly confirmed by the U.S. experience. One of the first actions of President Roosevelt was to eliminate the constraint on U.S. monetary policy created by the gold standard, first by allowing the dollar to float and then by resetting its value at a significantly lower level. The new President also addressed another major source of monetary contraction, the ongoing banking crisis. Within days of BIS Review 14/2004 7 
8 BIS Review 14/2004 his inauguration, Roosevelt declared a “bank holiday,” shutting down all the banks in the country. Banks were allowed to reopen only when certified to be in sound financial condition. Roosevelt pursued other measures to stabilize the banking system as well, such as the creation of a deposit insurance program. With the gold standard constraint removed and the banking system stabilized, the money supply and the price level began to rise. Between Roosevelt's coming to power in 1933 and the recession of 1937-38, the economy grew strongly. I have only scratched the surface of the fascinating literature on the causes of the Great Depression, but it is time that I conclude. Economists have made a great deal of progress in understanding the Great Depression. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz deserve enormous credit for bringing the role of monetary factors to the fore in their Monetary History. However, expanding the research focus to include the experiences of a wide range of countries has both provided additional support for the role of monetary factors (including the international gold standard) and enriched our understanding of the causes of the Depression. Some important lessons emerge from the story. One lesson is that ideas are critical. The gold standard orthodoxy, the adherence of some Federal Reserve policymakers to the liquidationist thesis, and the incorrect view that low nominal interest rates necessarily signaled monetary ease, all led policymakers astray, with disastrous consequences. We should not underestimate the need for careful research and analysis in guiding policy. Another lesson is that central banks and other governmental agencies have an important responsibility to maintain financial stability. The banking crises of the 1930s, both in the United States and abroad, were a significant source of output declines, both through their effects on money supplies and on credit supplies. Finally, perhaps the most important lesson of all is that price stability should be a key objective of monetary policy. By allowing persistent declines in the money supply and in the price level, the Federal Reserve of the late 1920s and 1930s greatly destabilized the U.S. economy and, through the workings of the gold standard, the economies of many other nations as well.  
Jaime Caruana: The New Accord and where we stand today Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Banco de España and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Annual Washington Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, 1 March 2004. *      *      * I. Introduction I would like to thank the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to join you here in the great city of Washington, D.C. As the only non-US regulator participating, it is an honour, if perhaps a daunting one, for me to try to present some reflections from the perspective of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision at your conference. Yet in this increasingly global world, banking supervisors need more and more to co-ordinate and work with one another. The benefit of this is that I often find myself meeting friends and colleagues, both from within and outside the Basel Committee. I am pleased to see that several of them are here today. This includes Chairman Powell, plus of course my colleagues Bill McDonough, who served as chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision before me, and Mike Zamorski from the FDIC. For nearly forty years, the IIB has served as an exchange for views on the issues that affect the U.S. activities of internationally active banking organisations. It has also been a forum for bankers to discuss these issues with regulators and policymakers. An active dialogue between banks, supervisors, and policymakers is essential for maintaining a regulatory framework that is relevant and robust.  Along those lines, I would like to thank those who are participating in one of the most important dialogues in bank supervision today, namely the Committee’s consultations on the New Basel Accord on bank capital requirements. Many industry participants have written comment letters, participated in discussions, and provided us with practical data. Your suggestions have helped us to clarify and simplify our proposals for the “three pillars” of minimum requirements, supervisory review, and market discipline. We have listened carefully and, thanks to the hard work of the industry and to the support from other supervisory agencies and central banks, the proposals for the New Accord have improved dramatically since the first draft was published in 1999. The process to revise the Accord has sparked lively discussion among the industry, policymakers, and regulators, naturally, but also among the business community, the popular press, and other constituencies. One might ask why so many care so much about something as seemingly esoteric as bank capital requirements.  The answer, I think, lies in the unique public functions that banks provide. Banks settle payments among businesses and consumers. They channel savings and provide credit, which is vital to promote economic growth. And they safeguard public wealth. Yet banks cannot fulfil any of these tasks for long if they fail to remain adequately capitalised and to manage risk properly. Capital is, after all, a bank’s last line of defence. Even with appropriate risk management, there will be occasions when reserves are exhausted, leaving capital to absorb a bank’s losses. If capital is insufficient, troubled banks may disrupt the flow of credit and payments, with this leading to inefficiencies in markets.  So, many parties take a great interest in the safety and soundness of the banking system. In my remarks, I would like to share my thoughts on the New Accord and where we stand today. I’ll cover four areas of interest.  • I’ll begin with a reminder of why a New Accord is so important and so different from its predecessor. • That leads to our expectations for the New Accord, which is my second set of issues. Our overarching public policy objective is to promote a more stable financial system. To achieve that goal, the New Accord contains several transmission mechanisms I will elaborate upon, namely encouraging improvements in risk management and promoting greater cooperation between financial supervisors.  • Finding a way to accomplish such a wide range of objectives has not been an easy task. In my third batch of remarks, I’ll address some of the challenging questions we face in drafting the New Accord.  BIS Review 14/2004 1 
• Finally, I’ll conclude by offering some thoughts on the work ahead. II. Why is the New Accord so important and so different from its predecessor? Allow me to begin by focusing on the first area of interest and trying to answer why so many supervisors, central banks, and banking organisations themselves have invested so much hard work in revising the Basel Accord. Perhaps part of the explanation is that we know, as Benjamin Franklin did, that diligence is the mother of good luck. But our diligence is hard to explain if you consider that, in so many ways, the existing 1988 Accord was already a tremendous success story. The 1988 Accord was simple to apply. It represented the first internationally accepted definition and measure of bank capital. It has been adopted in over 100 countries and has come to be acknowledged as one of the benchmark measures of a bank’s financial health. That begs a question. If the 1988 Accord was so successful, why has the Basel Committee published a huge number of pages on ways to improve it? Why have several hundred commercial organisations participated in hundreds of hours of meetings and written hundreds of comment letters to us?  The best explanation is that the existing rules have been overtaken by the pace of innovation in the banking system. The simplicity of the 1988 Accord was an asset in promoting its acceptance, but its simplicity is quickly becoming a liability for some bankers and supervisors alike.  Over the past 16 years, the methodologies for measuring and managing risk have evolved in ways that the architects of the 1988 Accord could not have anticipated. Improvements in technology and telecommunications have changed the speed at which banks collect and analyse data on their exposures. The explosive growth in the markets for securitised assets and for credit derivatives has offered banks new ways to manage and transfer credit risk. And a new discipline in risk management is emerging - namely, operational risk management - through which banks are quantifying in an increasingly reliable manner the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal processes or systems or from damage caused by an external disruption. As the art of risk management becomes more sophisticated, the static and very simple rules of the 1988 Accord are becoming less relevant to the most advanced banks. Leading banks increasingly view the old rules as a burden, constraining their abilities to administer their businesses relative to the best information and practices available today. Supervisors, for our part, have less and less confidence in the measures of risk that the 1988 Accord lays down for banks that engage in the most sophisticated forms of risk taking and risk mitigation.  III. The goal of the New Accord: financial stability and resilience By the late 1990s, it became clear to leading banks and supervisors that we needed a New Accord. But one person in particular knew that we should do much more than merely revise the minimum requirements. Bill McDonough, the previous chairman of the Committee, convinced leaders in the industry, in central banks, and in supervisory agencies that we should recognise and provide incentives to advance the state of the art in risk management across the industry. He did not seek to reduce the amount of capital held by the banking system but rather sought to increase the stability of the global financial system - a goal that would benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and consumers. This leads me to the second part of my remarks, namely what we expect from a New Accord. As a result of Bill’s initiative, the Committee has set out as its overarching goal the promotion of greater financial stability. The members of the Basel Committee believe that, when individual banks are adequately capitalised and well managed, they become more stable and better able to withstand periods of financial distress. But more importantly, when all banks have the proper incentives to manage their risks appropriately and hold adequate levels of capital, we believe that the entire financial sector becomes more resilient, less sensitive to the business cycle, and better able to act as a source for the sustainable growth of the broader economy. Increasingly, policymakers and central bankers recognise that financial stability is a public good much like price stability. All of us have long understood the benefits of price stability and the need for sound monetary policy in the pursuit of smooth economic growth. In recent years, we have learned more about the concurrent need for a stable financial system as well. That includes the need for businesses and consumers to have access to credit on fair and reasonable terms through all stages of the 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
business cycle so that they can build and grow. We need an efficient and resilient payments system to maintain the flow of funds through the economy at all times. We need financial markets that remain active, liquid, and trusted regardless of events in the economy.  Given the unique positions of banks at the crossroads of businesses and consumers in every economy - and their special role as intermediaries of credit to both - nothing threatens financial stability more than the presence of poorly managed and poorly capitalised banking institutions.  However, financial stability, like price stability, is not something that can be legislated into existence.  The New Basel Accord will seek greater financial stability through several mechanisms, all of which might be considered objectives in themselves. Some of these mechanisms were already present in the 1988 Accord, such as setting minimum quantitative capital requirements and a level playing field. But I want to focus on what I see as two innovations of the new Accord. The first is to encourage improvements in banks’ internal risk management processes, which should, in turn, be anchored on good corporate governance. The second is to promote greater cooperation and coordination among supervisors across jurisdictions. Risk management and corporate governance The first objective is to encourage banks to improve their risk measurement and management techniques. The existing rules set out the quantitative requirements for capital - that is, how much capital in dollar terms a bank should hold relative to the kinds of risk exposures it has. The New Accord will improve those quantitative requirements by making them more risk sensitive and more closely tailored to banks’ practices. But we will supplement them by setting incentives for banks to strengthen the structures and processes through which they assess and manage their risk exposures. To encourage enhancements in internal controls and risk management processes, the New Accord will offer explicit economic incentives for banks to adopt more accurate measures of risk and more sophisticated means for controlling their exposures to such risks.  Of course, risk management must be based on a strong foundation of corporate governance. Corporate scandals on both sides of the Atlantic - and elsewhere - have highlighted the significance of capable, responsible, and proactive management. The Committee has long recognised this, and this is why we have explicitly stressed the importance of good corporate governance in the New Accord. We have included provisions on the need for boards and senior management to understand the nature and level of the risks that their banks are exposed to, to set the bank’s tolerance to these risks, to ensure that strong risk management and internal controls are adopted throughout the organisation, and to ensure that they themselves continue to be appropriately informed about the risks being taken on. The New Accord also stresses the importance of independent assessments and audits. Let me now mention four different examples of provisions in the New Accord, which, through promoting good risk management and governance, should enhance financial resilience. The adoption of a comprehensive, enterprise-wide view of risk First, as you may know, the New Basel Accord takes a big step forward in developing a clear, comprehensive, and consolidated view of the risks each bank faces. The 1988 Accord focused initially only on a bank’s exposures to credit risk. In the years since 1988, the Basel Committee has sought to mirror the evolution of best practices in the private sector to identify other risks and establish appropriate controls for them.  In 1996, for example, the Committee adopted requirements for banks that are heavily exposed to market-related risks. The New Accord continues this trend by segregating and setting explicit capital requirements for exposures to operational risk. We believe that, when managers and boards of directors have a better sense of the different extent and kinds of risks they face, they will make more informed decisions at the enterprise-wide and business line levels.  The use of a comparable, quantitative measure for risk A second step that the New Accord will take is to provide banks with a means to compare their exposures to very different kinds of risks. It will require banks to express their exposures to various risks using a common “language,” namely capital. By expressing exposures to market, credit, and operational risk in directly comparable terms, bank managers will be supplementing their more subjective expertise in each area with a more objective sense of the relative importance of each. For BIS Review 14/2004 3 
risks not captured in the minimum requirements of the first pillar, the second pillar, supervisory review, is premised on the need for banks to review their exposures to all other risks and on the need for supervisors to evaluate those internal assessments. Taken together, expressing risk exposures in similar terms and considering exposures to risks not explicitly included in the New Accord should enable bank managers to make decisions more rigorously. Demanding operational standards for collecting, analysing, and reporting risk data Of course, to quantify and compare the full range of risks, a bank must gather and report information on its various kinds of exposures using this common language. This brings me to a third step toward strengthened corporate governance, namely the New Accord’s proposals to set demanding operational requirements for the collection, analysis, and reporting of risk data.  By raising the bar for gathering and interpreting data, we expect to improve the quality, effectiveness, and frequency of internal reporting. That should go a long way toward providing senior management and even individual members of the board with an accurate and timely understanding of the nature of their business. Senior managers and directors must see the right information at the right times. They must be positioned to ask tough questions and to make hard decisions confidently - before it’s too late. This is something that we always expect of responsible business leaders. For the first time, the New Accord allows us to recognise these responsibilities of the board and senior management explicitly in the regulatory capital framework. The promotion of transparency in financial reporting Beyond raising the bar for internal reporting, a fourth step that the New Accord will take to strengthen corporate governance is to promote greater transparency in a bank’s external financial reporting under the third pillar of the New Accord. When marketplace participants have a better sense of a bank’s financial condition, the risks it faces, and the controls it employs, they will be better able to make their own business and investing decisions vis-à-vis the bank. The Committee expects that rating agencies and others will be better positioned to evaluate a bank’s condition and future prospects, while investors and counterparties will be better able to decide whether to invest in or to extend credit to the institution. The New Accord’s improved transparency requirements leverage the power of market-based incentives for bank management to assess its risks carefully and to manage them responsibly. Taken together, these four steps are intended to renew the emphasis on excellence in corporate governance - from the level of the front offices, to the back offices, and up to the board room.  Promote cooperation, coordination, and consistency between supervisors So far, I have focused on improvements within banks that will help to make the financial sector more stable. The second objective I will mention today is to promote greater cooperation, coordination, and consistency in the ways that bank supervisors evaluate capital adequacy. When supervisors across jurisdictions share similar expectations for evaluating a bank’s capital adequacy, we can foster competitive equality and lessen the regulatory burden on banks by allowing them to concentrate on managing their exposures and their businesses - rather than on managing and trying to balance differing or even conflicting requirements set by individual supervisors. The IIB, for one, has expressed special concern about supervisory coordination and cooperation, which I will address in a moment. IV. Responses to Current Concerns Realising these inter-related objectives to attain greater financial stability will require a comprehensive framework for assessing the adequacy of a bank’s capital. This is resulting in what, I must confess, is a more complicated-looking Accord than the less sophisticated, and much less comprehensive, existing Accord. We’ve offered formulas, annexes, and no shortage of footnotes. The astrophysicist Stephen Hawkins was once told that every equation he included in his books would cut his sales by half: perhaps there is a lesson there. I’d like to turn now to the third area of my presentation and offer my thoughts on some of the questions that we have faced in drafting the Accord, starting with its potential complexity. 4 BIS Review 14/2004 
Is the New Accord too complex? One question I hear frequently is whether the New Basel Accord is too complex. To some degree, one might say that complexity lies in the eye of the beholder. Take just a brief glance at the hundreds of pages of legal documentation accompanying a simple debt security prospectus. You might quickly become convinced that such instruments are highly complex. Yet corporate bonds are sold every day to investors, including to individual investors. Regardless of whether financial instruments are complex, one must ask whether the regulatory framework needs to be complex as well. The members of the Basel Committee know that it is far easier to enforce a simple rule than a complicated one. Still, banking is no longer a simple business. Leading banks offer a wide range of highly evolved products and services. Likewise, they employ sophisticated analytical tools, advanced mathematical models, and even dense legal documents to help insulate themselves against losses. What’s more, leading banks seek to differentiate themselves and their products continuously from those offered by competitors. A culture of constant innovation makes it a tall order for regulators to develop simple rules that fit all banking products and services in all their permutations. In fact, some of the complexity of the New Accord stems from banks’ own requests to address the rich variety of risks and practices in existence today. The New Accord offers banks and their supervisors numerous options for evaluating capital adequacy that are intended to reflect differences in each bank’s level of sophistication. Many of these options were created precisely because some banking organisations thought that a “blanket rule” would unfairly burden them. Indeed, banks have asked the Committee not to sacrifice the New Accord’s sensitivity to risk, even if this requires some complexity. By providing a range of options, we are better able to fit the regulatory framework to each bank’s profile, rather than the other way around.  At the same time, the Committee has worked hard over the past five years to simplify the rules where possible. Just this past January, for example, the Committee proposed ways to simplify the treatment of securitisation exposures, which themselves arise from highly complex transactions. We will continue to seek ways to simplify the rules, but we must recognise that ensuring comparability and improving the rules’ sensitivity to the actual risks banks face will entail a certain degree of complexity.  Will differences arise in how countries apply the New Accord? Another reason why parts of the New Accord are so detailed stems from our efforts to maintain a level playing field. This leads to the second question that I am frequently asked, namely whether the New Accord might be applied less stringently in some countries and thereby create unfair advantages to banks from more lenient jurisdictions.  Indeed, the IIB itself, in its comment letters to the Basel Committee on the New Accord and to U.S. supervisors on the domestic rules being discussed here, has highlighted some concerns about the cross-border implementation of the New Accord and the need to apply a shared set of expectations across jurisdictions to minimise regulatory burden.  The members of the Committee believe that competition in global banking markets should be driven by each bank’s business strengths, rather than by differences in each country’s rules. One way to promote a more consistent application of the New Accord is to provide banks and supervisors with detailed requirements where necessary. These details may add to the length and complexity of the New Accord, but that may be a small price to pay to promote consistency and a more level playing field. The IIB, for its part, has asked the Basel Committee to provide clear standards for the cross-border implementation of the New Accord and, especially, on the roles that home and host supervisors will play in supervising capital under the new framework. The Committee has been working hard to do just that. Last August, for example, the Committee released a paper outlining six principles that re-emphasise the traditional responsibilities of home and host supervisors and that explain how those responsibilities will continue under the new framework on the basis of enhanced cooperation. Cooperation among supervisors will be critical for effective supervision under the New Accord. Just this past January, the Committee published another set of principles that would apply more specifically to the cross-border supervision of advanced measurement approaches for operational risk. The ongoing discussions of the Accord Implementation Group, led by the Canadian Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Nick LePan, are likewise intended to help supervisors exchange ideas and reach BIS Review 14/2004 5 
shared views on how best to implement the New Accord to domestic and international banking operations.  V. Where we stand today Let me move now to my fourth point: where we stand today and the work ahead. I have five remarks. First, I think the Committee has done tremendous work over the past few years, and in the last few months we have continued to make significant progress in a number of important areas: we decided to calibrate regulatory capital to unexpected losses only; we have made significant headway in securitisation, credit risk mitigation and operational risk; we have clarified Pillar 2, and we continue to make progress in the implementation of the Accord. Of course, the work is not yet complete, and we continue to evaluate questions and comments. However, we are well on track to resolving outstanding issues by the middle of this year, in line with the time schedule and work plan we set ourselves in October 2003, and to ensuring that the text will provide a solid basis for national implementation processes and the industry’s preparations to continue. All this is compatible with the implementation date of end-2006 that was previously agreed. Second. It is clear that the responsibility for implementing the New Accord is a domestic responsibility. As with the 1988 Accord, the members of the Committee know that the process for revising the New Accord will not be complete, and our work on the New Accord will not be done, until meaningful national processes are finalised and each member country is satisfied. We have been sensitive to national rule-making processes, and we will continue to be sensitive.  Furthermore, and this is my third remark, the Committee has agreed that, prior to implementation, a further review of the calibration of the New Accord will be conducted on the basis of additional information, which may come from new national impact studies or field tests and the monitoring of bank’s parallel calculations. The Committee welcomes these efforts and looks forward to considering those results. Fourth. At the same time, the banking industry needs some certainty about the new rules, so that they can continue to improve their risk management systems in time for the implementation of the New Accord. Uncertainty about the particulars of the new rules will otherwise become a form of regulatory burden, as banks may become less willing or less committed to make investments in systems and processes if they lack confidence in whether certain rules will be implemented. Providing a greater sense of the rules will help to reduce that burden. Finally, in this context, I would like to stress that the Basel 2 approach is intended to be evolutionary. In other words, it should continue to evolve in order to reflect continuing developments in industry practices. We do not intend to wait another ten years before reviewing the New Accord. In fact, we already have some items on our agenda which we will begin to consider immediately once we have completed the mid-year text, with the intention of finding a prudentially sound solution as promptly as possible prior to implementation of the New Accord. So, we might think of the New Accord as “Basel 2.0”, to be followed by a further release - “Basel 2.1” - and so on.  This evolutionary approach is not inconsistent with the need for certainty. On the contrary, it requires a stable framework which ensures that the accord is not a moving target for the industry, as well as enough structured flexibility to be able to adapt to relevant changes in best practices. VI. Conclusion In concluding, I would like to note that the Committee and its working groups are addressing the remaining issues with the same level of commitment, energy, and enthusiasm that they brought to the table when we began to review the first Accord in the late 1990s. The openness of the process and the hard work behind us has strengthened the quality of our proposals. We expect the work ahead to be equally fruitful. The industry seems to agree, as you have not hesitated to continue to share your views and thoughts with us on the New Accord. Adopting an Accord that will serve contemporary banking will require a substantial commitment from all of us. What banks and supervisors learn about the factors driving operational, credit, and market risk, and how we can better measure and reduce our exposure to losses, means much more to all of us than simply a more favourable capital requirement. We are advancing our comprehension of the many risks banks face and are sharpening our ability to navigate them successfully. For all of us, that 6 BIS Review 14/2004 
BIS Review 14/2004 7 offers the reward of a more stable banking system less susceptible to systemic risks and better able to circulate credit to businesses and consumers alike through good times and bad.  
Alan Greenspan: Intellectual property rights Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Economic Summit, Stanford, California, 27 February 2004. *      *      * Market economies require a rule of law. A society without state protection of individual rights, especially the right to own property, would not build private long-term assets, a key ingredient of a growing modern economy. Since its early stirrings in eighteenth-century Britain, modern economic development has been characterized by an ebb and flow in the intensity of state involvement in shaping the economic environment. According to the legends of the early American West, the only law west of the Pecos River was administered by Judge Bean. I am not sure how much law that was, but I do know that much protection of property in sparsely settled western communities just after the Civil War had to be privately provided. Understandably, trade was limited in such an environment. Economic growth was greatly facilitated by the emergence of civil government, which provided, among other things, consistent and predictable enforcement of property rights. More recently, the states of the former Soviet Union suffered for a time many of the alleged characteristics of the American Wild West-legal chaos, rampant criminality, and widespread corruption. This difficult period of transition in the Soviet satellite countries followed four decades of central planning in which the arbitrary enforcement of an inefficient set of rules resulted in massive economic failure. With few exceptions, the new leaders of these countries recognize that their future economic success will depend on an efficient and predictable rule of law. * * * A tension has always existed between a desired continuity in the laws and regulations governing trade and business practices and the necessary updating that is required to keep pace with a growing and, hence, changing economy. Uncertainties that stem from the arbitrary enforcement of the body of prevailing rules result in higher risk and an associated elevation of the cost of capital, which in turn inhibits economic growth. Implementing an effective rule of law, however, has its own difficulties. One key component, a law of contracts, governs the resolution of certain disputes between parties. Yet if adjudication were requested for more than a very small fraction of contracts, our court system would be swamped into immobility and the performance of our economy would suffer. Thus, if our market system is to function smoothly, the vast majority of trades must rest on mutual trust and only indirectly on the law. A more general concern is that laws can never be fixed in perpetuity. As societies and economies evolve, the details of the law, though generally not its fundamental principles, need to change. But any uncertainty about the clarity and fixity of the law adds to the risk of trade, which as I noted, is reflected in a higher real cost of capital. We in the United States endeavored to lessen legal uncertainty by embedding our most fundamental principles in a constitution, which we made difficult to amend. The commercially and economically salient specifics are typically expressed in federal or state statutes. In general, this arrangement seems to have provided us with a healthy balance of continuity and predictability and, yet, also the requisite flexibility to respond to evolving economic and societal circumstances. * * * Reflecting that flexibility, the direction and the emphasis of legislative revision over the generations have mirrored the changing structure of our economy. In recent decades, for example, the fraction of the total output of our economy that is essentially conceptual rather than physical has been rising. This trend has, of necessity, shifted the emphasis in asset valuation from physical property to intellectual property and to the legal rights inherent in intellectual property. Though the shift may appear glacial, its impact on legal and economic risk is beginning to be felt. Over the past half-century, the increase in the value of raw materials has accounted for only a fraction of the overall growth of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). The rest of that growth reflects the BIS Review 14/2004 1 
embodiment of ideas in products and services that consumers value. This shift of emphasis from physical materials to ideas as the core of value creation appears to have accelerated in recent decades. Technological advance is continually altering the shape and nature of our economic processes and, in particular, is promoting the trend toward increasing conceptualization of U.S. GDP. The size of our radios, for example, has been dramatically reduced by the substitution of transistors for vacuum tubes. Thin fiber optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire. New architectural, engineering, and materials technologies have enabled the construction of buildings enclosing the same space with far less physical material than was required, say, 50 or 100 years ago. More recently, mobile phones have markedly downsized as they have improved. The movement over the decades toward production of services requiring little physical input has also been a major contributor to the marked rise in the ratio of constant dollars of GDP to ton of input. This dramatic shift toward product downsizing during the past half-century stems from several causes. The challenge of accumulating physical goods and moving them in an ever more crowded geographical environment has clearly resulted in cost pressures to economize on size and space. Similarly, the prospect of increasing costs of discovering, developing, and processing ever-larger quantities of physical resources has shifted producers toward downsized alternatives. This shift appears effectively to have answered the dire concerns that were expressed, in a report from the Club of Rome three decades ago, about the prospects of running out of the physical resources that allegedly were necessary to support our standards of living. Another cause of product downsizing is that, as we moved the technological frontier forward and pressed for information processing to speed up, the laws of physics required the relevant microchips to become ever more compact. More generally, in the realm of physical production, where scarce resources are critical inputs, each additional unit of output is usually more costly to produce than the previous one; that is, production, at least eventually, is characterized by increasing marginal cost. By contrast, in the realm of conceptual output, much of production is characterized by constant, and perhaps even zero, marginal cost. For example, though the set-up cost of creating an on-line encyclopedia may be enormous, the cost of reproduction and distribution may be near zero if the means of distribution is the Internet. The emergence of an electronic platform for the transmission of ideas at negligible marginal cost may, therefore, be an important factor explaining the recent increased conceptualization of the GDP. The demand for conceptual products is clearly impeded to a much smaller degree by rising marginal cost than is the demand for physical products. But regardless of its causes, conceptualization is irreversibly increasing the emphasis on the protection of intellectual, relative to physical, property rights. Before World War I, markets in this country were essentially uninhibited by government regulations, but they were supported by rights to property, which in those years largely meant physical property. Intellectual property - patents, copyrights, and trademarks - represented a far less important component of the economy, which was mainly agricultural. One of the most significant inventions of the nineteenth century was the cotton gin. Perhaps it was a harbinger of things to come that the intellectual-property content of the cotton gin was never effectively protected from copiers. Only in recent decades, as the economic product of the United States has become so predominantly conceptual, have issues related to the protection of intellectual property rights come to be seen as significant sources of legal and business uncertainty. In part, this uncertainty derives from the fact that intellectual property is importantly different from physical property. Because they have a material existence, physical assets are more capable of being defended by police, the militia, or private mercenaries. By contrast, intellectual property can be stolen by an act as simple as broadcasting an idea without the permission of the originator. Moreover, one individual's use of an idea does not make that idea unavailable to others for their own simultaneous use. Even more importantly, new ideas - the building blocks of intellectual property - almost invariably build on old ideas in ways that are difficult or impossible to trace. From an economic perspective, this provides a rationale for making calculus, developed initially by Leibnitz and Newton, freely available, despite the fact that those insights have immeasurably increased wealth over the generations. Should we have protected their claim in the same way that we do for owners of land? Or should the law make their insights more freely available to those who would build on them, with the aim of maximizing the wealth of the society as a whole? Are all property rights inalienable, or must they conform to a reality that conditions them? These questions bedevil economists and jurists, for they touch on some fundamental principles governing the organization of a modern economy and, hence, its society. Whether we protect 2 BIS Review 14/2004 
BIS Review 14/2004 3 intellectual property as an inalienable right or as a privilege vouchsafed by the sovereign, such protection inevitably entails making some choices that have crucial implications for the balance we strike between the interests of those who innovate and those who would benefit from innovation. In the case of physical property, we take it for granted that the ownership right should have the potential of persisting as long as the physical object itself. In the case of an idea, however, we have chosen to strike a different balance in recognition of the chaos that could follow from having to trace back all the thoughts implicit in one's current undertaking and pay a royalty to the originator of each one. So rather than adopting that principled but obviously unworkable approach, we have chosen instead to follow the lead of British common law and place time limits on intellectual property rights. It is, thus, no surprise that, as a result of the increasing conceptualization of our GDP over the decades, the protection of intellectual property has become an important element in the ongoing deliberations of both economists and jurists. Of particular current relevance to our economy overall is the application of property right protection to information technology. A noticeable component of the surge in the trend growth of the economy in recent years arguably reflects the benefits that we have derived from the synergy of laser and fiber optic technologies in the 1960s and 1970s. This synergy has produced very little that is tangible in information technology. Yet the information flow that it facilitates has fostered the creation of vast amounts of wealth. The dramatic gains in information technology have markedly improved the ability of businesses to identify and address incipient economic imbalances before they inflict significant damage. These gains reflect new advances in both the physical and the conceptual realms. It is imperative to find the appropriate intellectual property regime for each. * * * If our objective is to maximize economic growth, are we striking the right balance in our protection of intellectual property rights? Are the protections sufficiently broad to encourage innovation but not so broad as to shut down follow-on innovation? Are such protections so vague that they produce uncertainties that raise risk premiums and the cost of capital? How appropriate is our current system - developed for a world in which physical assets predominated - for an economy in which value increasingly is embodied in ideas rather than tangible capital? The importance of such questions is perhaps most readily appreciated here in Silicon Valley. Rationalizing the differences between intellectual property rights as defined and enforced in the United States and those of our trading partners has emerged as a seminal issue in our trade negotiations. If the form of protection afforded to intellectual property rights affects economic growth, it must do so by increasing the underlying pace of output per labor hour, our measure of productivity growth. Ideas are at the center of productivity growth. Multifactor productivity by definition attempts to capture product innovations and insights in the way that capital and labor are organized to produce output. Ideas are also embodied directly in the capital that we employ. In essence, the growth of productivity attributable to factors other than indigenous natural resources and labor skill, is largely a measure of the contribution of ideas to economic growth and to our standards of living. Understanding the interplay of ideas and economic growth should be an area of active economic analysis, which for so many generations has focused mainly on physical things. This work will not be easy. Even as straightforward an issue as isolating the effect of the length of patents on overall economic growth, a prominent issue recently before our Supreme Court, poses obvious formidable challenges. Still, we must begin the important work of developing a framework capable of analyzing the growth of an economy increasingly dominated by conceptual products. 
Susan Schmidt Bies: The economic outlook and the state of household and business finances Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the New York Forecasters Club, New York, 26 February 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure to be with you today. As a relative newcomer to the forecasting profession, I must say that speaking to such an esteemed group of professional prognosticators is a bit intimidating. But newcomers often bring new perspectives, and I hope my remarks will prove informative. I intend to talk briefly about my assessment of the economic outlook and then turn to a more detailed discussion of how the evolution of household and business balance sheets in recent years is affecting economic activity.1 The Economic outlook As you know, real gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 6 percent in the second half of 2003, and the economic fundamentals seem to be in place for another sizable advance this year. Indeed, the GDP forecasts of Federal Open Market Committee members have a central tendency range of 4-1/2 to 5 percent. Yet despite the recent strong pace of economic activity, the labor market has improved only slowly. I am cautiously optimistic, however, that job growth will pick up - perhaps substantially - over the course of this year. My business contacts tell me that companies have indeed become more optimistic about economic prospects and that their plans include some increase in the size of their payrolls. The FOMC expects the unemployment rate to fall to between 5-1/4 and 5-1/2 percent by the end of this year. Although economic growth revived in the second half of 2003, core consumer price inflation continued to slow. Surveys suggest that inflation expectations remain stable, and extraordinary gains in labor productivity have continued to keep price pressures in check. Moreover, I expect these recent favorable price trends to continue, and I am very comfortable with the FOMC’s prediction of a 1 percent to 1-1/4 percent rise in the PCE price index this year - a shade less than the increase in 2003. Briefly putting on my hat as a monetary policy maker, I will say that the prospect of a strongly growing economy, falling unemployment, and low inflation seems to be close to a central banker’s ideal. Under these conditions, we can be patient before we must, inevitably, confront the need to diminish the substantial degree of monetary accommodation now in place. Given this broad-brush summary of the outlook, let me now take a closer look at the financial positions of U.S. households and businesses. As I will discuss, the favorable financial conditions in both sectors should support a solid increase in household and business expenditures. Household financial conditions Some commentators have expressed concern about the rapid growth in household debt in recent years. They fear that households have become overextended and will need to rein in their spending to keep their debt burdens under control. My view, however, is considerably more sanguine. Although there are pockets of financial stress among households, the sector as a whole appears to be in good shape. Certainly, households have taken on quite a bit of debt over the past several years. According to the latest available data, total household debt grew at an annual rate of 10 percent between the end of 1999 and the third quarter of 2003; in comparison, after-tax household income increased at a rate of                                                       1 The opinions that I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or Federal Open Market Committee. BIS Review 13/2004 1 
6 percent. The rapid growth in household debt largely reflects a surge in mortgage borrowing, which has been fueled by historically low mortgage interest rates and strong growth in house prices. Despite the heavy borrowing, households have kept the repayment burden of their debt in check. Notably, many homeowners have taken advantage of low interest rates to refinance their mortgages, some having done so several times over the past couple of years. Survey data suggest that homeowners took out cash in more than one-third of these “refis,” often to pay down loans with higher interest rates. The resulting drop in the average interest rate on household debt, combined with the lengthening maturity of this debt, has tempered the repayment obligation from the growing stock of debt. The Federal Reserve publishes two series that quantify this repayment obligation. The first series, the debt service ratio, measures the required payments on mortgage and consumer debt as a share of after-tax personal income. The second series, the financial obligations ratio, is a broader version of the debt service ratio that includes required household payments on rent, auto leases, homeowners’ insurance, and property taxes. Both ratios rose during the 1990s, and both reached a peak in late 2001. Since then, however, they have receded slightly on net from their respective peaks, an indication that households, in the aggregate, have been keeping an eye on repayment burdens. Because the debt service ratio and the financial obligations ratio are calculated from aggregate data, they do not necessarily indicate whether the typical household is experiencing financial stress. Nonetheless, we have found that changes in either ratio help predict future changes in consumer loan delinquencies. Accordingly, the fact that these ratios have come off their recent peaks is a hopeful sign about household loan performance. Indeed, delinquency rates for a wide range of household loans turned down over the second half of 2003. Another often-cited indicator of household financial conditions is the personal bankruptcy rate. Movements in the bankruptcy rate, to be sure, partly reflect changes in the incidence of financial stress, but the rate has been trending up for more than two decades for a variety of other reasons. The Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 made bankruptcy a more attractive option for most households by increasing the amount of wealth that households could retain after bankruptcy. Other factors that have likely contributed to the upward trend are the decrease in the social stigma of filing for bankruptcy and the growing access to credit in the United States. As lenders have become more sophisticated in their ability to assess the riskiness of borrowers, they have extended loans to households that were previously denied credit. These households are more likely to default on their obligations than the typical borrower, but this increased risk is priced into loan terms. Although the bankruptcy rate remains elevated, it has edged down on balance in recent months, likely because of the pickup in economic growth in the United States since mid-2003. This relatively upbeat assessment of household credit quality seems to be shared by lenders and by investors in securities backed by consumer debt. According to the Federal Reserve’s survey of senior loan officers, banks have not materially changed their lending policies for consumer loans over the past couple of years. This behavior certainly does not point to much concern about household loan performance. Moreover, one gets an even more positive message from the credit spreads on securities backed by auto loans and credit card receivables. In recent months, the spreads between the yields on these securities and swap rates of comparable maturities have narrowed across the credit spectrum. Thus far, I have focused on the liability side of the household balance sheet, but there have been favorable developments on the asset side as well. Equity prices rallied strongly last year and have continued to rise this year, reversing a good chunk of the losses sustained over the previous three years. In addition, home prices appreciated sharply during each year from 1997 to 2002. Although the increases in home prices have slowed somewhat lately, the cumulative rise since the late 1990s has exceeded the growth in per capita income by a wide margin. All told, the ratio of household net worth to disposable income - a useful summary of the sector’s financial position - recovered last year to stand at a level slightly above its long-term average. Before I turn to the business sector, let me address two concerns that have been voiced about the prospects for households. The first of these regards the low level of the personal saving rate. During the past several years, the personal saving rate has been in the neighborhood of 2 percent, well below its earlier post-World War II average of nearly 8 percent. Such low personal savings rates raise concerns that households may not be saving enough to meet longer-run needs, such as for retirement or college education of their children. 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
What might be behind this paucity of personal saving? As recently as the early 1990s, the saving rate was near its long-run average. One reason that the saving rate fell during the 1990s was the rising stock market. Higher equity prices led consumers to feel wealthier, which boosted spending relative to income and thus reduced the saving rate. In addition, the greater household wealth brought about by higher equity prices meant that any saving goals a family might have - such as for education or retirement - were closer to being fulfilled. Hence, households would need to save less to achieve those goals. By this logic, we might have expected to see some increase in the saving rate in the aftermath of the sharp declines in equity prices in 2000, 2001, and 2002. It is true, as I noted earlier, that rising house prices cushioned these losses. But, on net, household wealth took a hit during these years without any commensurate rise in the saving rate. A key factor that has likely boosted spending - and thus held down saving - has been the low level of interest rates. The low interest rates have worked directly by stimulating spending in interest-sensitive sectors such as consumer durable goods. In addition, they have facilitated the restructuring of the household sector’s balance sheet, with a positive indirect effect on expenditures. In particular, over the past few years, homeowners have extracted a large amount of home equity through cash-out refinancing and home sales, which helped to support consumption despite the decline in equity prices. As I noted earlier, I do not think that the household sector is overextended, and thus I do not believe that a large, autonomous increase in the personal saving rate is a serious risk to the economy. However, I would not be surprised to see the personal saving rate move up gradually over time to levels more consistent with its historical average. This rise presumably would be consistent with the expected shift in the pattern of growth in our economy - from an expansion that has been led mainly by the household sector to one led more by business spending. The second concern often expressed is that a bubble may have developed in house prices after several years of rapid increases. Some of the measured price rise results from improvements in the quality of houses: Houses are bigger and have more amenities than in the past, two characteristics that will lead to rising average house prices over time. But even after controlling for quality, increases in home prices have been outstripping general price inflation by a considerable margin in recent years. Once again, the low interest rates are probably an important factor. Houses, like other assets, generate an expected stream of future benefits. With low interest rates, these future benefits are discounted less heavily, which raises the asset’s price today. Low interest rates also push up house prices by boosting the demand for housing. Of course, some of that increased demand is being met by the rapid pace of construction of new housing. But building houses takes time, and in the interim, higher demand will push up the price of existing houses. Although we can identify the key forces behind the rise in house prices in recent years, we cannot be sure that the increases are fully justified by the prevailing fundamentals. Still, we need to keep the recent increases in house prices in perspective: Although house prices have been outstripping broad measures of inflation - even after adjusting for quality improvements - their rise is nothing like the increase in equity prices in the late 1990s. In fact, the speculative forces that can sometimes drive equity prices to extremes are less likely to emerge in housing prices. First, buying and selling houses is a lot more expensive and cumbersome than buying and selling equities, which makes taking a speculative position in houses much more difficult. Second, housing markets are much more local than equity markets, which are national, if not global, in scope. So if any speculative frenzy emerged, it would be much less likely to spread in the housing markets than in equity markets. Finally, financial institutions have a much more disciplined process around the housing and construction lending market than they did in past housing cycles. Lenders today are cautious about lending for speculative purposes, and appraised values undergo more scrutiny than in the past. The expansion of credit to higher risk households may also have driven banks to strengthen their underwriting procedures. That said, it is certainly possible for local housing markets to become overvalued and then to experience sharp price declines. House prices fell significantly in several parts of the country in the early 1990s. But because the transactions costs are much higher in the housing market than in the equity market, and because the underlying demand for living space is much more predictable than are the prospects for any given firm, the large rises and declines often observed in the stock market are less likely to occur in the market for houses. In addition, lenders are much more responsive to local BIS Review 13/2004 3 
economic conditions, and generally become more cautious in loan underwriting when unsold homes or local unemployment increase. Financial conditions of businesses The change in the economy that caught my attention in the second half of 2003 was that the decline in business fixed investment had finally ceased. Capital spending by businesses posted a solid increase in the second half of last year, and orders for nondefense capital goods - a key indicator of equipment spending - point to further sizable gains. Moreover, the tenor of anecdotes from the corporate sector has become comparatively upbeat, with corporate managers seeing stronger revenue growth and a much improved and accommodative financing environment. Four important factors have contributed to this improvement in financial conditions: low interest rates, a widespread restructuring of corporate liabilities during the past few years, a sharp rebound in corporate profitability from its trough in 2001, and a substantial narrowing in market risk premiums. In addition, the burden of underfunded pension plans, perhaps the most prominent negative financial factor that remains, has eased of late. I will discuss each factor in turn. First, firms are continuing to benefit from the accommodative stance of monetary policy. With the federal funds rate at 1 percent, short-term borrowing costs remain very low. For longer-term debt, the combination of low yields on benchmark Treasury securities and reduced risk spreads has kept borrowing costs attractive. Indeed, the yield on Moody’s Baa corporate bond index is at its lowest sustained level since 1968. Second, in response to low long-term rates and to nervous investors who were burned by some high-profile, unanticipated meltdowns, firms have greatly strengthened their balance sheets. Many firms have refinanced high-cost debt, which has reduced the average interest rate on the debt of nonfinancial corporations more than 1 percentage point since the end of 2000. The average cost of servicing debt would have fallen even further if not for a second major trend - the extension of debt maturities. Businesses replaced a substantial portion of their short-maturity debt with long-maturity debt, both to lock in low rates and to improve their ability to withstand a liquidity shock (since long-term debt does not need to be continually rolled over). In addition, many firms - especially in the most troubled industries - have retired debt through equity offerings and asset sales, which limited the growth of nonfinancial corporate debt in 2002 and 2003 to the slowest pace since the early 1990s. Third, firms have significantly tightened their belts. Over the past two years, the drive to cut costs has generated rapid productivity gains. This greater efficiency boosted corporate profitability in 2002 and 2003 despite rather tepid revenue growth. Moreover, a pickup in revenue growth in the second half of last year helped companies leverage those productivity gains, producing a dramatic recovery in overall corporate profitability. Over the course of 2003, operating earnings at S&P 500 corporations surged almost 25 percent, bringing profit margins to their highest levels in several years. Fourth, risk premiums fell substantially last year as corporate governance scandals receded and investor sentiment turned markedly more positive. The recovery in stock prices reflects this brighter view. In addition, spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed appreciably - especially for the riskiest firms - and they now stand at the lowest levels in several years. This decline in spreads has been helped along by the beneficial effect of the balance sheet improvements that I mentioned a moment ago. Indicators of corporate financial stress such as bond rating downgrades and default rates have returned to levels normally associated with economic expansion. Delinquency rates on business loans at commercial banks have also declined, and our surveys indicate that, on balance, banks have recently eased the terms and standards on such loans. In another sign of improved sentiment, money has been flowing into riskier securities. For example, equity mutual funds have registered strong net inflows for nearly a year, as have high-yield bond funds. The more favorable tone in the bond market has been associated with a notable pickup in junk-bond deals amid a surge of corporate bond issues. Over the past two quarters, the market for initial public equity offerings has also come back to life; investors appear to be increasingly receptive to new issues, though (fortunately) they still appear to be more selective than during the boom in the late 1990s. These four points all suggest that financial conditions are capable of supporting a sustained, healthy pickup in economic growth. The much improved profitability can help finance expansion directly out of internal funds or indirectly by supporting firms’ borrowing capacity. Furthermore, firms will be able to 4 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 5 draw on their liquid assets that have accumulated over the past couple of years. And given the successful efforts to pare costs, firms are set to benefit from new investment in plant and equipment. Perhaps the biggest hurdle still facing many corporations is the burden of underfunding in their defined-benefit (DB) pension plans, but even here we have seen some improvement from the situation a year ago. At that time, the value of pension assets had been significantly eroded by stock market losses, and sharply declining interest rates had raised the present value of plan liabilities. Just among the firms in the S&P 500, the combined effect was to subtract nearly half a trillion dollars from the net asset value of DB pension plans during 2000, 2001, and 2002. As a result, 90 percent of S&P 500 plans were underfunded at the end of 2002, with a net shortfall that exceeded more than $200 billion. Most companies with DB plans thus needed to make additional contributions to their pension plans, in some cases quite substantial contributions. For many, this situation was a sea change from the multiyear contribution holiday they experienced during the 1990s. Indeed, in 2002, S&P 500 firms contributed $46 billion to their pension plans - three times more than in either of the previous two years - and total contributions are estimated to have been even higher in 2003. But this drain on cash resources is likely to decline, or at least not worsen, over the next few years. DB pension assets have benefited from robust returns in equity markets since early last year, and pension liabilities are estimated to have risen only modestly in 2003. Automakers, in particular, have already bitten the bullet; together with the solid returns earned on plan assets last year, their cash contributions have apparently helped to wipe out much of their funding deficit. So what is the longer-term prognosis for firms with DB pensions? Assuming current discount rates and normal pension asset returns, S&P 500 firms would eventually need to make about $150 billion in contributions to close the remaining funding gap. And once the current funding hole is filled, these firms would still need to make contributions to cover their rising liabilities. Indeed, DB plans are increasingly concentrated in mature industries with aging workforces, for which the growth rate of liabilities is relatively high and rising. This longer-term challenge will remain even if the current favorable market conditions are sustained. Conclusion In summary, recent indicators suggest that the pace of economic activity remains solid, while inflationary pressures continue to be subdued. In addition, the household and business sectors are, by and large, in good financial shape. Although uncertainties remain, I believe the fundamentals are in place to generate sustainable economic growth. 
Ben S Bernanke: Euro at five - ready for a global role? Remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Institute for International Economics Conference, Washington, DC, 26 February 2004. The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. *      *      * “What is the appropriate domain of a currency area? It might seem at first that the question is purely academic since it hardly appears within the realm of political feasibility that national currencies would ever be abandoned in favor of any other arrangement.” Robert A. Mundell (1961, p. 657) It is an honor for me to address such a distinguished group on the occasion of the euro’s fifth anniversary. I congratulate the Institute of International Economics for putting together such an excellent program. The successful introduction, five years ago, of an entirely new currency over a wide range of polities and economies was, at a minimum, a remarkable technical achievement. As a card-carrying member of the club of monetary economists, I like to think that our collective expertise was helpful in making that achievement possible. As both a policymaker and an economist, I welcome this opportunity to look back on the first five years of the euro to see what we can learn from the experience and to consider what this grand experiment implies for the future. I should say at the outset that, as usual, my remarks this evening reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1 The economic analysis of optimal currency areas began, of course, with Robert Mundell’s seminal 1961 paper, from which I have quoted above.2 As you know, Mundell argued that, ideally, economic similarity, not political boundaries, should define the geographic area spanned by a common currency. He was the first to state the classic tradeoff implied by the decision to adopt a common currency. According to Mundell, the principal advantage of a common currency is the reduction in transaction costs implied by the use of a common medium of exchange across a broad area. The disadvantage of a common currency is the loss of the shock-absorber properties of flexible exchange rates and independent monetary policies. Flexible exchange rates and independent monetary policies will be useful shock absorbers to the extent that macroeconomic shocks are imperfectly correlated across regions, wages and prices are sticky, and other macroeconomic adjustment mechanisms - such as factor mobility or fiscal transfers among regions - are weak or absent. Thus, from the Mundellian perspective, the case for a common currency within a broad area is stronger, the greater the actual or potential economic and financial integration within the area; the greater the correlation of macroeconomic shocks among regions within the area; and the more effective the non-monetary shock absorbers, such as factor mobility. Whether the nations that compose the European Monetary Union (EMU) form an optimal currency area in Mundell’s sense has been widely debated by researchers. For example, Barry Eichengreen argued early on (Eichengreen, 1992) that Europe was perhaps not well suited for a common currency on economic grounds (though he found the political motivations more compelling). According to Eichengreen, the factors reducing the desirability of a monetary union in Europe included the historical variability of real exchange rates among European nations, the low degree of labor mobility between countries, and a lower correlation of underlying shocks among European countries than among regions of the United States.3 Other critics of monetary unification, such as Martin Feldstein, have stressed the limited extent of fiscal transfers within the European Union. Differences across countries in the nature and strength of the monetary policy transmission mechanism are another factor that may reduce the attractiveness of a monetary union.4 However, some more recent assessments, which                                                       1 Karen Johnson and members of the Board’s International Finance Division provided helpful assistance and comments. 2 McKinnon (1963) extended Mundell’s analysis. 3 See also Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1992). 4 The volume edited by Angeloni, Kashyap, and Mojon (2003) documents these differences in detail. BIS Review 13/2004 1 
have emphasized factors such as the high propensity of European countries to trade with each other and the increased coherence of national business cycles within Europe, have generally been more favorable (Alesina, Barro, and Tenreyro, 2002; Agresti and Mojon, 2001). Of course, analyses that look only at historical conditions ignore the important possibility that monetary union itself may induce endogenous changes in trade propensities, the pattern of macroeconomic shocks, and other components of the Mundellian analysis, a point that Eichengreen and many other authors have made. Rather than pursuing the question of whether Europe is in fact an optimal currency area in Mundell’s sense, I think it is useful simply to recognize that the European experiment in economic and monetary union has not been motivated primarily by Mundellian factors. (Mundell himself did not expect that such considerations would be sufficient to lead to monetary unions, as the quote with which I began suggests.) Political factors, rather than economic ones, have played the dominant role. The nations of Europe share a remarkable cultural heritage in philosophy, politics, science, religion, and the arts, and advanced thinkers have long recognized that this common heritage might serve as a basis for the formation of a cohesive European political entity. Such an entity presumably could influence world events and provide for a common defense more effectively than could a collection of nation-states. Indeed, political and economic integration within regions of Europe has occurred on a number of occasions - for example, in Germany and Italy. Another important motivation for political integration has been the desire to reduce the risk of intra-European conflict. From Napoleon to Bismarck to the Kaiser to Hitler, Franco-Prussian and then Franco-German conflicts were flash points for continentwide and worldwide wars. European economic and monetary union holds the promise of binding so closely the economic interests of these two powers, as well as those of other European nations, as to make future intra-European conflict unthinkable. Such arguments have been part of the debate over European integration at least since the 1957 Treaty of Rome. Indeed, the hope of policymakers is to create a virtuous circle, in which closer economic integration promotes greater political cooperation, which enhances opportunities for economic integration, and so on.5 The largely political origin of the union has several implications for the economic analysis of the common currency. First, from a purely economic point of view, the creation of the European economic and monetary union is at least partly an exogenous event. Thus, we have something of a natural experiment from which to learn about the effects of such institutional innovations. Second, we should keep in mind that our assessment of the success of the euro, indeed of the entire experiment in European integration, rests not only on economic criteria but also on the success of Europe as a political entity. If we think of the introduction of the euro as representing to some degree a natural experiment in monetary economics, what can we say about the costs and benefits, at least thus far, of this sweeping institutional change? We can look in a number of areas for effects of monetary unification, including the patterns of trade, developments in the financial sector, changes in macroeconomic stability, and the international role of the new currency. Many of these areas have already been examined today in much greater detail than I can do here. Rather than trying to be exhaustive, I will instead assert and briefly defend a hypothesis. The hypothesis is that the most significant effects of monetary unification have been felt, and will continue to be felt, in the development of European financial markets, and that the greatest economic benefits to Europe in the long run will accrue through the improved functioning of these markets. To defend this hypothesis, I need first to consider briefly the effects of monetary unification in some other key areas. Let us begin with trade. The debate about monetary unification was influenced to some extent by a tradition of empirical research that provided some basis for optimism about the effects of a common currency on trade. For example, the extensive literature on so-called border effects concluded that nations trade with each other far less than would be expected based on the extent of trade between regions within a country, opening up the possibility that differing national currencies are among the factors that inhibit trade. In a recent study, Reuven Glick and Andrew Rose (2001) provided some support for the idea that currency unions promote trade. Glick and Rose analyzed a panel data set of 217 countries for the period 1948 through 1997. They found that entering or leaving a currency union had large effects on trade flows; indeed, they estimated that a pair of countries that begins to use a common currency should see a doubling in bilateral trade. However, as Glick and Rose themselves note, many of the countries entering or leaving currency unions during                                                       5 The importance of political factors in the European economic union has also been illustrated by the importance of non-economic considerations in the debates about joining the union in nations such as Sweden and the United Kingdom. 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
their sample period were small and poor, not rich and (in some cases) large like the nations of western Europe. Moreover, their analysis does not rule out either reverse causality (that is, that increasing trade may promote the adoption of a currency union, rather than vice versa) or the possibility that a third, unmeasured factor (such as political relationships) may have influenced both trade and currency policies. In contrast to the findings of Glick and Rose, evidence drawn directly from the recent European experience does not generally support the view that adoption of a common currency has a major effect on the magnitude or direction of trade.6 True, euro-area exports did surge after the adoption of the euro in January 1999. However, cyclical conditions and the early weakness of the new currency no doubt played a critical role in that increase, an inference confirmed by the substantial slowing in European export growth since the beginning of 2001. Also striking is the fact that the share of total euro-area exports destined for other members of the euro-zone did not increase with the introduction of the new currency, as would be likely if the common currency promoted trade. Indeed, at about 50 percent of total exports, the intra-euro-area export share today remains noticeably below the recent peak of about 57 percent reached in the early 1990s. The most decisive evidence on the trade question can be found by looking at microdata. In an important study, John Rogers (2003) of the Board staff analyzed annual data on the prices of 139 items, collected by the Economist Intelligence Unit for twenty-five European and thirteen U.S. cities. For his main results, Rogers divided the items into traded and non-traded categories, though he considered many other ways of slicing the data as well. He then analyzed the cross-city dispersion of prices in each year. Of course, the reduction of barriers to trade, the harmonization of tax policies, and the increased efficiency of cross-national markets should lead to reduced dispersion in the prices of goods, especially actively traded goods, as competition and arbitrage reduce local monopoly power and differences in prices. Rogers found a substantial decline in the dispersion of traded-goods prices across European cities over 1990-2001. Indeed, by the end of the period, the variability of traded goods prices across cities within EMU countries had declined by more than half, and it was not substantially different from the variability found among cities in the United States. This convergence of prices suggests a powerful, ongoing process of increased economic integration and elimination of barriers to trade among the members of the European Monetary Union. Crucially, however, Rogers found that the bulk of this convergence occurred between 1990 and 1994, the period of the “single market” initiative. Only a small part of the convergence in traded goods prices occurred after 1998, the period during which the euro was introduced and national currencies were withdrawn from circulation. Rogers’ evidence therefore suggests that the increased integration of product markets in Europe has been an ongoing process, which may have been assisted by the adoption of the euro but for which a common currency has hardly proved essential. A second question of interest is the degree to which adoption of the euro has affected macroeconomic stability in the euro zone. In Mundell’s taxonomy, adoption of a common currency is a strictly negative factor for stability because it eliminates the shock-absorbing features of flexible exchange rates and independent monetary policies. In fact, however, the effects of the common currency on macroeconomic stability in Europe have been positive as well as negative. Notably, the structure and mandate of the European Central Bank (ECB), as well as the perception of continuity with the policies of the pre-euro Bundesbank, have enhanced the ECB’s credibility and contributed to low and stable inflation in the euro-zone. Although Germany and several other countries in the union enjoyed low inflation before the adoption of the common currency, with some partial exceptions to be discussed in a moment, the ECB has been able to “export” that benefit to other members of the monetary union. The common currency has also eliminated periodic exchange-rate crises, which had plagued European monetary arrangements and generated real and financial disturbances at least since the days of the gold standard. On the other hand, the ECB has faced the challenge of making policy for Europe as a whole despite differing macroeconomic conditions in member countries, a dilemma that Mundell would have predicted. For example, since 1999 a few countries, such as Ireland, have had inflation rates consistently above the euro-zone average. Irish inflation peaked at 7 percent on a twelve-month basis                                                       6 Micco, Stein, and Ordonez (2003), using bilateral trade data from the early years of the monetary union, find modest trade-enhancing effects. BIS Review 13/2004 3 
in November 2000 and has since been in the 4 to 5 percent range. At the same time, other countries, such as Germany, have experienced low - perhaps uncomfortably low - rates of inflation.7 Patrick Honohan and Philip Lane (2003) investigated the sources of relatively high inflation in Ireland after the adoption of the euro. These authors found that the loss of exchange-rate flexibility and monetary autonomy played important roles in the Irish inflation. For example, a relatively large share of Ireland’s trade is with non-European partners, so that the early weakness of the euro stimulated Irish exports and economic activity disproportionately. Ireland was also unable to resort to monetary restraint to cool down an economy that, for a variety of reasons, was experiencing faster demand growth than most of the rest of Europe.8 Ireland’s relatively high inflation rate may in turn have had destabilizing effects, because, in combination with low pan-European nominal interest rates, it implied that the Irish economy faced a negative real rate of interest. One possible consequence of the low real rate is the boom in Irish property prices, which has fed back into higher domestic spending. Of course, at the other end of the spectrum, Germany has experienced weak growth and very low inflation in the past few years (Sinn, 2003). Without the ability to use stabilizing monetary policy, Germany has eased fiscal policy and thus has come into conflict with its obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact. In short, with respect to macroeconomic stability, the common currency appears to have had both positive and negative effects. More time will be needed before we can assess whether the common currency will ultimately be a stabilizing or a destabilizing influence at the macroeconomic level. Yet a third area in which potential benefits of the euro have often been cited is in respect to the common currency’s potential international role. The phrase “international role of the euro” covers a number of disparate possible functions of the currency. These functions include the use of euro-denominated assets as official reserves, the use of the euro as a vehicle currency in foreign-exchange transactions, the denomination in euros of financing instruments issued by borrowers not resident in the euro zone, the acceptance of euro-denominated or euro-linked assets in international investment portfolios, and the invoicing in euros of internationally traded goods and services. Of course, during the post-World War II period the U.S. dollar has been the dominant international currency with respect to each of these functions. It seems plausible that the euro, a low-inflation currency used by an economy comparable to that of the United States in size and sophistication, will, over time, increase its “market share” in each of these areas. However, the euro’s potential international role, and, more importantly, the benefits to euro-zone countries of an increased role for the euro differ significantly by function. A summary evaluation of the euro’s international position is that the common currency’s role has been increasing but that so far the euro has posed less of a challenge to the U.S. dollar as an international medium of exchange than some analysts expected. For example, in foreign exchange markets the U.S. dollar accounts for nearly 50 percent of transaction “sides,” compared with about 25 percent for the euro, implying that the overwhelming majority of foreign-exchange transactions involve the dollar (European Central Bank, 2003, p. 26; data are from Continuous Linked Settlement). Hence, the dollar appears to remain the international “vehicle currency,” serving as a temporary abode of value for foreign-exchange transactions involving third currencies, whereas the euro’s role in foreign-exchange markets is similar to that played in earlier times by the deutschemark (Solans, 2003). The dollar also remains the dominant invoicing currency for internationally traded raw materials, such as oil. The dollar is even dominant in U.S.-European trade, with more than 90 percent of U.S. exports to Europe and something more than 80 percent of European exports to the United States being invoiced in dollars as of September 2003 (European Central Bank, 2003, p. 33). With regard to the currency composition of official reserves, dollar-denominated assets accounted for 64.5 percent of world reserves at the end of 2002, down from 67.5 percent at the end of 2000. During the same period, the euro’s share of international reserves rose from 15.9 percent to 18.7 percent (European Central Bank, 2003, p. 45). Although economists and financial market participants will observe the developing role of the euro in international transactions with interest, the direct benefits to euro-zone economies of having the euro play an international medium-of-exchange role are relatively modest. Arguably, the more significant                                                       7 Some cross-country differences in inflation might simply reflect convergence in price levels, resulting from the Balassa-Samuelson effect or from initial conversion factors from national currencies to the euro not precisely consistent with the law of one price for tradables. Rogers (2003) finds some evidence for the latter effect but not the former. 8 Of course, fiscal policy remained available, though most economists agree that fiscal policy is less effective than monetary policy as a short-run stabilization tool. 4 BIS Review 13/2004 
aspects of the euro’s international role arise from the strengthening and expansion of euro-denominated financial markets as these markets take on a greater international character. Internationalization of European financial markets increases investment opportunities, opportunities for diversification, and sources of funding and improves liquidity and market efficiency. On that note, let me turn finally to the effect of the common currency on European financial markets. As I have already suggested, the most important benefit of the currency union has been and will likely continue to be its strengthening of European financial markets. Traditionally, the efficiency and scope of these markets has been hampered by the costs and risks associated with the use of multiple currencies as well as by the fragmentation arising from international differences in legal structure, accounting rules, and other institutions. Given the rapidity and frequency of trade in financial markets, even small transaction costs can hamper the efficiency and liquidity of those markets. The common currency, with ongoing efforts to harmonize financial regulations and institutions, has significantly reduced those transaction costs. Together with lower country-specific macro risks arising from the adoption of the common currency, this reduction in transaction costs has greatly improved the breadth and efficiency of European financial markets. Importantly, the benefit of more efficient financial markets goes well beyond the benefits to financial investors and the financial industry itself. A growing academic literature suggests that financial development is a critical precursor to broader economic development (King and Levine, 1993). In this vein, a study for the European Commission estimated that financial development that brought the European financial system close to U.S. norms might add almost a percentage point to the growth of value added in manufacturing in the European Union (Giannetti et al., 2002). Whether one accepts this optimistic assessment or not, there are evidently significant potential benefits to financial deepening that go beyond the financial sector itself. How has the common currency improved financial efficiency? Perhaps the most dramatic effects of the monetary union in the financial sphere have been in fixed-income markets, both government and private. Government debt markets, because of their size, safety, and benchmark status, are central to a vibrant fixed-income market, and they have been particularly strengthened by the adoption of the euro. Notably, since the run-up to monetary union began, sovereign debt yields have converged to a remarkable extent. For example, between 1990 and 1996, spreads on Italian and Spanish government bonds, relative to German bonds of comparable maturity, averaged about 430 and 350 basis points, respectively. Today the spreads paid by these governments are quite small, in the vicinity of 15 basis points over the German equivalent for Italy and essentially zero for Spain.9 Clearly, these governments have benefited substantially by the reduction in inflation risk and exchange rate risk provided by the common currency.10 The addition of some sovereign default risk (now relevant because individual countries are no longer able to inflate away their debts) has evidently not offset these benefits, perhaps because of the effects of the Stability and Growth Pact. Beyond improving the fundamentals of government finances, the common currency has also increased the depth and breadth of government bond markets. In particular, the development of a large market in euro-denominated government debt and the resulting expansion in cross-border holdings of debt has improved market liquidity and opportunities for risk sharing. For example, in their excellent survey of developments in European financial markets since the introduction of the euro, Gabriele Galati and Kostas Tsatsaronis (2003, p. 174) note that nonresident holdings of French government bonds rose from about 15 percent at the end of 1997 to about 35 percent by 2002. Moreover, as of 2002, foreigners held three-quarters of Belgian government long-term bonds and 63 percent of Irish government debt. A broader investor clientele implies more potential bidders in primary markets and more transactions in secondary markets, improving liquidity. This broadening is the sense in which an international role for the euro, by which here I mean more internationalized European financial markets, seems to promise the greatest potential benefits. The European government bond market has been substantially strengthened by the adoption of the common currency, but it has not attained the liquidity of the U.S. Treasury market (and may never do so). Although aggregate issuance of euro-zone government debt is of the same order of magnitude as                                                       9 So-called “convergence plays” proved very profitable for financial investors who bet on the success of the European Monetary Union and its implication that government debt spreads would largely disappear. 10 It is interesting, however, that even nonmembers such as Sweden and the United Kingdom have seen their bond yields converge to the German benchmark since about 1997 or 1998. BIS Review 13/2004 5 
U.S. Treasury issues, there remains the fundamental difference that euro-zone debt is the debt of twelve sovereign entities, rather than one as in the United States. Naturally, the Stability and Growth Pact notwithstanding, the European Union accepts no collective responsibility for the debts of individual governments. Moreover, so far coordination of issuance schedules, the structure of issues, and other technical details has been limited. However, opportunities for further strengthening of the euro-zone government bond market appear to remain. For example, if the technical details can be worked out, one can imagine the issuance of securities backed by the obligations of multiple European governments. These securities could be made uniform by fixing the country shares of the underlying debt, or by stripping off country-specific default risks through such instruments as credit default swaps. Such securities would provide a benchmark yield curve, among other advantages. The benefits of the euro for government bond markets have carried over to corporate bond markets as well. Issuance of euro-denominated bonds by corporations took off soon after the introduction of the new currency. Although much of the boom no doubt reflected general macroeconomic conditions and other factors, potential access to a much larger base of investors willing to hold bonds in the common currency and resulting improvements in pricing and liquidity also played a role. Underwriting costs have also fallen, the result of both greater competition and the reduced costs of bringing issues to market (Santos and Tsatsaronis, 2003). The rapid development of Europe’s corporate bond market, including a nascent high-yield market, should prove highly beneficial to European economic development. The benefits of the common currency for other types of securities markets have been more mixed thus far, but the potential is there. The European interbank market was strengthened substantially in tandem with the creation of the Eurosystem of central banks. In contrast, markets for securities lending (repo markets) remain somewhat fragmented, and commercial paper markets are underdeveloped. European stock markets, which in any case account for a smaller share of financing activity than in the United States, have not been successfully harmonized thus far, and cross-border equity investments may still involve high transaction costs (McAndrews and Stefanadis, 2002). However, it is widely observed that the perspectives and strategies of European equity analysts have changed, toward a de-emphasis on country-specific factors and greater attention to industry and company factors in the valuation of stocks (Adjaouté and Danthine, 2002). This change indicates that financial market participants see increased financial and economic integration in Europe as an irreversible trend. Efforts to adhere to the Lamfalussy Process, which aims to streamline the harmonization process for financial market legislation and regulation, should hasten the integration of European securities markets. European finance has traditionally been bank-centered. What will happen to banks in the new regime? Banks may lose some loan customers to the growing securities markets, but they will also benefit from increased access to finance, both in the interbank market and in the corporate bond market. Indeed, the banks were large players in the early boom in the issuance of euro-denominated corporate bonds, accounting for more than half the new issues thus far (Galati and Tsatsaronis, 2003, p. 181). On the lending side, banks’ local knowledge and specialized services should allow them to retain an important market share. In a study that illustrated the importance of banks’ knowledge of local conditions, Allen Berger and David Smith (2003) found that European affiliates of multinational corporations strongly prefer working with a bank in the country of their operation, rather than a bank from the country of the multinational’s corporate headquarters. Moreover, having chosen a bank in the country of operations, the affiliates were more likely to select a bank with local or regional operations than a bank with global reach. These results are consistent with the view that bankers’ competitive advantage relative to security markets is their knowledge of local firms, markets, and economic conditions and their ability to establish long-term relationships with local customers. Perhaps the European banking situation will begin to look more like that of the United States, where borrowing through securities issuance and banking co-exist, providing different services and meeting the needs of different clienteles. Moreover, the composition of banks may settle into the pattern of the United States, where very large banks with a global reach and the capacity to engineer highly complex transactions and community banks that specialize in lending to the local area have both found room to flourish. However banking may evolve in Europe, increased financial integration that makes local banking markets more “contestable” will likely improve the efficiency with which local banking services are delivered. My remarks this evening have only scratched the surface of a large topic, but it seems safe to conclude that the common currency has had and will continue to have large benefits for European finance. At a minimum, the single currency eliminates exchange-rate risks that exist when securities are denominated in different currencies. The single unit of account seems also likely to reduce 6 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 7 transaction costs and eliminate a portion of the fixed costs involved in issuing similar securities in multiple currencies. These factors are already serving to moderate home bias in borrowing and lending, leading to larger, more-liquid, and more-diversified financial markets. Clearly, a great deal more work needs to be done, both by the government and by the private sector, to realize the full benefits of the common currency for European finance. Beyond the markets that I have mentioned as needing special attention, like equity markets, further harmonization is also required to coordinate national systems for payments, clearing, and settlement. A larger and more integrated financial system may carry greater systemic risks and raise new challenges for the system of financial oversight and supervision. Further challenges will arise as new countries, including those currently at a relatively low level of financial development, join the European monetary system. Their accession will greatly complicate the harmonization process, but given what we know about the role of finance in economic development, the benefits for both the new members and the current ones could be very large. 
Seung Park: Korea’s experience in the choice of bank supervisory arrangements Speech by Dr Seung Park, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 39th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 12 February 2004. *      *      * 1. Introduction This afternoon, I would like to talk about Korea’s experience in the reform of the financial supervisory system. In April 1998, Korea established an integrated financial supervisory body responsible for banking, securities, and insurance. As you may be well aware, the United Kingdom and Japan launched integrated financial supervisory systems : the U.K. in October 1997 and Japan in June 1998. In some ways, therefore, Korea was going along with a new international trend toward bringing together financial supervision within a single agency. The Republic of China, and Governor Fai-nan Perng will correct me if I am wrong, intends to set up an integrated financial supervisory body this July. And the People’s Republic of China has, meanwhile, stripped the central bank of its bank supervisory function and established a separate bank supervisory agency. In most other SEACEN member countries, I understand that the central bank exercises the function of bank supervision. So I think that my fellow governors may have a deep interest in proposals to establish a separate financial supervisory body. I believe that Korea’s experience, in this regard, may be of some help to you in this area. Let me now express my deep thanks to our gracious host, Governor Jayawardena, for providing me with this opportunity. 2. Establishment of integrated financial supervisory agency The financial supervisory system prior to integration Until the 1998 reorganization, Korea had several supervisory bodies responsible for different types of financial institutions. The Office of Bank Supervision of the Bank of Korea(BOK) supervised commercial banks. It authorized the market entry of new banks, laid down prudential regulations, held on-site examinations, and exercised discipline over them. Two other major supervisory bodies were the Securities Supervisory Board responsible for securities companies and the Insurance Supervisory Board, the insurance company watchdog. Both these supervisory bodies came under the direction of the Ministry of Finance and Economy(MOFE). Debate over the integration of financial supervisory bodies Great changes had, however, been taking place in the financial institutions’ operating environment particularly since the mid 1990s. Following Korea’s admission to the OECD in late 1996, competition in the Korean financial market became fiercer and fiercer as the financial and capital markets were thrown open in line with OECD criteria. Banks, securities companies and insurance companies all sought to expand their turf and the linkages between them grew much closer. As enterprises had more transactions with various types of financial institutions, money flows grew increasingly complex. Meanwhile, the scale of the Korean economy was expanding and its structure becoming more complicated. An important new task emerged : that of rolling back government intervention in the economy in the name of improved efficiency. From early 1997, the Korean government began to press ahead with financial reforms to bring together the various independent supervisory bodies under a single roof. It also sought to strengthen the BOK’s independence in monetary policy. The government’s steps toward the establishment of an BIS Review 13/2004 1 
integrated financial supervisory body naturally ignited a debate on the idea of taking away the central bank’s bank supervisory function. The BOK at that time strongly opposed such government’s plans. Firstly, as lender of last resort, the central bank had to be in a position to monitor the insolvency and liquidity status of banks. This was also necessary for it to secure the stability of the payment and settlement system. Therefore it was essential for the BOK to keep bank supervisory function. Secondly, it stressed that the politically neutral central bank should carry out bank supervision, a process that needs to be shielded from political pressure. It was also more efficient if bank supervision remained entrusted to the BOK, which already possessed the adequate human and physical resources. The government, for its part, advocated that bank supervision had to be separated from the BOK because of conflicts of interest that might arise between monetary policy and supervisory policy. For example, if the central bank eased monetary policy to maintain financial stability, this could damage price stability which was the core goal of the central bank. Furthermore, the government pointed to worries that the central bank might become overly powerful, if it were to retain the right to supervise banks while being granted independence in monetary policy. The plan to establish an integrated supervisory body became bogged down because of the clash of opinions between the BOK and the government. It gained a new lease of life, though, once the situation took a new turn in the aftermath of the outbreak of the currency crisis in late 1997. In view of the urgent need for prompt financial sector restructuring, the IMF recommended the setting-up of an integrated financial supervisory agency to the Korean government. An MOU was consequently drawn up between them concerning its establishment in December 1997. The National Assembly late that month passed the necessary legislation to remove bank supervision function from the BOK and establish an integrated financial supervisory body. This was duly set up in April 1998. The BOK consequently lost its bank supervisory function. Some 650 members who had been working in its bank supervisory field moved over to the new integrated agency. In tandem with the passage of the new legislation for the financial supervisory system, the Bank of Korea Act was revised so as to give the central bank a greater degree of independence in monetary policy. Previously the finance minister had been the chairman of the central bank’s policy-setting body. Under the revised Act, the central bank governor became its chairman. Consequently, the policy setting body, the Monetary Policy Committee, was able to make decisions on monetary policy without prior consultation with the government. Overview of the integrated financial supervisory system Now, I would like to move on to explain the workings of the integrated financial supervisory system in its present form. The Korean financial supervisory agency is made up of the Financial Supervisory Commission(FSC) and the Financial Supervisory Service(FSS). The FSC is a collegiate administrative body under the control of the Prime Minister. It is the supreme decision-making organ in relation to financial supervision and examination. As such, it has the authority to direct the operations of the FSS and exercise surveillance over it. The Commission consists of nine members, and its chairman is appointed by the President for a three-year term. It is served by a secretariat made up of public officials. Under the FSC’s direction, the FSS, a non-governmental organization and special juridical person having no capital, supervises and examines financial institutions. The Chairman of the FSC serves concurrently as the Governor of the FSS. In the meantime, the BOK, the MOFE and the Korea Deposit Insurance Corporation(KDIC) exercise some limited supervisory functions in relation to those businesses falling within their particular areas of competence. For its part, the BOK has the right to request individual banking institutions to submit materials about their business to check their actual management status. It may also require the FSS to examine banking institutions or to have its own staff participate on a joint basis in such examinations. Another 2 BIS Review 13/2004 
connection is that the Deputy Governor of the BOK serves as an ex-officio member of the FSC. Consequently, he takes part in the decision-making process concerning financial supervisory policy. To perform these tasks efficiently, the BOK established a Banking Institutions Department, which currently comprises a staff of 57. The MOFE has the right to present draft bills relating to finance and supervision to the National Assembly. It is, however, required to consult with the FSC before proposing or revising such legislation. The KDIC, meanwhile, has the right to investigate the business status and assets of financial institutions thought to be in danger of failure. Like the BOK, it has the right to request that the FSS undertake the examination of financial institutions or allow its own staff to take part in joint examinations with that body. 3. Evaluation of the current financial supervisory system Six years have passed since the integrated financial supervisory body was established in Korea. During this period, the Korean financial industry has undergone intensive and far-reaching restructuring. The number of banks fell to 19 as of today from 33 in December 1997. The number of bank employees meanwhile declined by about 30 percent. Non-banking financial institutions have experienced an equally dramatic process of restructuring. The integrated supervisory agency has been highly rated for its role in helping to overcome the currency crisis and improving the soundness of financial institutions through the swift and consistent restructuring of the financial industry. It has been able to do so through the concentration of supervisory authority and information. Also, with the gathering of comprehensive information about all kinds of financial activities, the inter-linkage and consistency of supervisory activities have increased. On the other hand, the grey areas in supervision, which existed under the multiple-regulatory structure, have been largely eliminated. However, there is increasing concern that conflicts of interest between the prudential regulations of the supervisory agency and the macro-economic policies of the MOFE might limit the efficient implementation of supervision policies. The threat of the insolvency of a number of credit card companies has recently become a potential source of risk to the financial market stability. There has been suspicion in some quarters that the reason the FSC was unable to nip the looming insolvency problem in the bud was because of its lax supervision of credit card companies under the influence of the MOFE that wanted to boost domestic demand. With regard to this problem, the question of an adjustment of the functions of the MOFE, the FSC and the FSS has recently come under discussion. 4. Response of the Bank of Korea to the new financial supervisory system Now I would like to tell you how the Bank of Korea has come to live with the new financial supervisory system. As you know, a central bank needs a wide range of up-to-the-minute information on the financial markets not only to carry out monetary policy but also to perform its function as the lender of last resort. Though stripped of the banking supervisory function, the BOK has been given the statutory right to request managerial information from banks and to ask the FSS to examine banks with it on a joint basis. It can also ask the FSS to examine banks on specific areas of concern to the central bank. In actual practice, though, the BOK has had considerable difficulty in gathering information. Banks often took a negative attitude toward the BOK’s demand for managerial information. Moreover, the BOK has no right to demand information from non-bank financial institutions. Under these circumstances, the BOK has prevailed upon the FSS to provide it with materials such as the reports filed by financial institutions. This January, the BOK, the FSS, and the KDIC agreed a memorandum of understanding providing for a dramatic increase in information sharing among them. BIS Review 13/2004 3 
This means that the central bank is now able to collect managerial information both from banks and non-bank financial institutions. Another area of concern was the on-site examinations to check banks’ managerial status. In its early days, the FSS was reluctant to accept the BOK’s requests for bank examination, even though it was legally stipulated that the FSS should accept the BOK’s demands for bank examination. In 2002, the FSS went so far as to turn down the BOK’s demand for a joint examination. This clash spurred the two organizations to draw up a memorandum of understanding in October 2002 after a hard negotiation. Under it, the FSS must accept the BOK’s demand for joint examination provided the MPC decides this necessary. The arrangements, nonetheless, suffer from the limitation that the Bank has no option but to stick to the FSS’s examination schedule. It is still impossible for the BOK to hold an on-site examination when it judges this warranted. It was a big issue whether to give the BOK the power of independent examination, even at the time of reforming the financial supervisory system in 1997. On that occasion, the BOK took the position that it should be free to examine banks at its own discretion. The National Assembly, however, accepted the government’s argument that if the BOK examined banks independently of the FSS, the burden on the financial institutions might be too heavy and that joint examinations should be held with the BOK joining in the FSS’s on-site examination. Under the present joint examination system, the FSS examines general matters regarding financial institutions’ managerial soundness. For its part, the BOK examines only limited areas related to monetary policy and the payment and settlement system. The two institutions, meanwhile, pool the information that they gather in the course of on-site examination, and draw on it for their respective operations. There is one more issue concerning financial stability and efficiency, although it is not directly related to banking supervision. That is the need for strengthening the central bank’s oversight of the national payment and settlement system. The case for this is constantly advocated by multilateral financial institutions such as BIS and IMF. In this regard, the BOK was given the authority to oversee the various payment and settlement systems in Korea under the most recent revision of the Bank of Korea Act in September 2003. Under the revised legislation, the BOK may demand relevant materials from both banks and non-bank financial institutions that take part in BOK-Wire, the real time gross settlement system operated by the BOK. It may also request the improvement of payment and settlement systems operated by other entities. All this means that the BOK has come to play many roles in order to secure financial market stability in spite of its limited official powers of financial supervision. 5. Concluding remarks Let me now indicate a few points that central bankers may wish to bear in mind from our experience following the integration of financial supervisory agencies in contemplating the reorganization of their own national financial supervisory framework. Firstly, in the light of other countries’ example and Korea’s experience, I do not think there is any one-size-fits-all supervisory system that is the optimal for every country. In particular, I think there are various alternative options regarding the issue of the central bank’s supervisory function. These will depend on the degree of financial market development and a nation’s traditions related to the division of roles between government and central bank. And I think that it rests with the financial system characteristics of a particular country whether it should go for an integrated financial supervisory body or multiple supervisory agencies for the various types of financial institution. Secondly, it is absolutely essential for central banks to obtain a wide range of information on financial markets and the management status of financial institutions whether or not they are responsible for bank supervision. Where a separate bank supervisory agency exists, a system of co-operation with it must be built up so that necessary information can be collected promptly. It is also desirable for the central bank to have the authority to conduct the on-site examination of financial institutions independently so that it may obtain the necessary information when there is a high degree of market instability. 4 BIS Review 13/2004 
BIS Review 13/2004 5 Thirdly, it is vital to set up a system for policy coordination so that the opinions of the central bank are reflected in the supervisory policies of the financial supervisory agency. Prudential supervision is closely related to monetary policy. If the financial supervisory agency strengthens prudential supervision, this may bring about similar effects to the tightening of monetary policy. Therefore I think it is crucial that the supervisory agency be required to consult with the central bank before the revision of prudential regulations. What is more, the central bank should, where necessary, have the right to ask the supervisory agency to adjust its prudential regulations. Korea’s current supervisory system was introduced in some haste under the extraordinary situation prevailing in the aftermath of the currency crisis six years ago. Therefore, there have been some frictions between the institutions concerned with financial supervision. In the course of time, its shortcomings have been made good to a considerable extent, but to my mind a number of areas still call for improvement. Drawing my remarks to a close, I venture the hope that Korea’s experience may serve as a useful reference for member countries in discussing the reorganization of financial supervisory systems. Thank you very much for listening so attentively. 
Edward M Gramlich: Budget and trade deficits - linked, both worrisome in the long run, but not twins Remarks by Mr Edward M Gramlich, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Euromoney Bond Investors Congress, London, 25 February 2004. *      *      * Thank you for inviting me to speak today. While I know that most of you would welcome any insights I might have about current U.S. monetary policy - whether the Open Market Committee will be raising or lowering interest rates at our next meeting - I prefer to focus instead on some issues that could become serious over the longer run. These issues involve the persistent budget and trade deficits facing the American economy, issues that could eventually involve significant economic adjustments around the world.1 Large budget and trade deficits are not a new phenomenon. They also arose in the United States in the mid-1980s. At that time, the business press and many economists began referring to the situation as one of “twin deficits.” With the current re-emergence of both deficits, the phrase has come back into common usage - too common, in my view. To be sure, in theoretical models there is a scenario by which budget deficits can create trade deficits, and one by which trade deficits can create budget deficits. But there are also many scenarios by which either deficit can arise independently, or even by which budget and trade deficits can move in opposite directions, as they did in the 1990s. In general, while budget and trade deficits can be linked, there are important differences between the two, both in how they respond to economic forces and in their long-run consequences. I start by examining the relationship between budget and trade deficits - why they are linked but not twins. I discuss the sustainability conditions for budget and trade deficits; the conditions that must be fulfilled for the debts on both accounts to be stabilized in relation to the size of the U.S. economy. Then I discuss what happens if either debt violates this condition and rises in relation to the size of the economy. This discussion, in turn, raises further interesting distinctions between the two deficits. The link The link between budget and trade deficits can be seen most naturally through the national income accounting framework. Any saving the nation does finances either private domestic investment directly or the accumulation of claims on foreigners. This means that national saving - the sum of private and government saving - equals private domestic investment plus that period’s accumulation of claims on foreigners, or the trade surplus. The trade surplus can also be thought of as net foreign lending. All of these relationships are accounting identities - true at every moment in time apart from data inconsistencies captured by a statistical discrepancy. In equation form, we have NS = S – BD = I – TD (1) On the left side of the equation NS refers to national saving, S refers to overall private saving, and BD refers to the government budget deficit. This part of the equation says merely that total national saving equals the sum of all saving done in the economy by the private sector and the government sector. A budget surplus would be treated as governmental saving and added to private saving; a budget deficit would be treated as governmental dissaving and subtracted. The right side of the equation repeats the familiar open economy identity that national saving equals private domestic investment, I, plus the accumulation of claims on foreigners or less that domestic investment financed by foreigners. As was noted earlier, borrowing from foreigners involves either a reduction of claims on them or an increase of claims on us by them. It is by definition equal to the                                                       1  As with all such talks, I am speaking for myself and not for other members of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.   BIS Review 12/2004 1 
trade deficit TD. In the equation, then, a trade surplus means that some national saving goes to building up claims on foreigners (national saving is greater than domestic investment) while a trade deficit means that some investment is financed by foreigners (national saving is less than domestic investment). This identity first demonstrates the all-important role of national saving in shaping long-run economic welfare. National saving is the only way a country can have its capital and own it too. Models of the economic growth process identify national saving as one of the key policy variables in influencing a nation’s living standards in the long run. The identity also makes clear that the budget deficit and the trade deficit can move together on a dollar-per-dollar basis, but only if the difference between private domestic investment and private saving is constant. Typically that difference will not be constant. For example, if there were to be an investment boom, interest rates might rise to induce some new private saving and some new lending by foreigners. The implied trade deficit might rise and, because of the rise in income, the budget deficit might fall. In this case, the trade deficit would increase while the budget deficit fell. Conversely, suppose that expansionary fiscal policy resulted in a rise in budget deficits. If this expansion were totally financed by borrowing from foreigners, domestic interest rates would not change much, and domestic investment and private saving might not either. In this scenario, there could be a simultaneous dollar-per-dollar change in budget and trade deficits - the classic twin-deficit scenario. Such a situation is most likely to occur in small economies fully open to international trade and capital flows, economies in which domestic interest rates are determined by world capital markets and are independent of domestic economic variables. But if domestic interest rates do change, as they likely would in either a closed economy or a large open economy, private investment and saving would also likely change, and any strict link between budget and trade deficits would be broken. One could spin any number of scenarios, but these are enough to make the basic point. Because of the underlying relationship between saving and investment, budget and trade deficits could be strictly linked. But in a large open economy like the United States, it is easy to imagine plenty of scenarios in which they are imperfectly linked, and even some scenarios in which they move in opposite directions. Budget and trade deficits should be viewed as linked, but not as twins. Stability conditions Although the economic implications and reactions of budget deficits and trade deficits differ, both are deficits. Another elementary accounting identity says that last period’s debt level plus the current deficit equals the current period’s debt level. This identity is true whether we are talking about budget deficits building up the stock of outstanding government debt (a liability of the government sector to the private sector), or trade deficits building up the stock of external debt (the net stock of accumulated foreign claims against the United States).2 Economists have worried for years about optimal stocks of government and external debt. For government debt, the optimal stock turns out to be related to the optimal level of national saving, which can be defined as the level that maximizes the nation’s long-term path of consumption per worker. The optimal stock of net external debt can be determined in the same framework from an open economy perspective. While these models can be instructive, today I am going to focus on a weaker standard. Whatever the long-term optimal level of government debt, and whatever the optimal level of external debt, one can separately ask whether either debt level is becoming a more, or less, important economic factor over time. For government debt, this weaker standard, or stability condition, determines merely whether the ratio of debt to gross domestic product (GDP) is stable. If it is, interest payments on the debt will, in equilibrium, also settle down to a stable proportion of GDP. For external debt, a stable debt-to-GDP ratio means that the net interest and dividend payments of the United States to foreign investors will also settle down to a constant ratio to GDP. The appendix derives this stability condition generically. It is that d (g – i)/(1 + g) = p, (2)                                                       2  Both debt stocks would also include a valuation adjustment to deal with capital gains and losses.   2 BIS Review 12/2004 
where d is the stable ratio of debt to GDP, g is the nominal growth rate of the economy, i is the nominal interest rate in the economy, and p is the ratio of the primary deficit to GDP. For budget accounts, the primary deficit is the national income accounts budget deficit, but excluding interest payments. For trade accounts, the primary trade deficit is the current account deficit, excluding net interest and dividend payments to foreigners.3 As a general rule, the economy’s growth rate and interest rate will be fairly close. The equation says that if they are equal, the primary deficit must be zero to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio. If the interest rate is slightly above the growth rate, as it would be in models without risk for economies that save less than the theoretical optimum, a nation with outstanding debt would have to run a slight primary surplus to stabilize its debt-to-GDP ratio. If the effective interest rate on debt is slightly below the growth rate, as it has generally been found to be in the past for both deficits, a nation with outstanding debt could run slight primary deficits and not see the debt ratio grow.4 On the foreign side, this condition has until now been especially forgiving. Even with a large net debt position, our net investment income from foreigners has exceeded that paid out to foreigners. Since the net interest rate has been less than the GDP growth rate, the ratio of external debt to GDP could have been stabilized with a moderate primary trade deficit.5 Magnitudes It is well known that the U.S. economy now suffers both budget and trade deficits. But how do these deficits compare with the stability conditions? Historically, there have not been significant instabilities in U.S. federal budget deficits.6 Overall deficits have averaged about 2 percent of GDP over the past four decades, but Figure 1 shows that when interest is deducted, primary budget deficits have averaged close to zero, the approximate level that stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio. Hence, the outstanding debt, while fluctuating in the range of 25 percent to 50 percent of GDP, has actually declined slightly as a share of GDP. It was 38 percent of GDP in the mid-1960s and is now only 37 percent of GDP. The ratio did rise as high as 50 percent in the high-deficit years of the early 1990s, but it dropped sharply thereafter with the primary budget surpluses of the late 1990s. Looking ahead, things might not be so favorable. As a result of recent fiscal changes, the budget has lately fallen into primary deficit again; this primary deficit is now more than 2 percent of GDP (1.5 percent after cyclical adjustment). The deterioration reflects the much-discussed recent rapid growth in expenditures, along with significant tax cuts. Perhaps more significant, in a few years the United States will face huge looming costs for retirement and health programs. It will take extraordinary fiscal discipline just to keep the present primary deficit near its current level of 1 to 2 percent of GDP over the short, medium, and long run. And even at that level, the stability condition is violated by at least 1 percent of GDP, suggesting that the debt-to-GDP ratio is likely to climb steadily upward.7                                                       3  This primary trade deficit differs from the trade deficit component of GDP mentioned earlier because it includes foreign transfers and other small items.   4  Laurence Ball, Douglas W. Elmendorf, and N. Gregory Mankiw, “The Deficit Gamble”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 30, no. 4, (November 1998), pp. 699-720, show that interest rates on domestic government debt have generally been slightly less than the GDP growth rate in past decades.   5  The rate-of-return puzzle is in turn a question about why foreign direct investment in the United States has such a low rate of return. See Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., “An Examination of the Low Rates of Return of Foreign-Owned U.S. Companies”, Survey of Current Business, vol. 80 (March 2000), pp. 55-73.   6  Even though the previous identity referred to the consumption budget for the entire government sector, in this section I switch over to the familiar concept of the total budget for the U.S. federal government. State and local governments more or less finance their current spending and do not have much outstanding debt apart from that backed by capital formation; and federal capital investment is very small.   7  These statements are based on estimates of the Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook, Fiscal Years 2005 to 2014 (January 2004). A further discussion of the long-run budget outlook can be found in Alan J. Auerbach, William G. Gale, Peter R. Orszag, and Samara R. Potter, “Budget Blues: The Fiscal Outlook and Options for Reform,” in Henry J. Aaron, James Lindsay, and Pietro Nivola (eds.), Agenda for the Nation (The Brookings Institution, 2003). See also the General Accounting Office, Truth and Transparency: The Federal Government’s Financial Condition and Fiscal Outlook BIS Review 12/2004 3 
On the trade side, Figure 2 shows that the trend is definitely more worrisome. While the budget debt has fluctuated between 25 percent and 50 percent of GDP over the past several decades, the net external debt has grown steadily. Until 1985, this external debt was not even positive; that is, until that time the United States had net claims on foreigners. But because the United States has run persistent and sizable primary trade deficits since 1990, the net external debt is now 25 percent of GDP and rising sharply. The primary trade deficit is now 5 percent of GDP, violating the stability condition by nearly this same amount. At this rate, the external debt ratio will climb very quickly. While the trade deficit does have equilibrating tendencies, as will be discussed later, there are also forces that tend to increase it. Econometric studies of the basic demand for imports and exports find that the U.S. income elasticity of demand for imports is higher than the foreign income elasticity of demand for U.S. exports. This means that even if the world economy grows at the same rate as the U.S. economy, our trade deficit is likely to widen, (apart from any changes in relative prices).8 Indeed, the U.S. primary trade deficit has widened steadily since 1990. Adjustments I have just argued that the U.S. is now in violation of the stability condition for both budget and trade deficits - recently and moderately on the budget side, persistently and significantly on the trade side. What are the implications? With each deficit there is probably a credibility range. By that, I mean a limited range within which a country may be able to violate its stability condition and have its debt-to-GDP ratio trend upward without further economic consequences. For budgets, there may be a range within which the debt-to-GDP ratio can grow without significant changes in interest rates.9 As equation 1 indicates, economic performance in this range is by no means optimal, because the persistent deficits are subtracting funds that would otherwise be devoted to capital investment and future growth in living standards. But there may not be significant relative price effects. The same is true on the trade side; there could be a range in which foreign claims on the United States just build up without major impact on relative prices. Once the economy gets outside of the credibility range, more significant relative price adjustments become likely. On the trade side, for example, the continued accumulation of foreign claims on the U.S. economy will raise the issue of whether foreign investors will want to hold an ever-increasing share of their wealth in the form of U.S. assets. Or, as is the focus of the stability condition above, whether the U.S. economy can indefinitely pay out ever-higher shares of GDP in the form of interest and dividend payments. The conventional view is that at some point there should be a relative price adjustment - some combination of rising U.S. interest rates (to make U.S. assets more attractive), rising foreign prices (to make imports more expensive), moderating U.S. prices (to make U.S. exports more competitive), or a change in exchange rates. Each of these reactions is likely to occur naturally, and each moves in the direction of lowering the external imbalance. That is why foreign trade deficits are typically thought of as self-correcting. The main risk here is that the natural adjustments may not occur gradually, but so rapidly as to threaten various types of dislocations. There are complicating factors. One involves the currency denomination of the net debt. Countries with large trade deficits often have their external liabilities denominated in a foreign currency. Hence, when their own currency depreciates, the value and burden of foreign debt automatically increases. The United States does not have this problem because most of its debt is denominated in dollars - say, foreign holdings of U.S. Treasury bills. If the dollar were to fall, the value of our debt in terms of foreign currencies would then automatically decline, inducing foreign wealth-holders to make further portfolio shifts, perhaps even including increasing their stock of dollar-denominated debt. This                                                                                                                                                                       (September 17, 2003) and Rudolph G. Penner and C. Eugene Steuerle, Budget Crisis at the Door (The Urban Institute, October 2003). 8  See, for example, Peter Hooper, Karen Johnson, and Jaime Marquez, “Trade Elasticities for G-7 Countries”, Princeton Studies in International Economics, vol. 87, (August 2000).   9  Even this claim may be overoptimistic. See, for example, Thomas Laubach, “New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget Deficits and Debt,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series working paper (April 2003). Among other things, Laubach has an interesting way to remove cyclical effects from his dependent variables, interest rates. 4 BIS Review 12/2004 
denomination effect would not permanently prevent any relative price adjustment, but it could lengthen the process. Beyond that, for pragmatic reasons this conventional adjustment process could be extended or distorted even further. By way of illustration, Asian central banks have now accumulated more than a trillion dollars of international currency reserves - largely in dollar-denominated assets - equal to roughly half of the outstanding net debt of the United States. These central banks are not traditional wealth-holders motivated by expected risks and returns. Instead, they seem motivated more by the prospect of preserving low domestic currency values for their exporters.10 To pursue this objective, they can print money to buy U.S. securities. This monetary expansion could generate domestic inflation unless it is sterilized with other open market sales of securities - and the mere scale of present and expected future debt stocks may make continued sterilization impossible. But if these central banks continue behaving this way, the so-called credibility range could be extended significantly. While trade deficits should ultimately correct themselves, perhaps after a long trek through the credibility range, there are really no natural self-corrective mechanisms for budget deficits. Once the U.S. economy gets through the credibility range, interest rates on the increasing government debt will have to rise to induce people to hold the debt. This rise increases the interest burden and causes total deficits to rise further, all the time subtracting more and more funds from capital accumulation. Once this process begins, market psychology may hasten the adjustment.11 Hence, while natural forces lessen the basic external imbalance, they increase the basic budget imbalance. In the long run, the only way to correct budget deficits is for policymakers to correct them. Outside forces There are several outside forces - both natural and as a result of policy - that could influence budget and trade deficits. One generally helpful influence is productivity growth. Say the U.S. economy benefits from an exogenous positive shock to productivity growth, as it seemed to have in the late 1990s. This shock would raise the trend path of income, meaning that slightly higher primary budget and trade deficits could still be consistent with debt-to-GDP stability; in effect, a higher level of g can be plugged into equation 2 (at least as long as it is not offset by a higher i). Higher productivity could also help lengthen the credibility range, the range in which moderate changes in the debt ratio might not lead to adverse changes in relative prices. Among other things, higher productivity could raise the marginal product of capital and make investment in U.S. assets relatively attractive. But even with these favorable developments, the stability conditions discussed above still hold. If they are violated, the natural adjustment mechanisms will eventually take over for the trade deficit, and the primary budget deficit will eventually have to be reduced to stop a growing government debt ratio. One unhelpful measure is trade protectionism. While it might appear that trade protectionism would correct trade deficits, it probably will not. Over the medium and long run, the economy should be producing near its natural growth path, perhaps because of timely monetary and/or fiscal policy, perhaps because of natural equilibrating forces in the economy. In this event, trade protectionism would not stimulate added national production. Even if protectionist measures reduce imports, the added spending demands for import-competing industries will crowd out other types of production. Put another way, equation 1 shows that the trade deficit is ultimately determined by national saving and investment. Without a change in these, protectionism merely shifts the types of goods that are produced. It does not increase overall production and, short of cutting off trade altogether, does not even change the trade balance. Moreover, as is well known, over the long run, trade protection lowers a nation’s standard of living. Finally, suppose politicians actually do correct budget deficits, again assuming an economy near its medium-term growth path. As mentioned above, such a fiscal austerity policy is the only known way to                                                       10  This view is given in Michael Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, “An Essay on the Revived Bretton Woods System”, NBER Working Paper 9971 (National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2003).   11  An argument that market psychology will hasten the adjustment is given by Robert E. Rubin, Peter R. Orszag, and Allen Sinai in “Sustained Budget Deficits: Large Run US Economic Performance and the Risk of Financial and Fiscal Disarray,” paper presented at the meetings of the American Economic Association (San Diego, California, January 4, 2004). BIS Review 12/2004 5 
correct persistent budget deficits. The reduction in deficits should lower domestic interest rates and trigger changes in exchange rates that lower imports and raise exports. Hence, well-designed fiscal austerity measures could solve all the problems simultaneously. They correct budget deficits directly, they reduce trade deficits indirectly, and the implied higher level of national saving also permits more funds to flow into capital formation and long-term productivity enhancements. Fiscal austerity is the one tried and true approach to dealing with budget and trade deficits simultaneously. Conclusions There are obviously strong links between budget and trade deficits, and the deficit-debt dynamic relationships are very similar. At the same time, it is misleading simply to equate the two deficits, as is often done in the twin-deficit literature. Budget deficits typically involve a reduction in national saving and, if large, a steadily growing government debt-to-GDP ratio. They typically will not be corrected without explicit action. Trade deficits, on the other hand, typically involve an increase in foreign claims on the U.S. economy. As these claims grow in relation to national income, at least some natural forces are set in motion to correct the imbalance. From a policy standpoint, neither deficit may be terribly harmful in the short run, and at least the recent fiscal deficits have been useful in stabilizing movements in output. Moreover, there is likely to be a credibility range in which debt levels could rise relative to GDP without much change in relative prices. In the long run, however, both deficits could become much more worrisome. There are forces tending to increase both deficits: political and demographic for budget deficits, income elasticities for trade deficits. At some point, continued large-scale trade deficits could trigger equilibrating, and possibly dislocating, changes in prices, interest rates, and exchange rates. Continued budget deficits will steadily detract from the growth of the U.S. capital stock and may also trigger dislocating changes.   6 BIS Review 12/2004 
 Appendix: Derivation of the stability condition Let P denote the primary deficit (for either budget or trade), D the debt for either, and i the nation’s nominal riskless interest rate. Then apart from valuation adjustments D = D–1 (1 + i) + P (A1) Divide through by GDP (Y): D/ Y = (D–1 /Y–1 )* (1 + i)/(1 + g) + P/Y. (A2) Use lower case letters to refer to the ratio of a variable to GDP. This ratio is a measure of the proportionate importance of the variable. d = d –1 (1 + i)/(1 + g) + p.  (A3) If there is stability in the debt-to-GDP ratio, d = d –1 = d. Then d (1 – (1 + i)/(1 + g)) = p (A4) and d (g – i)/(1 + g) = p (A5) This is equation 2 in the text. Note that if i = g, p must equal 0. If d is positive and i > g, p must be less than zero, a primary surplus. If d is positive and i < g, p can be greater than zero, a primary deficit. BIS Review 12/2004 7 
Jaime Caruana: Announcement of Basel II Opening remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the press conference announcing the publication of Basel II, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 26 June 2004. *      *      * I would like to thank President Trichet for his kind words, which I will certainly share with my colleagues. On behalf of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, I am honoured to join him in announcing the publication of the revised framework for bank capital adequacy, a document that we have officially entitled, the “International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: a Revised Framework.”  I will not go into details about the document in my opening remarks, although of course I will be delighted to answer questions afterwards. What I would like to say is that the new framework represents a significant step towards achieving a more comprehensive and risk sensitive supervisory approach. It also represents an unparalleled opportunity for banks to improve their capital strategies and risk management systems. And finally, it provides supervisors with an opportunity to improve their ability to identify banking risks and to enhance the dialogue with the industry and among banking supervisors. This new approach can be expected to play a significant role in reinforcing the soundness of individual banks and thereby enhancing financial stability. Our objective is also to ensure a consistent application across jurisdictions. As you know, many individuals inside our member agencies devoted substantial efforts to the Basel II process. We are indebted particularly to the leadership of Bill McDonough, our prior chairman and the former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who championed this new approach to capital supervision. We appreciate as well the leadership and excellent work of Danièle Nouy, the former Secretary General of the Committee’s highly professional Secretariat, and that of her successor, Ryozo Himino. Given that the capital framework serves as a cornerstone to the safe and sound operation of the banking system, we sought to conduct our discussions in a highly transparent process. We engaged in extensive discussions with many interested parties on the domestic and international levels, and I would like to thank in particular two groups of external organisations and individuals who supported our efforts. First, I should mention the countless representatives of banking organisations, industry associations, and other private sector bodies who devoted time and energy to sharing their views. They offered hundreds of comment letters, as well as data to test the quality of the rules, and they engaged in exhaustive hours of discussion with the Committee, its working groups and member authorities. Above all, banks and other private sector bodies helped us to ensure that supervision would be more closely aligned to sound industry practices. A second group would be those supervisory agencies, central banks, multilateral financial institutions, and other public authorities around the world who shared with us the perspectives and needs of banking systems that are based in many different markets, economies, and legal systems. Thanks to discussions with these colleagues, such as through joint working groups like the Core Principles Liaison Group and through regional consultations and meetings, the Committee was better able to ensure that the new framework would be relevant to many different kinds of banks and economies that are in various stages of growth and development. The cooperation of so many public authorities worldwide has helped to make Basel II a truly global product. The Committee will continue to seek opportunities to deepen its relationships, and its opportunities for discussion, with other supervisors and central banks in the months and years ahead. Of course, this work would have been impossible without the sponsorship of the Bank for International Settlements. I would like to offer my sincere thanks to Malcolm Knight, the General Manager of the BIS, for his institution’s support of our work on Basel II. The BIS has been a staunch ally and advocate for our work over the entire thirty-year history of the Committee. With regard to Basel II itself, the BIS is fostering a greater understanding of the new framework among central bankers and supervisors BIS Review 38/2004 1 
worldwide through programs organised by its Financial Stability Institute, the “FSI”. The Committee looks forward to continued collaboration with the BIS on matters related to financial stability. Basel II represents a genuine success story in international cooperation. And we know that our need to cooperate and to collaborate does not end when we release this framework. Indeed, under Basel II, supervisors and central bankers will need to work even more closely together in the future, especially in view of the evolutionary nature of Basel II. And the Committee has a full agenda ahead of it. We must, of course, continue to work on the specifics related to the implementation of the framework and its calibration. We must also ensure that the new framework keeps pace with market developments and advances in risk management practices. As we carry out this work, the Committee intends to continue its discussions with the industry and other supervisors in the same open and transparent manner as we have to date. It has been an honour for me to participate in and help to lead this process, and I look forward to the next phase of the Basel II project as we turn toward national adoption and implementation. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 38/2004 
Mark W Olson: Economic outlook  Remarks by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the annual meeting of the Charlotte Regional Partnership, Charlotte, North Carolina, 15 June 2004. *      *      * I am very pleased to have the opportunity to share with you my thoughts about what is required to maintain an economic environment that businesses like yours will find conducive to investment and job creation. I should note that these views are my own; I do not speak for my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.  Over the second half of last year, the U.S. economy gathered strength, and its performance so far this year suggests that it has made the transition to a sustained, broad-based expansion. Household spending and new homebuilding have continued to move up, and businesses now appear to have shed a good deal of the uncertainty and caution that for some time weighed on their decisions to upgrade their capital and to hire workers. Real business spending on new equipment and software in the first quarter of this year was 12-1/2 percent above its level a year earlier, and more-recent data indicate that manufacturers are continuing to book new orders for capital goods at a solid pace. The upturn in hiring has been particularly encouraging; between January and May, private nonfarm establishments added almost 1.2 million jobs. We have not seen a string of monthly increases like that in more than four years.  To be sure, monetary and fiscal policies played key roles in the strengthening in aggregate demand over the past year. Accommodative monetary policy raised the prices of household assets and lowered the costs of financing new homes and durable goods while reductions in personal taxes boosted disposable income. Businesses, too, benefited from the more-accommodative financial environment. Low interest rates have not only reduced short-term borrowing costs but they have combined with more narrow risk spreads to keep longer-term corporate borrowing costs attractive. The extended period of low interest rates has allowed firms to refinance high-cost debt and to substitute long-term debt for short-maturity debt to improve their balance sheet liquidity. On the fiscal front, firms have been able to take advantage of the temporary partial-expensing tax provision. At the same time, the impressive efforts that businesses have been making to control costs and to increase productivity have paid off in a strong rebound in profitability and cash flow. The combination of balance sheet restructuring and strong profitability has allowed corporate America to achieve the highest level of liquidity in more than a decade.  As I noted a moment ago, I find the recent recovery in hiring to be a particularly welcome indication that businesses have become confident about the durability of the expansion. Last year, as economic activity began to pick up, the recovery remained even more “jobless” than the recovery of the early 1990s. A good deal of monetary and fiscal stimulus was in place, which we expected over time to show through to a pickup in real economic activity. But firms were unusually reluctant to make commitments to take on new workers in an atmosphere clouded by risks and uncertainties associated with the war in Iraq and with the fallout from lapses in corporate governance. My sense, from both my informal contacts in the business and banking communities and the available surveys of business attitudes, is that confidence has recovered noticeably this year.  Other explanations for the sluggish recovery in employment during 2002 and 2003 focused on developments that may have more lasting effects on the labor market. First, the recovery seemed to be marked to an unusual degree by an ability of businesses to achieve labor-saving efficiency gains. Recall that we began to detect an improvement in productivity in the second half of the 1990s. The rate of increase in output per hour in the nonfarm business sector moved up from just 1-1/2 percent per year between 1973 and 1995 to 2-1/2 percent per year between 1996 and 2000. That acceleration appears to have been largely the result of brisk business investment. Since then, even with the slump in capital spending from 2001 to early 2003, productivity has risen at a stunning annual rate of 4 percent. One of the striking features of the recent acceleration is that the gains in efficiency seem to be the result of organizational changes and innovations in the use of existing resources -perhaps in part the result of learning better how to apply the new technologies that they acquired at a rapid pace in the late 1990s.  BIS Review 37/2004 1 
During the early part of the expansion, when aggregate demand remained weak, the especially rapid gains in efficiency allowed businesses to meet their sales and production goals without having to add workers. But as the pace of the expansion has stepped up over the past several quarters, we have begun to see both sustained advances in output per hour and gains in jobs. I suspect that productivity will eventually slow from the extraordinary pace of the past couple of years - indeed, the recent figures offer some evidence that some slowing has already occurred. Nonetheless, I am optimistic that part of the step-up in productivity growth will be sustained and that it will be reinforced by the renewed upturn in capital spending. Continued solid gains in productivity will be an important plus for our economy over the longer run because faster increases in productivity lead over time to higher profits, wages, and standards of living.  The jobless recovery also led economists to debate the extent to which the lack of hiring overall and the continued decline in manufacturing jobs specifically represented structural changes, that is, changes that were not likely to be reversed as the recovery strengthened. Specifically, a great deal of attention focused on the loss of international competitiveness, foreign outsourcing, and the relocation of jobs to overseas subsidiaries. Although these changes are, indeed, a natural consequence of globalization, we have considerable evidence that they are only a small part of the larger story. The ongoing turnover in jobs in our dynamic economy is considerable. The estimates that our staff assembled for a speech earlier this year at Duke University by my Federal Reserve Board colleague Ben Bernanke indicated that, over the past decade, gross private-sector job losses in the U.S. economy have likely amounted to 15 million per year, not including seasonal and short-term layoffs.1 Estimates of jobs lost to imports account for only slightly more than 2 percent of the total. More important, of course, is that the job creation side of the churning process has been even larger - roughly 17 million jobs per year. Given the total number of private-sector jobs of 108 million, an average year of job gains and losses represents about 30 percent of the total.  Certainly, the Charlotte region is very familiar with this dynamic process of job creation and destruction. In 1990, the Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill metropolitan area was relatively dependent on the fortunes of its manufacturing sector. The area had almost 150,000 manufacturing jobs, which represented almost one-fourth of the area’s employment; by contrast, jobs in professional and business services accounted for just 10 percent of the area’s employment, or roughly 60,000 jobs. Ten years later, the picture was dramatically different: Largely because of cutbacks at textile mills, the Charlotte metropolitan area had lost almost 20,000 factory jobs. But, at the same time, employment in professional and business services had more than doubled to roughly equal the number of manufacturing jobs that existed here in 2000. Employment in education, health, and leisure had also expanded rapidly. Certainly, the broader distribution of employment in recent years has helped the area weather the recession generally and, more specifically, the continued loss of textile jobs to import competition.  You have also witnessed first-hand that globalization works two ways. As you know from your experience in attracting foreign-owned companies to this region, U.S. workers also benefit from a good deal of “insourcing.” Nationwide, the employment of U.S. workers by affiliates of foreign firms was more than 5.5 million during the 2000-2002 period - up 1.7 million from ten years earlier. Although globalization clearly has resulted in very real hardships for workers in certain industries, it remains more generally an essential component of economic growth by encouraging innovation and promoting efficiency and higher standards of living. Placing restrictions on international trade would, over the long run, be counterproductive; consumers would likely end up paying higher prices for consumer goods, and businesses might lose the opportunities to be more productive that arise in an environment of open trade. The appropriate policy approaches are those that promote maximum job creation while easing the transition for workers caught up in the painful but inevitable shifts in the mix of job opportunities.  An important feature of the ongoing structural change in our economy is the increasing demand for skilled workers, which has arisen both from shifts in the industrial composition of jobs and from the upgrading of skills required within specific industries. Ensuring that the supply of workers with the necessary skills matches the demand is a critical element in adjusting effectively to ongoing structural change. As recently as 1980, many young persons depended on a high school education to launch a career; only half of all high school graduates enrolled in college. Today, the expectations of our high                                                       1  Governor Ben S. Bernanke, “Trade and Jobs”,Distinguished Speaker Series, Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, Durham, N.C., March 30, 2004. 2 BIS Review 37/2004 
school students have changed dramatically as the rising demand for skilled workers has resulted in a sharp increase in the premium paid in the labor market for a college education. In recent years, roughly 60 percent of high school graduates have enrolled in college. And surveys of high school sophomores indicate that many of them believe that simply earning a bachelor’s degree is not enough. In addition to the 40 percent of tenth graders in 2002 who expected that they would complete a bachelor’s degree as their highest degree, another 40 percent expected to finish a graduate or professional degree.2 This appetite for education is good news because the knowledge and skill of a country’s workforce is an important factor in economic growth.  Because the demand for skills and the churning of jobs is a never-ending process, workers have also come to realize that their education is not complete once they have a formal degree. In 2002-2003, 40 percent of adults participated in work-related training to retool, upgrade, or acquire skills.3 Many benefited from programs conducted on-site by their employers, but courses at colleges and technical schools were also an important source of training. I am sure that you all realize that your area’s universities, colleges, community colleges, and technical schools are a valuable asset in developing and maintaining a flexible and ever more productive workforce. I urge you also to engage in a civic dialogue with educators at all levels - including those at the elementary and secondary levels - about the importance not only of developing skills but also of adopting the view that education is a life-long process with important economic payoffs.  As I indicated earlier, monetary policy has played an important role in providing support for the economy in recent years. But our work is not done. Now that the expansion seems to have taken hold, we face the challenge of making the transition to a policy stance more appropriate for sustained economic expansion. Our goal is to do so in way that maximizes economic growth while sustaining the significant progress that we have made in achieving price stability. I only have to compare my experience as a banker in the 1970s and early 1980s with the environment today to see the value of price stability. In that earlier period, my colleagues and I doubted that we would ever see single-digit mortgage rates again. And, many of us despaired as we listened to borrowers who were convinced that it was wise to “buy now” before prices inevitably rose further. Certainly, today’s environment of low inflation and stable inflation expectations allows for much more rational business decisions concerning capital investment than we experienced in that earlier period.  Although inflation has picked up so far this year, it remains moderate. In this morning’s report, the core CPI was up 1.7 percent from a year earlier; in December, the year-over-year change was 1.1 percent. Keeping inflation low and stable will contribute importantly to sustaining financial conditions conducive for further gains in business investment.  Over the short run, low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations are critical to maintaining economic stability and, over the long run, price stability promotes growth and efficiency. As Chairman Greenspan indicated last week, economic developments will determine the level and term structure of interest rates. Of course, we cannot predict exactly how economic events will unfold over the coming year. But, at this point, I still concur with the Federal Open Market Committee’s characterization that monetary policy accommodation will become increasingly less necessary over time and can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.                                                        2  National Center for Education Statistics, The Condition of Education 2004, “Student Attitudes and Aspirations: Postsecondary Expectations of 10th-Graders,” U.S. Department of Education, June 2004. 3  National Center for Education Statistics, The Condition of Education 2004, “Adult Learning: Adult Participation in Work-Related Learning,” U.S. Department of Education, June 2004. BIS Review 37/2004 3 
Jaime Caruana: 60 years after Bretton Woods - a central banker’s view Opening remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Conference “Dollars, Debt and Deficits - 60 years after Bretton Woods”, Bank of Spain, Madrid, 10 June 2004. *      *      * Mr Managing Director of the IMF, Mr Second Vice-President of the Government and Minister of Economy and Finance, ladies and gentlemen: It is a pleasure for me to welcome you all to the Banco de España and to the inauguration of this conference, which is jointly organised by the International Monetary Fund and the Banco de España in commemoration of the 60th Anniversary of the Bretton Woods Agreements. For our country, which previously hosted the annual meetings of the Fund and the World Bank on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of these agreements, in autumn 1994, it is a source of satisfaction that this meeting should be held ten years later in Spain. I am also particularly pleased to welcome our distinguished audience - both from Spain and abroad - of representatives from official institutions, from academia and the private sector, who are going to participate in the busy sessions scheduled over the next two days. The Banco de España and the International Monetary Fund are tied by long-standing and deep-rooted links. Not only have we worked hand-in-hand for many years on various matters; we also share a similar mission and vocation, as well as similar concerns in many respects. The world has changed in the past 60 years, and the transformations both institutions have undergone bear witness to this. We have moved from a system of fixed but adjustable exchange rate parities to one where floating is the norm. Economic integration has made enormous headway during these years, both multilaterally and through regional agreements, the European Union being perhaps the most advanced. From a world of widespread capital controls and multiple exchange rates, we have moved to a very different one in which enormous cross-border flows take place daily in the form of a wide array of financial instruments, among which derivatives, which were virtually non-existent at the end of the Second World War. Undoubtedly, free capital movements have contributed to a significant improvement in the allocation of global saving to more profitable uses, although they have also entailed a swifter transmission of financial shocks across highly integrated markets, a phenomenon behind some of the recent crises. Economic policies - fiscal, monetary and structural - have been increasingly geared to providing a framework of stability and appropriate incentives for decision-making by agents. In addition to contributing to smoothing cyclical fluctuations, these policies help set in place the right conditions to achieve sustained economic growth based on flexible, competitive and efficient markets where comparative advantages are tailored to the changing circumstances of international markets.  The International Monetary Fund has adapted to these changes, seeking to respond in its capacity as the guardian of international monetary stability to the new problems that have arisen. It has evolved from focusing essentially on monetary stability and on countries’ external transactions and the management of their exchange rates, to areas more related to the overall quality of macroeconomic policies and to the design of structural policies and sound institutions. More recently, the Fund has devoted particular attention to financial stability. To a certain extent, central banks have also undergone changes similar to those at the Fund. Developments in macroeconomic theory and the experience built up over the years have forged an increasingly broad consensus on the need to apply stability-oriented macroeconomic policies and, in particular, to conduct an independent monetary policy with the primary objective of achieving and maintaining price stability, which is vital for sustained economic growth. Central banks have also focused increasingly on financial stability issues, both in countries where the central bank is the supervisor of the banking system and in those where such functions are entrusted to a different supervisory agency. In the case of the Banco de España, these transformations have also been induced by far-reaching changes in our environment and in the role of the central bank, including most notably the adoption of the euro as the single currency for an ample group of European Union countries. BIS Review 37/2004 1 
Spain’s relationship - and that of the Banco de España - to the International Monetary Fund is certainly today very different from what it was in 1958, when our country joined the Bretton Woods institutions. In the early years of its participation in the Fund, Spain received financial and, most importantly, technical assistance from this institution, as part of the process of external openness and liberalisation that allowed its economic take-off in that period. The Fund’s excellent technical guidance in this process supported those economic sectors in favor of liberalization, who nevertheless met notable resistance in pushing through their programme of reforms. I believe that Spain, since then, has a considerable debt of gratitude with the International Monetary Fund. Currently, the framework for our relationship to the Fund is very different. As part of the euro area, monetary policy discussions take place in a broader context spanning the whole of the euro area. As a member of the Eurosystem however, the Banco de España remains deeply involved in such discussions. In other realms, relations with the Spanish authorities remain on a bilateral footing, as is notably the case with the close contact each year on the occasion of the analysis of the Spanish economy via the Article IV report. That said, the European dimension is becoming increasingly important. Beyond the single monetary policy, there are various areas of European co-ordination in IMF-related matters although, as is well known, the different European states are represented on an individual basis in the Bretton Woods institutions. Spain, which adhered to the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) as from their creation in 1998, is today an IMF creditor country. And though we continue to benefit from the Fund’s excellent technical advice, we also provide technical assistance, in some cases in collaboration with the Fund, to other countries in the process of implementing systems or procedures in which we have a certain comparative advantage. Moreover, the Spanish authorities and, in particular, the Banco de España, co-operate increasingly closely with the Fund on matters relating to national and international financial stability. As I indicated earlier, this issue is becoming more and more important, and the objectives and the interests of the Fund tend to coincide in this connection with those of the competent national authorities. The reasons why national and international authorities pay greater attention to financial stability can be found in the crises a significant number of countries have undergone in recent years. These have highlighted the complex linkages between the real sector and the financial sector and the risk that the latter may not only be a source of instability, but also amplify the imbalances or shocks generated in other sectors of the economy. The links between exchange rate crises and banking crises - the so-called twin crises - and the feedback mechanisms between the two are, along with the propagation and contagion channels from one country to another, matters of particular importance here. National regulators and supervisors, in addition to their initial aim of safeguarding the solvency of individual institutions, have given increasing importance to combining the presence of flexible, efficient financial markets and intermediaries with the absence of excessive volatility on financial markets and to prevent the so-called systemic risks - which affect the whole of the financial system - from materialising. International financial institutions have also become increasingly oriented towards the need to ensure a proper functioning of international financial markets and to limit the transmission of shocks from one country to another in a world of ever deeper and swifter linkages. The relationship between national and international financial stability is obviously all the more important for countries, such as Spain, whose banking system has a significant presence abroad. The expansion of Spanish banks into Latin America explains why the Banco de España has, in recent years, promoted the monitoring and analysis of financial stability problems in this region in particular, and in the emerging market economies in general, an area in which the role of the International Monetary Fund has become increasingly important. Key lessons may be drawn from the recent crises that have affected emerging economies - though not only them - which should be borne in mind when designing mechanisms to reduce their frequency and cost. They include most notably: the need for a sound and well-designed institutional framework that protects property rights, prevents excessive public - or private-sector debt from accumulating and ensures economic stability; the importance of ensuring consistency between the exchange rate regime and the domestic economic policies and institutional framework; the risks entailed by the vulnerability associated with exchange rate instability processes for the balance sheets of different sectors in the economy, especially when there is a high degree of dollarisation; the marked sensitivity of emerging market economies to potentially very volatile capital flows, the direction of which can change suddenly due, at times, to factors that may even be exogenous to the country experiencing them; the importance of an appropriate regulatory and macro-prudential supervisory system to prevent crises 2 BIS Review 37/2004 
generated in the financial system and to alleviate the ensuing costs if such crises finally occur, and to cushion the effects of shocks stemming from the real sector of the economy; and, finally, the importance of distinguishing, as far as possible, between liquidity and solvency crises in countries’ external debt and in governments’ public debt, as a first step towards applying suitable remedies for resolving each type of crisis. As a result of these crises, and in collaboration with other international agencies and with national authorities, the Fund conducted a far-reaching review of the so-called “international financial architecture”. Numerous initiatives were adopted over recent years with the aim of lessening the frequency and cost of crises and of improving the stability of the international monetary system. Accordingly, there has been a notable effort to increase the transparency of member countries’ economic policies and to improve the information at the disposal of economic agents and, in particular, international financial markets so that the latter may exert market discipline more effectively. Specific measures have been adopted to reinforce financial systems. And it has also been sought to improve the crisis prevention and crisis resolution mechanisms available to the international financial community, including those particularly difficult cases in which sovereign debt restructuring proves inevitable. Moreover, instead of relying on exhaustive international regulations which, as experience has shown, are difficult to approve and even harder to implement, all these reforms have relied on voluntarily mechanisms, based frequently on the adoption of codes of best practices, international standards and systems that offer incentives for their application.  Over the next two days the Conference will address these and other matters of interest to us all, among them the risks associated with the persistent imbalances between the current account positions of the main economic areas; the consequences of adopting different exchange rate regimes in the current environment of free capital flows; the problems that arise from excessive public debt levels both in the emerging and industrialised countries; and the role of the Fund in the face of the challenges of economic and financial globalisation. All these issues have interested authorities, the private sector and the academic community for many years, although the way to deal with them has evolved in step with changes in the international economy. In what is an exceedingly dynamic environment, then, it is crucial to identify the root of the problems and possible solutions for them, which is precisely the chief aim of conferences such as this. We have an intense and fascinating agenda for discussion. It highlights, once more, the need for national authorities, international financial institutions and the academic community to work together in areas of common interest, taking advantage of their experience and comparative advantages and with the degree of technical excellence these matters require. I trust that these sessions will shed light on how to improve the functioning of the global economy and, in particular, the international monetary system. Thank you. BIS Review 37/2004 3 
Timothy F Geithner: The Bretton Woods institutions in the 21st century Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Bretton Woods Committee, New York, 10 June 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure to join you for this meeting of the Bretton Woods Committee. This is a great and accomplished organization. Although the international financial institutions are one of the most important legacies of the great statesmen of the last century, the task of supporting them is not always easy. The Committee has been effective in this role, not just by helping to explain the accomplishments of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to an occasionally skeptical public, but also by helping to shape the debate on how these institutions need to change.  The Fund, from its inception, was burdened by a mismatch between the aspirations of its architects and the authority and instruments they gave the institution to pursue those ambitions. Its authority over the policies of its members was limited. Its resources were small, and the facilities established to deploy those resources were modest relative to the problems they were designed to address.  At its creation, the architects of the Fund hoped to build a system that would deliver exchange rate stability globally, in a world much less integrated than it is today, without giving the Fund the capacity to induce, much less compel, its members to pursue the economic policies that might have made that objective more realistic. They gave the IMF a financial mission that had some of the characteristics of a lender of last resort to sovereigns, but without mechanisms to constrain risk-taking behavior. By necessity, they left the Fund in the position where it was ultimately dependent on the strength of the governments of its members, and on their willingness to act to address their economic challenges. To their credit, the founders gave the institution a basic charter that permitted evolution. And as the needs of the world have changed, the institution has been able to change as well. It has been much more responsive to change, and much more agile in responding to a rapidly changing mix of challenges than other multilateral organizations. But the constraints that were established at the outset still exist today. I am going to focus, in my remarks today, on the Fund’s role in promoting financial resilience and mitigating crises in emerging market countries. But first, let me mention briefly several of the other areas where the Fund has a very important role to play in the international economy and financial system. The Fund can provide a useful voice and a forum for advising the major economies to pursue policies that can contribute better to global economic expansion and financial stability. The Fund can play an important role in considering, from a global or systemic perspective, the exchange rate policies of its members. And the Fund plays a vital role in providing the macroeconomic policy framework that is the critical to sustaining better growth outcomes and the effectiveness of the global development assistance effort for the poorest, low-income countries.  I think the Fund is reasonably close to the frontier, the sensible or achievable frontier, in these areas. Some may wish it were more effective in persuading the G-3 to avoid policies that create the risk of abrupt changes in financial market conditions or exchange rates, but it will never be decisive in this arena. And it might do more to further improve the design of macroeconomic policies and institutions in the poorest developing countries. But outside those areas, the challenges to sustained growth in per capita income lie largely in areas beyond the core competence of the IMF. In the emerging market context, in contrast, there is greater distance between the Fund of today and the achievable frontier. This is a timely and critical issue, because of the magnitude of the challenges that still confront many emerging market economies.  Let me start with a broad review of the progress made over the past decade across emerging markets in reducing their vulnerability to financial crisis.  • International reserves have increased substantially, providing a larger cushion against adversity. Among the largest borrowers, half now hold reserves greater than 150 percent of maturing short- and long-term debt; less than one-sixth had such coverage heading into 1997.  • There have been improvements in fiscal performance, with some notable cases of governments achieving and sustaining large primary surpluses.  BIS Review 37/2004 1 
• External balances have improved, with current accounts in most of the emerging world in surplus or modest deficit. Only 2 of the 20 largest borrowers now are running deficits in excess of 3 percent.  • Exchange rate regimes are more resilient and less fragile, as a substantial majority of the largest borrowing countries have moved to flexible regimes, and away from the fixed-but-adjustable pegs that proved so dangerous in the crises of the last decade.  • Important progress has been made in building credibility for new monetary policy regimes, and inflation is generally moderate.  • Governments have made major investments in recapitalizing and restructuring their troubled financial systems. For example, in Asia, where some of the most severe problems were encountered, governments have spent over $500 billion carving out problem loans and bolstering capital.  • Growth rates have improved with the restoration of domestic stability and recovery in external demand. Indeed, aggregate growth currently is running at its highest rate since the onset of the crisis in 1997.  • With these improvements, and generally accommodative external financial conditions, borrowing costs have fallen, capital market access was restored for many countries, and credit growth resumed. Net credit growth to sovereigns has remained moderate, however, as much of the borrowing has gone to refinancing the existing stock of debt on more favorable terms.  • The market for emerging market debt also has matured. There has been more differentiation in the response of spreads, both on the way down as credit fundamentals seemed to improve, and during the recent correction.  This progress is indicative of a general increase in the sophistication and skill of economic policy makers in the emerging world, and in the quality of understanding of the benefits of macroeconomic stability and how to achieve it. Many countries benefited from the advice and financial support from the IMF and the multilateral development banks. But the most successful were those with policy makers who were ahead of the Fund and the Bank in diagnosing and addressing their problems, rather than being dragged reluctantly toward a more credible policy stance.  These improvements have left the emerging markets as a group less vulnerable to financial crisis than they were in the mid-1990s. The combination of deeper reserve cushions, stronger external positions, improved balance sheets, more flexible exchange rate regimes, and better inflation performance provide a very different setting from what existed the last time we faced a transition after a sustained period of benign financial conditions and low interest rates.  These aggregate improvements mask substantial differences across countries and a number of areas of lingering vulnerability. Let me highlight some, and then suggest some implications for how the Fund might better position itself to deal with the challenges they present. • Some of the most daunting challenges are in the fiscal and public debt area, where a number of emerging market economies across different regions face very high, and in some cases still growing public sector debt levels. Average public debt burdens in the emerging world have risen to about 70 percent of GDP, and among countries rated single B and below, the mean rises above 80 percent.  • The challenge of managing debt burdens of this size is magnified by the fact that the debt structures in a number of countries are still quite vulnerable to foreign currency, liquidity, and interest rate risk. The substantial share of public debt denominated in foreign currency - 70 percent on average for the lowest rated group of borrowers - and the relatively short maturity of the debt stock mean that a relatively modest shock can produce a substantial increase in debt burdens, raising the amount of fiscal effort needed to keep the debt stock on a stable or declining path, and increasing the economy’s vulnerability to a crisis.  • In some countries, the fiscal trajectory is too weak to place the debt-to-GDP ratio on a sustainable path. In others, the fiscal position is strong enough to stabilize the debt dynamics, but provides little buffer against adverse shocks, and very little room for fiscal policy to help cushion the effects of such a shock.  2 BIS Review 37/2004 
• Important challenges remain in the financial area as well. In many countries, large public sector debt burdens have left banking systems highly exposed to the sovereign, constraining authorities’ room for maneuver. There are also problems in banks’ corporate and consumer loan books, and a number of banking systems also have a large share of foreign currency denominated liabilities, in some cases held by non-residents.  • The durability of recent improvements in external positions, which reflect weak domestic demand in many countries, is also open to question. As domestic demand strengthens, external balances could move into deficit again, which in some cases will reintroduce a greater external risk.  • And in many cases, the financial exposure of the IMF and the multilateral development banks is already high.  These balance sheet challenges took a long time to develop, and they will take a long time to reverse. They are the legacy of years of past fiscal decisions, magnified by the impact of crises on growth, the exchange rate, and the financial sector. They leave an exacting set of policy challenges. They raise the risk that future shocks to domestic confidence or adverse changes in the external environment could lead to new pressures on exchange rates, on interest rates, and on the capacity of countries to fund themselves on sustainable terms. Apart from the risk of crisis, these debt levels are large enough to depress domestic investment and long-term growth prospects. In part because of these balance sheet and debt burdens, many emerging market economies face a protracted transition before they can expect to be comfortably considered stable investment grade credits, with sufficient levels of self-insurance against external and domestic challenges to financial stability. One of the most pressing challenges for the Fund is to help assist in this process of reducing vulnerability, by promoting an unwinding of these large balance sheet risks and, at the same time, providing a credible form of contingent insurance for those hopefully rare circumstances when its members face extraordinary financing needs. The Fund would be better able to contribute to this process if it were to strengthen its policies in a number of specific areas. My suggestions cover four types of reforms: changes to the substantive focus of Fund policy advice; to the relationship between the Fund and its members in the surveillance framework; to the Fund’s approach to countries undertaking a debt restructuring; and to how the Fund uses its financial resources. They involve adopting: a risk based approach for focusing the Fund’s crisis prevention work; a more intensive framework for the surveillance process to provide a stronger anchor for the member’s economic program; a reinforced framework for providing support to countries undertaking a debt restructuring; and a more credible form of financial insurance that creates better incentives for stronger policies in advance of crisis. These proposals do not require amending the Articles of Agreement of the Fund, and can be achieved without major changes in the structure of the institution. They are evolutionary rather than revolutionary.  More policy ambition Studies by IMF staff, the IMF’s Independent Evaluation Office, and others catalogue a number of criticisms of the substantive content of the Fund’s policy advice. Many of these studies conclude that the Fund has had insufficient ambition in its prescriptions for reform and in a number of cases was too deferential to domestic political constraints on adjustment and reform. Some conclude it was too supportive of choices by its members to run exchange rate regimes that were incompatible with the rest of the policy framework, that led to substantial appreciation of the real effective exchange rate over time, that encouraged borrowing in foreign currency, and that proved too brittle under stress. Some suggest the Fund was in some cases insufficiently attentive to or ineffective in addressing the increases in debt, particularly foreign exchange denominated and linked debt, that created the balance sheet problems, which made crises so damaging and difficult to resolve. It accommodated, if not supported, decisions by its members to calibrate policies designed for a more benign external environment than was realistic and therefore encouraged less self-insurance than was necessary to manage safely. And it was drawn too far into a range of efficiency-improving long-term institutional reforms that necessarily diffused attention from critical vulnerabilities. BIS Review 37/2004 3 
To some extent, these criticisms suffer the classic failure of claiming that what seems obvious in hindsight was as clear at the time. Many are unfair in the degree of influence they expect the Fund to be able to exert over a reluctant member - recall the constraints I described at the beginning on the Fund’s powers over its members. And many of the criticisms fail to recognize the difficulty of making definitive judgements about the path of policies consistent with sustainability.  Yet elements of this general diagnosis of the Fund’s policy advice to emerging market economies have substantial merit. If the Fund is going to contribute to a process of well-targeted reform, particularly in the more vulnerable countries, it probably needs to raise the bar, to increase the level of ambition of its policy recommendations. Greater policy focus is required on the principal sources of near-term vulnerability, ideally without fully eclipsing longer-term institution building and structural reforms important to raising growth potential.  A risk-based framework for determining the hierarchy of policy priorities is important. Such a framework would almost certainly entail more focus on unwinding large balance sheet problems (both with respect to the sovereign and the financial system), reducing sovereign debt to more sustainable levels, making debt dynamics less vulnerable to shocks, increasing liquidity buffers, and preserving appropriate exchange rate arrangements. Addressing these issues would help reduce the risk of future capital account crises. It would create better conditions for private sector growth. In virtually every context where public sector debt burdens are high and fiscal deficits large, more ambition in the adjustment path should be positive for growth through the effect on confidence, interest rates, and the exchange rate.  Of course the Fund can’t want reform more than its members. The principal burden for running a set of policies more commensurate with the risks emerging markets face in this world rests with their governments. The role of the Fund should be to help guide and encourage them to the point where they build in a more substantial degree of self-insurance. The Fund should not acquiesce in and validate policy frameworks that fall substantially short of the threshold necessary to safely navigate this world of high variability in the external environment and occasional domestic political pressures to weaken policies.  Changing the surveillance framework  Part of the challenge entails reorienting surveillance, the process through which the Fund’s policy advice is delivered, to make it more effective. The surveillance framework of today has a number of features that make it poorly suited to a small open emerging market economy that has fragile credibility, a limited buffer against shocks, and considerable exposure to a rapidly changing economic and financial environment. The assessments occur quite infrequently, only every 12 to 24 months. The assessments can only be published with the approval of the member state, which tends to take the edge off the diagnoses and prescriptions. Assessments do not come with a clear evaluation relative to thresholds that help define degrees of vulnerability, or relative to other countries in similar circumstances. The assessments are judgments of the Fund’s Executive Board, not formally of the staff, which can also work to take the edge off candid economic and financial judgments. Risks are not clearly and candidly identified and explored. And the process does not come with consequences, since critical evaluation can be withheld from the public, and neither favorable nor critical evaluations necessarily have consequences for access to financial assistance from the Fund.  The model we use for bank supervision in the United States offers an interesting contrast. We undertake a continuous process of onsite examination. We use a risk-based framework for focussing attention on critical factors. We produce a confidential rating of select dimensions of the financial profile of the institutions and their risk management and control infrastructure. We assess the models banks use to measure risk and the scenarios used to stress test exposures, but the banks have the responsibility for designing and running the risk management infrastructure. By looking across a broad range of world class financial institutions, we have a good sense of the evolving frontier of best practice in risk management which we can then use to help benchmark other institutions and pull common practice closer to that frontier. For a number of reasons, this can’t be the model for the Fund’s relationships with its members. But it provides an interesting prism in thinking about surveillance. The Fund has explored a number of ideas to strengthen the surveillance framework. One of the most promising is to establish a process with more frequent, published staff assessments of performance against a medium-term framework designed by the member country. That assessment could convey a 4 BIS Review 37/2004 
clear judgement about the degree of progress being made in reducing vulnerabilities, improving resilience, and strengthening the structural underpinnings of growth. Analysis of public and external debt trends, benchmarked against sustainability and vulnerability thresholds, and stress tests for relevant shocks could play a key role in this process.  There are compelling arguments for combining such a framework with contingent access to Fund resources. Surveillance today does not provide a meaningful check on ex ante policies, and resources are only made available when the financial need is acute. Access to supplemental resources from the Fund on a precautionary or contingent basis could make a critical difference in preventing short-term liquidity crises from becoming full-scale solvency problems leading to default. Of course, access to such contingent financing should be limited to countries whose policies were judged reasonably sustainable, and consistent with a reduction in balance sheet risks over time. With an enhanced surveillance framework designed to help keep policy on a stronger path that does reduce risk over time, and with contingent finance that could be mobilized quickly, the Fund would be better positioned to contain the risk of deeper financial crisis. And more of the policy reform that is a necessary accompaniment to Fund finance resources could be supported ex ante, rather than ex post. Catalyzing better policies sooner is the best defense, though it will never be a perfect defense, against crises. Facilitating restructurings We have seen some progress in the last few years in efforts to improve the framework for sovereign restructurings. In particular, collective action clauses have now become the market standard where emerging market governments issue debt under foreign law. It will take some time for the full stock of sovereign emerging market debt to include these provisions for restructuring by majority action, but this progress is nonetheless important.  But there are also some experiences that overshadow these more encouraging developments, and expose a breakdown in the broad consensus that had formed the basis for the successful past strategies of collaboration among the official sector, borrowers, and private creditors.  Without commenting on the specifics of any particular case, let me offer a view of what I see as fundamental tenets of a credible approach by the international community to situations where a sovereign finds it necessary to restructure its obligations to private creditors: The IMF should be willing to lend to a sovereign that is in default to its private creditors only when two conditions have been established:  First, the country must commit to a credible medium-term adjustment program, one that offers the prospect of a successful restructuring and a reasonably early return to the capital markets. This has to be established up front for any restructuring effort to work. Commitment to a credible adjustment path that offers the reasonable prospect of a return to financial viability and growth is the necessary foundation for engagement by the creditors in a restructuring process. Without that, there is little basis for meaningful engagement. The science of economics does not provide a definitive answer to what that adjustment path must be, but it does offer the means to determine a reasonable band of outcomes between the inadequate and the excessive. This judgment must be made by the government. It can be informed by consultations with the creditors. Ultimately, though, it has to be endorsed by the Fund, if the Fund is to lend. Second, before the Fund can commit its support, the country must develop, in consultation with its advisors, and outline to the Fund and its creditors, a credible and monitorable framework for cooperatively achieving a viable debt restructuring, one that leaves the country with a sustainable debt burden. The issues of appropriate adjustment and appropriate broad terms of proposed restructuring are closely intertwined and need to be assessed in tandem. For the Fund, it should be an essential prerequisite that the country demonstrate at the outset that its approach has credible prospects for enlisting broad creditor concurrence, and for being consistent with the country’s macroeconomic framework and payment prospects. Reaffirming these conditions as the foundation for Fund support in restructuring or arrears cases would be a useful contribution to the system, and would leave the Fund better positioned to contribute to the favorable resolution of future crises that involve restructurings. BIS Review 37/2004 5 
Strengthening the Fund’s financial instruments The Fund has taken a number of important steps to make its financial instruments more effective for dealing with the challenges inherent in a world with ever more integrated national financial systems. The reforms of late 90’s - the increase in the size of the Fund and its supplemental borrowing arrangements, the launch of new facilities that offered the means for large-scale lending at penalty rates in carefully circumscribed cases, the introduction of greater flexibility in the phasing of resources, and in how those resources could be used to reestablish confidence - were extremely important. More recently the Fund adopted a set of criteria designed to limit the risk that the Fund would make large-scale resources available too frequently and in conditions where they would be unlikely to contribute to a resolution of the crisis. These various reforms gave the Fund a substantially more effective insurance mechanism for emerging market economies than it had before. Building on this progress, I see the key elements of a credible insurance mechanism as including the following: • Finance must be conditioned on a policy framework strong enough and timely enough to restore confidence. Fund resources can’t compensate for a lack of policy credibility, and lending official resources to fund an inadequate policy effort may make the situation worse.  • The scale of finance provided has to be calibrated to the need, and the needs can be substantial in today’s world. The Fund can only fill part of the gap, but it has to be able to fill a credible share of the gap if it is to play a successful part in catalyzing other resources to flow.  • Flexibility to structure programs appropriate to the circumstances and the borrower’s policy efforts is essential. The Fund needs to be able to substantially front-load financial packages, when this is warranted. Making available small tranches of resources over the life of a program does little to address the realities of open emerging market economies facing liquidity problems. Rather than the classic staircase pattern of disbursements, the Fund should consider, in some cases, providing a larger up front tranche that floats and is available if stress materializes and policy is responding appropriately.  • The Fund should stand ready to support countries in pursuing reasonable restructuring proposals when warranted by the circumstances. Official financial resources in that context can be helpful in meeting some targeted needs.  • And finally, the Fund needs a more credible capacity to withstand arrears, so that it does not face the reality or the perception that is can be induced to accept weak programs only to allow it to refinance its exposure.  Conclusion These are modest proposals. They only cover a small piece of the world of the Fund, much less the broader Bretton Woods institutions. They would not fundamentally change the balance established by the Fund’s articles between the rights and obligations of its members. But they would help position the Fund to deal with future financial pressure in emerging markets. And given the scale of the economic costs imposed by recent crises, that is an important goal. Thank you. 6 BIS Review 37/2004 
Christian Noyer: The role of inflation - indexed bonds in the process of setting monetary policy: a central banker’s perspective Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Morgan Stanley seminar on indexed bonds, Paris, 9 June 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, [Dear Friends], It is a great pleasure for me to address you here in the context of the first “Séminaire de Paris” on inflation-linked securities organised by Morgan Stanley. Today, I will focus more specifically on “The role of inflation - indexed bonds in the process of setting monetary policy” from a central banker’s perspective, based on my own experience as the former Vice-President of the ECB and the current Governor of the Banque de France. Throughout my presentation, I will occasionally refer to the monetary policy strategy framework implemented by the Eurosystem in which asset prices, in particular inflation-indexed government bonds, can play a role in the context of our economic analysis. Having said this, I will neither elaborate further on the ECB’s framework nor comment on the last Governing Council’s monetary policy decision. Price indexation of financial contracts is not a new phenomenon. According to Robert Shiller1, the world’s first known inflation-indexed bonds were issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 1780 during the Revolutionary War. These bonds, the so-called “depreciation notes”, were issued to US Soldiers as deferred compensation for their services. They were mainly designed to deal with severe wartime inflation. Although the bonds were successful, the concept of indexed bonds was set aside until the 20th century. Finland introduced indexed bonds in 1945, Sweden in 1952, Iceland and Israel in 1955. Since then, indexed bonds have usually appeared in countries experiencing very high rates of inflation, such as Brazil in 19642, Chile (1966), Colombia (1967), Argentina (1972) or even the UK in 1975, with the issuance of so-called “granny bonds”, i.e. non-marketable indexed-linked savings retirement certificates. Later on, in 1981, the UK issued a marketable instrument - the index-linked gilt- in a context of rapidly increasing prices. In all of these cases, the issuance of inflation-indexed debt instruments by the government was aimed at developing long-term capital markets and improving the credibility of anti-inflationary policies. As regards this last point, such a rationale is, however, ambiguous as it can also be argued that debt indexation can fuel the inflationary process by spreading inflation-linking to other contracts, such as wage contracts for instance.  Given this historical background, it might appear paradoxical that, since 1980, indexed bonds have largely been issued by industrialised countries, characterised both by low inflation rates and price stability - oriented monetary policies: Australia (1985), Canada (1991), Sweden (1994), New Zealand (1995), The United States (1997), France (1998 and 2001) and recently Italy and Greece (2003). The rationale behind the issuance of these indexed bonds was mainly to reduce the cost of debt and to develop complete financial markets. From a central banker’s standpoint, the role of asset prices in general and of inflation-indexed bonds in particular in the process of setting monetary policy is mainly related to their information content on future economic activity and inflation. As you have already probably noticed, the Governing Council of the ECB sometimes refers to the information delivered by the changes in the inflation-indexed bond yields both in its introductory statement and in its comprehensive assessment of recent economic and financial developments, as presented, for instance, in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. To elaborate further on this, I will develop three points. First, I will describe the information content of inflation-indexed bonds and explain why this information is relevant for central banks. Second, I will highlight some of the main drawbacks and potential biases that may alter this information content. Third, I will briefly review the other indicator variables that we also use in our cross-checking exercise at the euro area level. Finally, I will conclude my presentation by raising the issue of what I call the                                                       1  Robert Shiller: “The Invention of Inflation - Indexed Bonds in Early America”, NBER Working Paper N°10183, December 2003. 2  In the year prior to the introduction of the indexed bond, the inflation rate was at 69.2% in Brazil, 22.2% in Chile, 19.7% in Colombia, 34.8% in Argentina, 16,1% in the UK in 1974 and still at 14% in 1980. BIS Review 37/2004 1 
“circularity problem”, a difficulty encountered by every central bank faced with a signal extraction problem, in particular when it tries to get information from asset prices. Let me now turn to my first point: 1. What is the information content of inflation-indexed bonds and why is it relevant for a central bank? Over the past decade, policy makers have come to rely on long-term bond yields to measure the public’s long-term inflationary expectations. According to some empirical research3, “almost 80% of the movement in the long nominal rates appears to be due to changes in expected long-term inflation”. According to the Fisherian theory of interest rates, the long-term nominal interest rate depends upon the ex-ante real interest rate and the expected long-term inflation, factoring in an inflation risk premium. The main problem for the central bank is that, in practice, these three components are unobservable. In this respect, the central bank faces a signal extraction problem, which has important implications in terms of monetary policy decision-making. I will mention three of them. First, aggregate spending decisions are generally viewed as more closely related to long-term [real] interest rates. This implies that changes in short-term interest rates, used as the operational target for implementing monetary policy, will only affect aggregate spending decisions if they impact long-term interest rates. Under this rationale, the term-structure of interest rates and the relationship between long-term interest rates and long-term expected inflation becomes central to the design of monetary policy. Second, inflation expectations may be used by policy makers to gain information about the setting of short-term interest rates, whereas changes in the nominal yield curve, on their own are of no use. An increase in long-term nominal interest rates may be driven by a rise in the long-term expected inflation rate or a rise in the inflation risk premium, but it may also reflect an increase in long-term real interest rates, driven by some real factors. The two first movements could justify a change in the monetary policy stance, once the nature of the underlying shock and its likely duration have been clearly identified, but such a change may be inappropriate in the last case. Third, information on long-term inflation expectations can provide monetary authorities with a measure of the credibility of their commitment to price stability. The existence of a market for inflation-indexed securities may provide central banks with very useful information, since it may then enable them to identify whether changes in nominal yields mainly reflect changes in the expected long-term inflation rate or rather whether they are due to changes in real yields. If one assumes, for instance, that both the conventional bond market and the inflation-indexed bond market are efficient and arbitraged by economic agents so that they incorporate the same information about the real interest rate, then the difference between the conventional nominal rate and the real rate would provide, by factoring in an inflation risk premium, a measure of the expected inflation rate over the same period, known as the “break-even inflation rate”. Now, if we had both nominal and indexed bonds across the whole maturity spectrum, up to, say, 30 years which is the maximum maturity at which inflation-indexed bonds are currently issued, then we would be able to pin down market expectations of inflation for all the forecast horizons, up to 30 years, as well as forecasts of inflation for each year up to the maximum maturity. So you can easily imagine the importance of such information for central banks, information which is, moreover, updated on a daily basis. Our staff and also private forecasters are unable to routinely produce inflation forecasts in such a detail, at such a frequency and for such horizons! As far as the euro area is concerned, the reliability of both the inflation-indexed yield and the break-even inflation rate is strengthened by the significant development of the market for indexed bonds over the recent years, which accelerated further in 2003 with the arrival of two new government issuers: Greece in March and Italy in September. If we take into account the overall euro area inflation market, it is now the third biggest market in terms of market capitalisation, just behind the United States and the United Kingdom. However, in 2003, it was not only the fastest growing market in terms                                                       3  See Barr, D.G. and J.Y. Campbell (1996) : “Inflation, Real Interest Rates and the Bond market: A study of UK Nominal and Index-linket Government Bond Prices”, NBER Working Paper, # 5821, November. 2 BIS Review 37/2004 
of issuance but also the largest and most liquid inflation derivatives market, characterised by both the broadest range of products (government bonds, agency bonds, inflation swaps, etc.) and the largest number of frequent issuers (France, Italy, Greece, CADES, CNA, etc.). What has the Eurosystem learned to date from inflation-indexed securities? First, since the inception of the euro, long-term expected inflation, i.e. the break-even inflation rate, as derived from the French OAT indexed bond and the French OATei - indexed on the euro area HICP - has been broadly stable in a range of 1,7%-1,9%, i.e. broadly in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability, a year-on year increase of the euro area HICP close to, but below, 2% over the medium term. This could be interpreted as the sign of the ECB’s credibility and as an illustration of its ability to anchor inflation expectations at a fairly low level, consistent with price stability. However, since the third quarter of 2003, the break-even inflation rate has hovered at around 2.2 - 2.3%, breaking the ceiling defined by the Governing council of the ECB. In a context of rising oil prices and soaring commodity prices, this may reflect concerns about future price developments in the euro area and thus accelerating inflationary expectations. However, there is also anecdotal evidence that the demand for indexed government bonds by insurance companies, pension and hedge funds, has increased slightly over the recent months, pushing the prices of indexed bonds up and, consequently, their real yields down. As a result, break-even inflation rates may have been distorted upward, for some reasons not directly related to changes in expected inflation. This latter point raises the issue of the drawbacks and potential biases affecting indexed yields, increasing the difficulty to interpret correctly and decipher the movement behind the changes in the nominal yields. I will constitute the second point to my presentation. 2.  The biases in the break-even inflation rate. The break-even inflation rate may be a good measure of expected inflation. It should however be cautiously interpreted and analysed as it may also be severely biased. When I previously introduced the concept of the break-even inflation rate, I assumed both efficient and arbitraged markets but also perfect foresights and no risk or liquidity premia. Since this seems unlikely to hold in practice, we should then consider that the break-even inflation rate is only related to, but not equal to, inflation expectations. Let me briefly outline some of the biases we need to take into account in the context of our economic and financial assessment. For the sake of simplicity, I will distinguish two main categories of biases: technical biases and institutional biases, leaving aside the treatment of risk aversion considerations, which tends to introduce an upward bias in the break-even inflation rate. Technical biases The compound and the convexity biases: the definition of the break-even rate as the difference of the conventional nominal bond yield and the inflation - indexed bond yield is a first order approximation which does not take into account interest rate compounding. Consequently, the break-even rate is an upward biased estimator of expected inflation - provided that inflation expectations are positive4. Interest rate compounding has also another implication as it implies that bond prices will respond in an asymmetric manner to changes in the yield: indeed, bond prices are more sensitive to a fall in yields than to an increase in yield, and therefore, will also rise when the volatility of the yield increases, therefore pushing down the forward rates5. The net convexity adjustment will therefore bias the break-even inflation rate either upward (the most likely) or downward. The inflation lag: by construction, bond cash flows can not be adjusted instantaneously for actual inflation. This implies that the break-even inflation rate includes another bias reflecting the discrepancy between the lagged and the contemporaneous inflation rate. For instance, in the case of the French indexed bonds, the lag length is limited to three months, equivalent to that of the US TIPS and the Canadian indexed government bond, but slightly below that of the UK where an eight-month lag is                                                       4  To give a magnitude order, a real rate of 4% and an expected inflation rate of 2% would generate a compound bias of 8 basis point, which is in practice fairly small. 5  This phenomenon is known as the convexity bias. It grows with maturity, as compounding increases, and may vary across time, as volatility in the yield is also likely to change over time. There is no reason to think that the convexity adjustment is the same for the conventional forward curve and for the indexed forward curve. BIS Review 37/2004 3 
required. As a consequence, because the real yield is distorted, the information content of the break-even inflation rate will also be affected. According to some empirical research6, this bias is also estimated to be fairly small, at around 5 basis points. Liquidity bias: Finally, to conclude with this non exhaustive review of technical biases, one should also mention that, in general, indexed bonds are relatively less liquid than conventional government bonds. Holding periods seem to be longer for the former and this is also reflected in the relatively low trading volumes of inflation-indexed bonds. The existence of a liquidity premium results in an understatement of the level of expected inflation derived from the break-even inflation rate. Some in-house research suggests this bias to be at around 5 to 15 basis points. Besides these technical biases, institutional arrangements may also introduce distortions in real yields, which impact in turn on the break-even inflation rate. I will mention two examples. Institutional biases The tax bias: the main source of distortion is probably related to taxation. Investors are primarily interested in real net-of-tax cash flows, which implies that differences in tax treatment between conventional and indexed bonds will influence their relative prices and therefore the break-even inflation rate. In the French case, where inflation compensation gains and interest rate income are equally taxed, this bias is generally considered as relatively small - less than 10 basis points. But even if it is small, it constitutes another upward distortion in the break-even. New regulations - supply and demand factors: as I mentioned, earlier, and I will conclude this section by this point, the French OATi, which so far has been the main inflation-indexed indicator used by the ECB in its economic and financial assessment, has been distorted by a significant upward demand shift which can be, to a certain extent, attributed to the adoption by the French Banking and Finance Regulation Committee (CRBF) of a new regulation on Livret A (passbook saving vehicle), aiming at linking this savings account partly to inflation . Anecdotal evidence suggests that a surge in demand for OATi originated from banks, which tried to hedge against this new regulation. An insufficient outstanding amount of French inflation linkers relative to the overall demand for hedging purposes led to an upward pressure on the prices of other euro area linkers (Greece and Italy). To conclude this point, all these biases are likely to be small, but they add together, potentially in a non-systematic way. They are also likely to vary over time. It is therefore difficult to smooth out all these noises to get a good proxy of inflation expectations over the medium to long-term. Two main lessons may be drawn from the existence of the various premia and biases affecting the break-even inflation rates. First, it may be more informative to focus on the changes in the break-even rates rather than on their levels. This is however at a cost since the level by itself conveys relevant information for the central bank. Second, break-even inflation rate may provide interesting information as regards long-term inflation expectations, although it is necessary to cross-check against other inflation expectations’ measures. This leads me to my third and final point. 3. Other useful indicators of expected inflation Inflation-indexed bonds are not the sole financial instrument to provide information on long-term expectations of inflation, as similar information can be extracted from inflation-linked swaps. The market for inflation-linked swaps has developed rapidly since 2002 in the euro area. Companies with revenues linked to inflation may use this market to hedge against the perspective of low inflation while companies with liabilities linked to inflation may use it to hedge against the risks of high inflation. Compared to inflation-indexed bonds, they provide a wider maturity spectrum for short and medium horizons. However, they are affected by the same biases, in particular the inflation risk and liquidity premia. This tool, however, usefully complements inflation-indexed bonds in the Eurosystem’s information set7 and, so far, the information provided by this new financial instrument has been broadly                                                       6  See F. Alonso, R. Blanco and A. del Rio: “Estimating Inflation Expectations Using French Government inflation-indexed bonds”, Banco de Espana, Documento  de Trabajo, n° 0111, 2001. 7  See for instance the box entitled “Deriving euro area inflation expectations from inflation-linked swaps”, ECB monthly Bulletin, September 2003. 4 BIS Review 37/2004 
in line with the information derived from indexed bonds, suggesting an average ten-year expected inflation rate of around 2%. In addition to financial indicators, central banks, and the ECB in particular, also rely heavily on surveys to extract relevant information as regards long-term inflation expectations. I will limit myself to two examples: The first is the quarterly survey that has been carried out by the ECB since 1999, in which information is gathered from professional forecasters. In particular, it surveys inflation expectations over the medium term, at a 4-year horizon, and delivers very useful information since each forecaster is asked about his own probability distribution of inflation over the forecast horizon. It might then be completed by other surveys looking at longer horizons, such as the Consensus Forecast for instance. According to these surveys, medium to long-term expectations have proven remarkably stable in the euro area, standing at a level around 1.8 - 1.9%, in spite of short-term inflation dynamics being adversely affected by a series of sizeable supply shocks that have impacted the economy since 2000. Another very useful kind of survey is the European Commission’s harmonised survey of price expectations of individual households, which completes the set of alternative measures of inflation expectations. Here, households are asked whether they expect price over the next 12 months to rise more or less rapidly than over the past 12 months. The time horizon here is very short and, since 2000, the survey has delivered more worrisome results. A divergence has actually emerged, both in France and the euro area as a whole, between actual inflation and inflation as perceived by households. The proportion of households that feel that prices have risen sharply has substantially increased, without any correlation to actual developments in the general price level. Central banks must also avoid misperception and for that reason, they should not rely on a limited set of indicators but should use a comprehensive and rigorous analysis aimed at picturing the economy as a complex and permanently evolving system. Central banks also have the difficult task of identifying shocks hitting the economy and of addressing them appropriately by assessing their potential implications in terms of risks to price stability. Model analysis, monetary analysis, model -based forecasts are additional useful tools employed in this context. This is precisely the approach taken by the ECB, which developed its two-pillar-strategy in order to help to sort through the wealth of potentially conflicting statistics. Conclusion Let me now briefly conclude my remarks by asking the question: what information do we really get from asset prices, and particularly from inflation - indexed securities? Financial markets do indeed play a critical role in the process of setting monetary policy. In effect, the influence of monetary policy on the real economy and ultimately on prices is largely transmitted through asset prices. As pointed out by Blinder, the economic activity is not directly affected by the changes in the key policy rates, but rather by long-term interest rates and, where relevant, through wealth effects. In short, monetary policy affects the economy through its interaction with long-term expectations, which in turns affect asset prices and then economic activity and inflation. But central banks also rely on financial markets for information to help explain their monetary policy decisions. This points out to a sort of “circularity problem” whereby it is unclear how informative the information extracted from asset prices actually is. Consider for instance the stable break-even inflation rate at a level close to but below 2% in the euro area. Then suppose that, as sometimes observed on other financial markets -as the money market for instance- for any reason, the market for indexed-bonds is indeterminate in the sense that the market is unable on its own to determine an ex-ante equilibrium price. Thanks to the existence of a central bank, an equilibrium price may however be set if issuers or price-makers believe the central bank will commit to price stability as defined by a year-on-year increase of a consumer price index at around 2% over the medium run. The indexed-bond price will then be set on the basis of the actual conventional bond prices and the long-term nominal anchor defined by the central bank, factoring in certain margins or premia. This clearly indicates the central bank’s credibility, and a stable break-even inflation rate will reflect this aspect. But what else can we draw from this information to take a monetary policy decision? This might be another illustration of what some economists have recently named the “credibility paradox”. On the one hand, the information variable of the central bank is consistent with its definition of price stability: therefore no cause for concern. On the other hand, whatever the underlying market’s BIS Review 37/2004 5 
dynamics, economic agents are convinced the central bank will ensure price stability: credibility matters. In such a context, misperception from both sides can generate aggregate instability, characterised by unsustainable market developments and the emergence of financial imbalances. This is one of the reasons why central banks have to make use of the widest possible set of information variables to cope with uncertainties. In such a context, asset prices, inflation - indexed bonds play an important role as information variables; but one has to bear in mind that they are endogenous to the monetary policy decisions via the expectations channel. Thank you for your attention. 6 BIS Review 37/2004 
Mark W Olson: Regulatory update - banking industry, insurance and securities activities Remarks by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Bank Insurance and Securities Association Legislative, Regulatory and Compliance Seminar, Washington DC, 10 June 2004. *      *      * Introduction Many thanks to the Bank Insurance and Securities Association (BISA) for inviting me to speak to you this afternoon. Financial modernization, characterized by the ever-increasing ability of financial services firms to offer banking, securities, and insurance products, introduces new challenges as well as new opportunities. From the perspective of the Federal Reserve Board, I’d like to discuss compliance and risk-management issues for banking organizations that are beginning new, or expanding existing, insurance sales activities. I’d also like to offer a few observations on the “push-out” provisions being drafted by the Securities and Exchange Commission to require certain securities-related activities previously conducted by banks to be removed from the banks and “pushed out” to an entity that is a licensed, SEC-regulated securities broker-dealer. My comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my fellow Federal Reserve Board members or the Federal Reserve System. Background Following enactment of the McCarran-Ferguson Act in 1945, supervision of insurance was almost exclusively the domain of the states. Therefore, for most of the past century, we - that is, the Federal Reserve and state insurance supervisors - have traveled in different circles. The Federal Reserve has had very little to do with insurance issues because banks and bank holding companies have generally been involved only in credit-related insurance sales and underwriting activities. In fact, the federal legislation that charges the Federal Reserve with supervising bank holding companies - the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 - was enacted in large part to prevent the affiliation of one of the largest banks in this country with a large insurance underwriter. Congress went on to strengthen the separation of banking and insurance in 1982 with an amendment to that act generally prohibiting bank holding companies from engaging in insurance agency activities. The historic statutory separation of banking and insurance was ended in November 1999 by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act), which allows well-managed and well-capitalized banking organizations to affiliate with any kind of insurance underwriter and insurance sales and brokerage firms not just those that offer credit-related financial services, such as insurance to pay off a loan in the event of a borrower’s death or disability, or mortgage guaranty insurance. To engage in the broader range of insurance activities, a bank holding company must qualify to become a financial holding company by certifying that its subsidiary banks are well capitalized and well managed, among other criteria. As of year-end 2003, about 630 bank holding companies and foreign banks have chosen to become financial holding companies. Only 12 percent of U.S. bank holding companies have become financial holding companies; however, these financial holding companies control about 80 percent of the domestic banking industry’s assets. Since enactment of the GLB Act, surprisingly few banking organizations have taken advantage of their expanded insurance powers. About 25 percent of financial holding companies have used their new insurance powers, largely through acquisitions of insurance agency or brokerage firms or, in a few instances, of insurance underwriters. Only a few financial holding companies have expanded their insurance activities in any significant way. Anecdotal evidence suggests that many more financial holding companies are considering commencing or further expanding their existing insurance sales and, to a lesser extent, insurance underwriting. The sale of insurance by banking organizations makes sense. Insurance is a financial product that many customers need. Entering the insurance market as an agent fits naturally with the nature of banking. Banking organizations have developed networks and systems for delivering financial products to consumers - a business model that does not always require manufacture of the product. Insurance is increasingly viewed not just as a product that stands on its own, but as an important item BIS Review 36/2004 1 
on a menu of financial products that helps consumers create a portfolio of financial assets, manage their financial risks, and plan for their financial security and well-being. Many consumers find it convenient to purchase financial planning products at a single location that offers a full range of financial services. Thus, banking organizations are a natural alternative sales channel for insurance underwriters looking to expand their customer base. Compliance and risk management issues With these developments have come new challenges. While some types of risks are common to banking organizations and insurance companies, the products, business practices, and regulatory framework of the insurance industry are outside the experience of many banking organizations. Changes in the banking and financial services industry have highlighted the importance of incorporating an assessment of compliance risk into the evaluation of a banking organization’s overall risk profile and into its enterprisewide risk-management program. In December 2003, to further augment the Federal Reserve’s risk-focused supervision program, we adopted a policy to emphasize the importance of compliance with consumer protection regulations in the context of overall bank safety and soundness evaluations. Examiners will assess consumer compliance risk across the broad range of a banking organization’s activities to determine the level and trend of consumer compliance risk. Supervision and consumer compliance examiners will work together more closely to evaluate how consumer compliance risk affects the organization’s reputational, legal, and operational risk profiles. Supervisory plans, particularly for large complex banking organizations, now will more fully integrate the consumer compliance reviews into the overall risk-focused safety and soundness supervisory program. Key issues for bank and bank holding company compliance and risk managers to address in designing and updating their insurance and annuity sales programs are • Preventing conflicts of interest - ensuring that sales are suitable in light of customer needs and that appropriate alternative products are adequately considered; • Monitoring consumer complaints regarding sales practices, and identifying and addressing trends and issues that may expose the banking organization to potential loss; • Implementing the Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance Regulation, upon which I will elaborate in a moment; • Ensuring that the parent bank or bank holding company have in place appropriate controls over accounting and other systems, including disaster recovery programs related to the insurance sales line of business; • Ensuring that the bank or bank holding company has controls to protect the privacy of customer information, consistent with relevant state or other regulations; • Monitoring claims and potential exposures from mistakes - “errors and omissions” - related to insurance sales and brokerage activities, and identifying and reporting to banking organization management adverse trends and potential significant legal exposures; • Formal reporting to the board and management regarding the risks associated with insurance sales activities and the internal controls used by the organization to minimize potential loss from those risks. Many of these issues are covered in more detail in Federal Reserve supervisory guidance. While I’ll discuss just one of these issues, I urge you, when updating your compliance and risk management programs, to review and consider all of the issues as described in the Federal Reserve’s recently updated supervisory guidance entitled “Insurance Sales Activities and Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance,” which is contained in the Commercial Bank Examination Manual and the Bank Holding Company Inspection Manual. The issue in the compliance area that I’d like to discuss with you today is conformity with federal consumer protection rules required by the GLB Act for bank sales of insurance and annuities. The Consumer Protection in Sales of Insurance Regulation, as the rule is referred to, was issued on an interagency basis by the federal banking and thrift regulators, effective in October 2001. The federal banking and thrift agencies have responsibility for enforcing these relatively new regulations. The regulations require insurance and credit disclosures to consumers regarding insurance sold or 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
solicited at or on behalf of a bank. The insurance disclosures, among other things, are intended to ensure that consumers understand that insurance products and annuities sold by banks are not insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation - disclosures that are similar to those required for bank sales of non-deposit investment products. The credit disclosures seek to ensure that consumers understand that banks cannot “tie” loans to the purchase of an insurance product or annuity from the bank or an affiliate. The federal regulation also generally prohibits certain deceptive sales practices. In addition, the regulation limits the fees that may be paid to a bank employee for insurance and annuity referrals to a one-time, nominal fee that is not based on whether the referral results in the sale of insurance or an annuity product. While banking organizations, generally, are attuned to these new regulations and are implementing appropriate controls, some banking organizations have been slow to train staff appropriately, to update internal procedures, and to provide adequate controls to ensure compliance with the regulations. Such deficiencies may expose the institution to reputational and legal risk. Sales incentive programs that award points toward nonmonetary prizes of significant value, such as vacation packages, based on the number of insurance and securities product referrals also may raise compliance issues. Compliance staff should closely review these programs to ensure that they do not give bank employees, or those acting on behalf of the bank, rewards for insurance or non-deposit investment product referrals, that have a value exceeding a nominal one-time fee. While most banking organizations provide appropriate oversight over their insurance activities, it is important that banks have in place a formal mechanism for reporting to the board and senior management, at regular intervals, regarding the identification and assessment of risks arising from that business activity and the status of issue resolution. The insurance sales and annuity line of business should not be run on autopilot, even though this may be convenient simply because the business line is new and likely unfamiliar to bank management and the board, is managed by the “business line experts,” and is already being reviewed by the insurance underwriter and the functional regulator. As required in the GLB Act, the Federal Reserve generally does not examine insurance underwriters or insurance agencies owned by a bank holding company. Instead, we defer to the appropriate state insurance authorities. However, we do review, at the bank or holding company level, the appropriateness of risk management and internal controls over a banking organization’s insurance and annuity sales activities, and assess the level of risk arising from such activities. To improve our own understanding of the issues developing in the insurance industry, we also have established resource centers at the Board and at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston to monitor developments in the insurance industry. Observations regarding the proposed “push-out” provisions Before concluding, I’d like to touch on the securities side of the business. The GLB Act removed the blanket exemption from the definition of broker and dealer under the federal securities laws for so many years enjoyed by banks. In that exemption’s place, the GLB Act provides specific exemptions that permit banks to continue to conduct securities activities that are part of providing traditional banking products and services, including trust and fiduciary, custody and safekeeping and other specified traditional banking products and services. The SEC recently decided to invite public comment on rules that implement these exemptions. I believe that it is instructive to remember the context in which Congress adopted this change. Importantly, the replacement of the general exemption for banks with more-targeted exemptions was not in response to problems at banks providing trust and fiduciary or other traditional banking products and services. In fact, Congress recognized that banks have provided these services, and I quote, “without any problems for years.” Moreover, Congress recognized that banks have the expertise and customer relationships that make them uniquely qualified to provide these products and services. In particular, Congress expressed its expectation that the GLB Act would not disturb traditional bank trust activities. Congress concluded that the trust and fiduciary laws and oversight by federal and state banking agencies provide sufficient consumer protection. The Federal Reserve Board concurs with the judgment of Congress. We have expressed concern in the past that the rules proposed by the SEC would significantly disrupt - and might force discontinuation of - major lines of business for banks as well as longstanding relationships with bank customers. I believe that such consequences would be wholly unwarranted BIS Review 36/2004 3 
given the long-standing customer protections provided under federal and state banking and fiduciary laws. The members of the SEC have indicated their interest in engaging in a dialogue with the banking agencies and the banking industry about the effects of their recently proposed rules. We will carefully review this latest proposal and have already expressed our willingness to work with the SEC to ensure that the bank exceptions adopted by Congress in the GLB Act are implemented in a manner consistent with the purposes of those exceptions and, thus, enable banks to continue engaging in activities that Congress intended without incurring unnecessary burden and expense. Conclusion To be sure, the U.S. system of risk-focused bank supervision relies heavily on cooperation among multiple state and federal supervisors, and it is not perfect. But it is working - and, we think, working effectively. Certainly, we could not have postponed interstate banking until we had devised the perfect system for supervising it. The marketplace is constantly moving, and we have to adjust our role. To conclude, I offer one final thought on financial services convergence. It is simply that, even with the changes we have seen, further change is inevitable. The future offers the promise of better, more efficient, and more convenient financial services. Your role as compliance officers and risk managers is of utmost importance in ensuring that this potential is achieved. I encourage you to continue your efforts, and I am confident that your efforts will make an important difference. 4 BIS Review 36/2004 
Seung Park: Swiftly changing economic environment in Korea Speech by Dr Seung Park, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Asia Society, New York, 3 June 2004. *      *      * Introduction Mr. President, Distinguished members of the Asia Society, Ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted to stand before you here today as the guest of the Asia Society. It is a great privilege to have this opportunity to speak to so many leading members of New York’s business community, and a pleasure to see your great interest in the Korean economy. Let me at this point voice my deep gratitude to the President of the Asia Society, Nicholas Platt, and to all of those involved for inviting me to address you today. In the almost fifty years since it was founded in 1956, the Asia Society has played an invaluable role in building up the cooperation and furthering the flow of ideas, people and investment between the countries of Asia and the United States. Indeed, it has contributed to no small degree to the astonishing economic development of Asia today. Members of the Asia Society, I salute your achievements and congratulate you wholeheartedly upon the success of the Fourteenth Asian Corporate Conference, held recently in Seoul. I would like to speak to you today about the swiftly changing economic environment that Korea is now confronting and about our responses to it. My focus will be on the hollowing-out of manufacturing. The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing The hollowing-out of Korea’s manufacturing sector, as many of you will be quite aware, is now proceeding at a very fast pace. Korean companies are reluctant to make domestic investments in manufacturing. In contrast, they are undertaking many new investment projects abroad and are increasingly relocating domestic production lines overseas. Last year, facilities investment in Korea shrank by 1.5% while, in striking contrast, Korean direct investment in China rose by more than 40%. A recent survey found that more than 30% of Korean small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs, were either actively planning direct investment projects abroad or had a preference for investing overseas. In the case of export-oriented firms, this figure rose to more than 50%. More than one million jobs have been created by the ten thousand or so Korean enterprises that have set up businesses in China. At the same time, the rate of unemployment among people in their twenties in Korea has reached a high level of above 7%. Inward direct investment by foreign companies, meanwhile, has also fallen off. Flows of foreign direct investment into the Korean manufacturing sector stood at 2.9 billion dollars in 2001, but this figure has continued to shrink since then, reaching 2.3 billion dollars in 2002 and just 1.7 billion dollars last year. Owing to this reluctance to invest in the country on the part of both home and foreign businesses, we are witnessing the polarization of Korean industry and so-called jobless growth. Businesses involved in the high-tech sector, exporters and large companies are now generally showing fast rates of growth. On the other hand, companies in old technology sectors and SMEs dependent on domestic demand are becoming less and less competitive. What this means is that, with the contraction of the labor-intensive industries, in which SMEs predominate, there are fewer new job opportunities opening up even though GDP may be growing. What has brought about this state of affairs is the tectonic drift taking place in the locus of global manufacturing activity. You will all, I think, be familiar with how the dynamic core of global manufacturing moved in the 1960s from the United States to Japan, and in the 1980s from Japan to the newly industrializing economies including Korea. Since the early 1990s, it has been shifting to BIS Review 36/2004 1 
China and, as a part of this process, Korea is experiencing the hollowing-out of its own manufacturing sector. Earlier hollowing-out of U.S. and Japanese manufacturing Each of these shifts in the locus of world manufacturing production, that is to say these processes of the hollowing-out of previous manufacturing bases, has had its own distinct characteristics. Even so, there has been a common thread running through them all, which is that their root causes have lain in losses of competitiveness due to high costs and low efficiency. U.S. wage levels back in the 1960s were four times higher than Japan’s. In contrast, the rate of manufacturing productivity increase in the U.S. was less than one fifth that in Japan. Later, as wages, house prices, and land prices were continually rising in Japan from the early 1980’s, while manufacturing productivity growth was only one half that of Korea’s, Japan also began to experience fade-out in its manufacturing. However, I should point out that when the process of hollowing-out was underway in the U.S. and Japan, the scales of the economies to which the torches were being passed were relatively small. To be exact, the Japanese economy was only one fifth the size of the U.S. economy in the 1960s, and the scale of the Korean economy was just one fifteenth that of Japan in the 1980s. The new manufacturing centers in these cases, therefore, had relatively small capacities for absorption. What is more, protectionism was a part of the predominant economic framework in those days. Various institutional devices could, therefore, be drawn upon to protect a country’s industries. This meant that the hollowing-out of manufacturing in the U.S. and Japan took place only gradually, leaving companies and government with sufficient time to respond appropriately. In the U.S., notably, industries faced with declining competitiveness did not shift their production facilities offshore but instead underwent rational processes of adjustment involving mergers and acquisitions, shifts of specialization and closures. To my mind, deindustrialization or a shift to a focus on services, better describes this process in the U.S. than to refer to it as a “hollowing-out of manufacturing”. In the 1980s in Japan, similarly, efforts aimed at business rationalization went hand in hand with the simultaneous pursuit of product quality enhancement, the development of cutting-edge technology and the upgrading of industrial structure. In this respect, the hollowing-out of manufacturing at first posed challenges to both the U.S. and Japan, but eventually served as opportunities for these countries to strengthen their economic order and upgrade their industrial structures. Differences between the current hollowing-out of Korea and two previous cases The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing that we are facing today is a part of the phenomenon of tectonic drift of world manufacturing to China. The high costs and low efficiency of the Korean economy, which has drained its competitiveness, has also played a large role. Korea’s curse of high costs and low efficiency dates back to the second half of the 1980s, when per capita national income reached the level of semi-developed countries. In the transition to a democratic society, long suppressed popular aspirations for higher living standards erupted, while at the same time asset price inflation led to the formation of real estate and stock market bubbles. Above all, after 1990, wages in manufacturing rose at an annual average rate of 11%, the fastest pace among all OECD members. So in one bound, Korea has become a high wage economy. Korea’s wage levels are ten times those of China nowadays, and are also rather high compared to countries like Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan that are similar to Korea in terms of the stage of economic development. What is more, Korea finds itself in a situation where its other social costs are also high. This comes as a result of not just the high real estate prices and heavy private spending on education, but also an endemic climate of confrontation between labor and management and the influence of vested interest groups. Meanwhile, in stark contrast, manufacturing productivity growth in Korea has been no more than one half that of China since the late 1980s. The story does not end there. The environment in which this hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing is proceeding is very different from that which faced the U.S. and Japan. Firstly, in contrast to what happened in the U.S. and Japanese cases, the economy to which the base of manufacturing is moving from Korea is one that is already much larger in scale and so has a huge capacity for absorption. The Chinese economy is now more than twice the size of Korea’s. In addition, 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
it is showing the highest rate of growth worldwide, and so the gap between them in terms of economic scale is likely to widen. Secondly, I should point out as well that the gap between Korea and China in terms of costs is much greater than what we saw in the cases involving the U.S. and Japan in the past. Whereas U.S. wages were four times those in Japan in the 1960s, and this ratio was much the same when the manufacturing base shifted from Japan to Korea in the 1980s, the difference between Korean and Chinese wage levels is now ten to one. Transportation costs in China are only one half those in Korea and the corporate tax rate in China is 15%, much lower than Korea’s 27%. Thirdly, in contrast to the previously prevailing mood of protectionism, the predominant current that has spread around the whole world is that of openness. Under these circumstances, once the process of a hollowing-out of manufacturing is set in motion, the pace of its spread and development can only get faster. The effects that this has on society as a whole can then come to be almost destructive in their force. For textiles, footwear and white electric goods, the process of hollowing-out is already so far advanced that the major part of production by Korean firms now takes place in China. Even in sectors where hollowing-out is still in the early stages, its speed is rapidly gathering pace. I’m thinking here of sectors like computers, telecommunications, steel, chemicals and machinery, which are midway on the technological development ladder. As an example, about two years ago when I went to China, you could hardly see a locally produced mobile phone. Handsets imported from Korea were a big hit on the streets at that time. Today, however, China has already emerged as the world’s largest producer and exporter of mobile phones. Korea’s policy options in dealing with the hollowing-out The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing is taking place so fast and across such a wide spectrum that our firms and government have little time to spare. It has become a critical challenge to the Korean economy. Will the hollowing-out of manufacturing derail the Korean economy, or can we take advantage of it like the U.S. and Japan by turning it into an opportunity for a further quantum leap? The answer will depend upon how the Korean people react. To embrace this challenge and exploit it as an opportunity to press forward the development of the Korean economy, the Korean people and its government should commit themselves to four major endeavors. Firstly, we must set out to constantly strengthen economic cooperation between South and North on the Korean Peninsula. This will give us some short-term relief by softening the blow represented by the hollowing-out of manufacturing. South Korean firms should relocate their labor-intensive industrial facilities not just in the Kaesung Industrial Complex, which is now being constructed, but throughout the whole of North Korea. This will breathe new life into Korean enterprises whose competitiveness is now on the wane, and SMEs in particular. Within the Kaesung Industrial Complex, wage levels will be fifty-seven and a half dollars a month, which is lower than those in China. Land prices too are very reasonable, and the highest level of corporate tax rate will be only 14%. So there is a very good case for Korean firms to take full advantage of these points by relocating production to North Korea rather than to China or Vietnam. Brisk economic cooperation between North and South is also very important in terms of preparing for national reunification. Now many of North Korea’s industrial facilities are in a decrepit state. If they were to be exposed to the blast of open competition, there would be no option other than to scrap them entirely. Research institutes tell us that if reunification were to take place abruptly under these circumstances, with the coming down of the walls dividing the peninsula, several million North Koreans might be forced to flood into the South seeking refuge. This could lead to a national disaster. In this respect, strengthening South-North economic cooperation is obviously a much more desirable option. Secondly, we need to rectify the high costs and low efficiency that now characterizes Korean society. It is vital to reach a social consensus on improving the climate of labor-management relations and removing the rigidities of the labor market. On the basis of this consensus, we should then work for wage stability. We also have to start to reduce the burden of other social costs. This involves bringing down housing purchase and rental costs through stabilizing house prices. It means educational reforms to cut the exorbitant level of spending on private tutoring. It also implies lowering the costs of the political system by allowing a more productive style of politics to take hold. We should also seek BIS Review 36/2004 3 
ways to reduce the loss of efficiency caused by the tendency to collective egotism, often found in large-scale national investment projects. Thirdly, we will push forward still more passionately in upgrading the industrial structure and improving corporate competitiveness. We have to revitalize the manufacturing sector with a new focus on advanced technology areas generating high value-added, such as the IT industry. At the same time, we must also promote deindustrialization or service-oriented industrialization, while giving every encouragement to our financial, logistical, cultural and knowledge-based industries. The share of manufacturing drops in any economy as it moves into a more mature stage of development, while that of the service sector rises. In terms of its weight in their economy, the manufacturing sector peaked in the U.S. in 1953, in Japan in 1970 and in Korea in 1988. It then showed a steady decline in each case. By upgrading its industrial structure in this way, Korea can avoid competing head-on with China, which has huge reserves of low-cost labor, and can instead build up a complementary relationship with it. Some form of support will of course be necessary for the sunset industries that are no longer competitive, in order to assist their friction-free market exit through mergers and acquisitions, change of business lines within the country, or relocation overseas. Last, but by no means least, we need to promote even more strongly the liberalization and openness of the Korean economy. Earlier this year, Korea concluded, not without difficulty, a free trade agreement with Chile. But it is absolutely essential for us to ensure a degree of openness that is on a par with that of Singapore, through expanding FTAs not just with Chile but with the U.S., the European Union, Japan, China, members of ASEAN, and other Latin American countries. In parallel with this, we need to give a dynamic boost to foreign investment in Korea, by creating an environment in which people from all around the world can do business as freely in Korea as in Dubai or Singapore. Outward investment by Korean-based enterprises and their relocation of their production facilities overseas should also be viewed positively and made as simple as possible. Furthermore, by promoting deregulation in the areas of finance and transportation, the country will be able to achieve its great ambition of becoming a financial and logistical hub of North-East Asia. Concluding remarks Distinguished members of the Asia Society, Ladies and gentlemen, The hollowing-out of manufacturing that is now taking place in Korea can perhaps be thought of as an unavoidable stage on the road to economic maturity, a bit like the acute growing pains of adolescence. Having said this, I must admit that not all economic agents in Korea are finding it easy to adapt to this hollowing-out of manufacturing, because it is taking place so fast and its ripple effects have such awesome destructive power. Seen in this light, the hollowing-out of manufacturing may well appear threatening to the Korean economy in certain respects and in the short term. Looked at calmly overall and taking a longer-term view, however, the process brings fresh opportunities for the Korean economy’s upgrading and development. In other words, it is challenges like these that spur on the Korean economy to still more energetic advances. You will all, I think, be familiar with how Korea achieved the ‘Miracle of the Han River’, emerging phoenix-like as a member of the OECD from the ashes of the Korean War. Korea was again able to overcome within a short period of time the currency crisis with its threat of a debt moratorium in 1997. The Korean nation has repeatedly shown itself to have deep reserves of strength to draw on in times of crisis, when it unites as one. The stronger the challenge, the more dynamic vital energy the nation has been able to summon up, to respond even more resolutely. To turn the challenge facing the Korean economy into a great opportunity, the Korean people and government should now go through a process of wide-ranging social reform founded upon the transformation of the structure of popular consciousness. The difficult problem of society’s high costs and low efficiency can and will be solved through educational renewal, the reconfiguration of politics, cooperation between labor and management, and restraint from collective egotism. Along with this, globalization will be encouraged through moderation of the mood of anti-globalization and animosity to openness that still lingers on in some areas of Korean society. I am convinced that once Korea has traversed the hollowing-out of manufacturing, it will move on to become a much more mature advanced society. Let us suppose that it is indeed able to maintain 4 BIS Review 36/2004 
stable growth at the 5% level annually, by turning the present changes in its environment into opportunities for enlarging its growth potential. Then, about ten years later, the country could look to the ‘New Miracle of the Han River’, achieving per capita income of 30,000 dollars and joining the ranks of the ten largest economies worldwide. Mr. President, Distinguished members of the Asia Society, Ladies and gentlemen, Drawing my remarks to a close, I should like to give my deep thanks to all of you here today for your keen interest in the Korean economy. It is my great hope that as true friends of Korea you will not hesitate to give your suggestions and advice about the best way forward for the Korean economy. Thank you for listening so attentively. BIS Review 36/2004 5 
Timothy F Geithner: The changing face of risk management Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Institute of International Bankers, New York, 9 June 2004 *      *      * It is a pleasure to join you today for this meeting of the Institute of International Bankers. The financial institutions you represent play a major role in our financial system. The IIB has played an important part in shaping financial policy in the United States, by reminding us with force and persistence of the impact of our actions on the standards of fairness and equality of opportunity that we strive to maintain. The U.S. financial system has a number of features that help to make it attractive to participants from all around the world. The structure of our financial system is characterized by a diversity of channels for financial intermediation, with a relatively larger role for the capital markets and a smaller role for banks, than is true in most other major economies. And we have preserved, despite substantial consolidation, a system that comfortably accommodates the largest globally-active financial institutions side by side with a competitive and diverse array of regional and community banking organizations. We are very open to the presence of foreign financial institutions, and perhaps as important, have traditionally been very open to attracting non-U.S. financial talent to work in our markets. While the number of foreign banking organizations operating in the US has contracted over the last decade, the overall importance has grown. Foreign banking organizations now account for 45 percent of total banking assets in the United States, up from around 40 percent a decade ago, and they account for a substantial share of total securities underwriting in this market. Our framework for supervision and regulation is supportive of innovation. Much of the most transforming innovations in finance started in our markets or were adopted more quickly and more broadly here than in many other financial systems. The U.S. system, relative to the model in many other countries, has involved a continuous, risk-focused process of supervision and a strong enforcement mechanism working alongside the supervisory community. In addition, we have traditionally assigned a more important role to market discipline, importantly through a strong disclosure regime, in reinforcing the supervisory regime, than has been the case in other markets. Our system is successful in matching capital with ideas, in allocating savings to where returns are highest, in creating opportunities for households to better withstand the costs of change and dislocation that are inevitable offshoot of an open and dynamic market economy, and in spreading risk to where it can be best absorbed. The high degree of competition and flexibility that characterize our approach helps drive the pace of innovation, both in new forms of financial instruments and in new ways to manage risks. No financial system, of course, is without vulnerability. And we face a number of important challenges in making sure our system is as strong as it can to be. But the substantial competition from a diverse set of financial institutions, including a strong presence by foreign financial institutions, is an integral part of what makes our financial system work well. Our system would not be as efficient or as innovative, and our financial institutions would not be as strong, if we were less open or less committed to giving all institutions similar national treatment and equality of opportunity. I thought I would give you a brief overview of the some of the key challenges we face as supervisors and those that confront the risk management community. The fundamentals of the present U.S. expansion seem relatively strong, with confidence in its sustainability increasing. As the balance of risks to the outlook have evolved, and the financial markets have built in expectations of a move to less accommodative financial conditions, this is a good time to assess how well the U.S. financial system is positioned to deal with this transition, and to withstand the effects of future stress, if that were to materialize. From our perspective, the U.S. financial system is in reasonably strong shape. Risk adjusted capital ratios are strong, and earnings have been robust. Non-performing loan ratios are very low - at about one percent on average across the banking industry. The financial markets are pricing risk in exposure to financial institutions at what are still relatively low levels. BIS Review 36/2004 1 
Securitization and the rapid growth in credit risk transfer instruments have enabled risk to be spread more broadly. Risk management practices have improved in sophistication and rigor. Firms have made substantial investments in improving the strength and resilience of their technology and systems infrastructure. Payments and settlements systems have stronger safeguards in place. The overall capacity of the system to handle large hedging volume has increased substantially. Despite the fact that we have experienced a sustained period of accommodative monetary and financial conditions, net credit growth to the private sector has been moderate. The overall financial position of the corporate sector is strong. New household borrowing has grown rapidly, but the broad measures of the ratio of debt service to income remain at a level of roughly 13 percent, and estimates suggest that only a quarter of total household debt is exposed to rising interest rates in the near term. Net credit growth to emerging markets has been moderate relative to past periods. Growth in commercial bank assets has picked up a bit in recent quarters, but remains significantly below the pace of the second half of the 1990s. As the financial markets have built in expectations of a gradual rise in the fed funds rate over the next two years, financial institutions have had some time to position themselves for an environment of higher interest rates and volatility. There have been adjustments in credit spreads and other risk assets, which in some areas had fallen to historically low levels, but these reversals have been tempered by what it still overall a favorable view of corporate credit fundamentals. And it is worth drawing attention to the fact that the average duration of the mortgage market has increased significantly over the last nine months to the point where the amount of hedging pressure on interest rates related to extension risk is likely to be contained even as interest rates rise. The fact that these adjustments have begun ahead of any change in monetary policy probably will help diminish the strains in the financial system that might otherwise be expected to accompany this type of transition. Even so, risk managers need to be attentive to, and react appropriately to, the pressures that could emerge following this extended period of low interest rates and a steep yield curve. The agenda for the supervisory community remains dominated by the following broad priorities: • We are moving ahead with Basle II to bring a more sophisticated assessment of capital adequacy and risk management techniques to the supervisory framework. • Our ongoing supervisory examinations continue to concentrate on strengthening the internal management and control infrastructure across the various dimensions of risk management and compliance. • We are supporting the important efforts underway to better align U.S. and international accounting standards and to improve the quality and integrity of public disclosure. • We are working to encourage firms to proceed with their investments in greater resilience and geographic range called for in the Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System. • We continue to encourage efforts to strengthen all aspects of our national payments and settlement systems. • And we are engaged across a number of fronts internationally to provide a more integrated framework of supervision that better matches the integration of national financial systems and the increased global reach of the largest financial institutions. As part of our supervisory process we monitor closely the evolution in risk management practice across a broad array of financial institutions. Through horizontal reviews that focus on specific dimensions of risk management, we have a reasonably good sense of where the frontier in risk management practices is across the industry, and understand where the gap between this frontier and average practice is the greatest. The size of this gap in practice can increase in market conditions where competitive pressures and a search for return works to erode discipline. I thought it might be useful to highlight some of the areas where leading practice is farthest ahead of typical practice. Leading practice does not imply that there is a definitely superior model that we expect all firms to converge to over time. In most of these areas, there is some diversity in what defines the frontier of excellence. We recognize this, even as we encourage firms to put in place stronger and more sophisticated systems more commensurate with the complexity of the risks they are taking. 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
• Comprehensive aggregation of credit exposure: The most sophisticated among large diversified financial institutions have well-developed systems for aggregating credit exposure, with a common methodology and results available relatively quickly, across the full range of transactions and business lines they engage in with a single entity or groups of entities with correlated risks. • Stress testing and scenario analysis: Firms at the leading edge have moved well beyond reliance on “value-at-risk” complemented by stress tests of discrete shocks. They employ stress tests built around more exacting, forward-looking scenarios integrating large moves in a number of variables, more tailored to the risk profile of the firm and current market conditions, and the reactions of other market participants and counterparties. • Counterparty credit risk management: The most sophisticated firms use much more careful and sophisticated approaches for measuring potential future exposure, and they analyze how exposures may respond in conditions of significant market stress. With respect to hedge fund exposure in particular, the leading firms employ comprehensive evaluation of the risk profile of the hedge fund to set credit thresholds and terms and a more disciplined approach to setting sufficiently high levels of initial margin. • Measuring and managing interest rate risk: Leading institutions assess their exposure to interest rate risk in a comprehensive manner across the firm’s business lines. The most advanced approaches are able to assess the impact of rate, spread and implied volatility movements under multiple scenarios in both normal and stressed market conditions. These institutions also strive to achieve a balance between shorter term earnings impacts, and the longer-term preservation of economic value. • Liquidity risk: Similar evolution has occurred in liquidity management with leading practice now subjecting dynamic cash flow projections to a range of adverse scenarios relevant to the risk profile of the firm (such as a sustained loss of access to funding or a significant ratings downgrade or a systemic disruption to market liquidity) to assess the impact on funding. • Compliance risk management: Many firms are working to enhance their overall corporate compliance management processes, and the supervisors expect that firms will employ strong risk management practices with appropriate levels of testing. In response to the more exacting requirements of the Bank Secrecy and Patriot Acts and anti-money laundering controls, leading firms have now moved beyond manual systems with very limited capacity to look at patterns of transactions over time and across businesses and countries, and have put in place automated systems for monitoring transactions with more sophisticated filters for identifying suspicious patterns of behavior. The quality of internal compliance controls in the leading firms has advanced in other areas as well, with higher level oversight of an independent compliance function with more rigorous policies to address conflicts of interest involving hedge funds and proprietary trading and the flow of confidential information across the firm. These are examples of leading practice, and they are not at this point standard operating procedure across the range of institutions where they should be. Systematically assessing the evolving frontier of leading risk management practice is a useful way to ensure that we continue to build on the significant improvements in the overall stability and resilience of the U.S. financial system that have been achieved over the past two decades. This is important to do on a continuing basis to strengthen the shock absorbers in the financial system. It is important to do even when, or perhaps particularly when the overall economic environment looks quite favorable, as it does today. We look forward to working with the foreign banking community to continue to identify ways in which risk management practices can be strengthened. It is in our mutual interest to insure that the practices employed broadly by the industry continue to move towards the frontier of risk management practices.  Thank you. BIS Review 36/2004 3 
Susan Schmidt Bies: Bank Secrecy Act enforcement  Testimony by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 3 June 2004. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs to discuss the Federal Reserve’s participation in efforts to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. The Federal Reserve and the other federal financial institutions supervisory agencies play a critical role in these efforts, and the Federal Reserve is actively engaged in a number of initiatives to refine and strengthen examination protocols in this area and to effectively deploy resources to prevent, identify, and address problems at the banking organizations supervised by the Federal Reserve.  In my remarks today, I will describe for you some of the important steps we are taking to fulfill our supervisory mission, to guide the institutions we supervise, and, in cooperation with the other banking and financial services regulators and the Treasury Department, to make every effort to use our supervisory tools to enhance the banking industry’s role in preventing and detecting money laundering and terrorist financing. The Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering program is multifaceted. It involves work in bank supervision, applications, enforcement, investigations, training, coordination with the law enforcement and intelligence communities, and rule writing. This morning, I will touch on some of these aspects of the Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering program, but will concentrate on bank supervision efforts and enforcement matters.  I would like to begin with a few words about the Federal Reserve’s supervisory philosophy in this area. The Federal Reserve has long shared Congress’s view that financial institutions and their employees are on the frontline of the effort to combat illicit financial activity. The Federal Reserve believes that the banking organizations it supervises must take every reasonable step to identify, minimize, and manage any risks that illicit financial activity may pose to individual financial institutions and the banking industry. Accordingly, the Federal Reserve has required the financial institutions it supervises to put in place appropriate controls and risk management mechanisms, and has also devoted extensive resources to issuing guidance on legislative and regulatory requirements and sound banking practices, as well as to coordinating supervisory efforts with other agencies. In addition, the Federal Reserve uses its enforcement authority, where necessary, in the event that serious problems or risks cannot be satisfactorily addressed in the supervisory process.  Supervisory strategy and procedures for anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing It has been our longstanding policy that Federal Reserve supervisors incorporate a Bank Secrecy Act compliance and anti-money laundering program component into every safety and soundness examination conducted by a Reserve Bank. This means that on a regular examination cycle, examiners seek to determine if a banking organization’s Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) and anti-money laundering (AML) compliance programs are satisfactory and are commensurate with the organization’s business activities and risk profiles. Examinations are conducted at the state member banks, bank holding companies, Edge Act corporations, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks supervised by the Federal Reserve. Every Reserve Bank has BSA/AML specialists and coordinators on its staff, and, since the late 1980s, the Board has had an anti-money laundering program in its supervision division overseen by a senior official. Simply put, Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money laundering compliance has for years been an integral part of the bank supervision process at the Federal Reserve. Furthermore, the Federal Reserve’s enforcement program has a strong history of addressing both anti-money laundering and safety and soundness problems in formal actions, where necessary. While the number of actions may fluctuate somewhat from year to year, the Federal Reserve’s exercise of its enforcement authority has been consistently strong and timely.  The Federal Reserve supervision process includes both on-site examinations and off-site surveillance and monitoring. The Federal Reserve generally conducts an on-site examination of each bank it supervises once every twelve to eighteen months, and at each examination staff reviews the institution’s anti-money laundering procedures and its compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act, as BIS Review 35/2004 1 
amended by the USA Patriot Act and new Treasury regulations. For large, complex banking organizations, the safety and soundness examination process is continuous, and anti-money laundering and BSA compliance is incorporated into examinations conducted throughout the year. The Federal Reserve always includes BSA/AML examinations in the supervisory strategy for every banking organization we supervise.  A key component of anti-money laundering examinations is the institution’s compliance with the BSA compliance program requirement. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies have compliance program requirements for institutions they supervise. In general, the rules require a bank to establish, maintain, and document a program that includes:  • a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing compliance with the BSA,  • independent testing of the bank’s compliance with the BSA,  • training of appropriate bank personnel, and  • the designation of an individual responsible for coordinating and monitoring day-to-day compliance with the BSA.  The Federal Reserve works to ensure that the banking organizations we supervise understand the importance of having in place an effective anti-money laundering program. When a Reserve Bank conducts a BSA/anti-money laundering examination of a banking organization under its supervision, the four components of the program establish the framework for the examination. To properly evaluate the effectiveness of a banking organization’s anti-money laundering program, the Federal Reserve has developed comprehensive examination procedures and manuals, and regularly provides training for its examiners. The BSA/AML examination procedures are currently under revision to reflect newly issued regulations under the USA Patriot Act.  The Federal Reserve’s BSA examinations are risk-focused. While a “core” BSA examination is required of all banking organizations, risk-focused procedures allow examiners to apply the appropriate level of scrutiny to higher-risk business lines, where necessary, and alleviate burden where high-risk products or customers are not present. In other words, a small state member bank with a low-risk customer base receives a considerably different and less burdensome BSA/AML examination than a large, complex banking organization with international operations.  The examination process  During every safety and soundness examination of banking organizations under Federal Reserve supervision, bank examiners specially trained in BSA requirements review the institution’s previous and current compliance with the BSA. Examiners first determine whether the institution has included BSA/AML procedures in all of its operational areas, including retail operations, credit, private banking, and trust, and has adequate internal control procedures to detect, deter and report money laundering activities, as well as other potential financial crimes. As part of such an examination, bank examiners also review an institution’s fraud detection and prevention capabilities, and its policies and procedures for cooperating with law enforcement (whether through responding to subpoenas, acting on information requests under section 314 of the USA Patriot Act, or otherwise).  Our supervision policy guidance in this area requires that examiners also conduct a review of the databases of Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) and Currency Transaction Reports (CTRs) to determine if the banking organization that is about to be examined has filed such reports and that they appear complete and timely. Examiners are not doing this to count the number of SARs and CTRs, to compare their findings against other institutions, or to base any criticisms solely on a numerical count, but rather to make sure, for example, that the bank or U.S. branch of a foreign bank understands its obligations in this critical area and has taken steps to fulfill its responsibilities by filing timely and accurate reports with law enforcement and bank regulators.  The on-site examination begins as a review of the institution’s written compliance program and documentation of self-testing and training, as well as a review of the institution’s system for capturing and reporting certain transactions pursuant to the Bank Secrecy Act, including any suspicious or unusual transactions possibly associated with money laundering or other financial crimes. Transaction testing is generally conducted to verify these systems.  2 BIS Review 35/2004 
In those instances where there are deficiencies in the BSA/AML program, including failures to adequately document self-testing or training, obvious breakdowns in operating systems, or failures to implement adequate internal controls, the Federal Reserve’s examination procedures require examiners to conduct a more intensified second-stage examination that would include the review of source documents and expanded transaction testing, among other steps.  There is an important correlation between the areas covered by a BSA/AML examination and an institution’s overall risk management and internal controls. Thus, bank examiners take into account an organization’s enterprise-wide corporate governance mechanisms and how they are applied. The Federal Reserve’s bank examiners are able to apply a broad perspective and depth of organizational knowledge to the area of BSA/AML and to coordinate with examination and analytic staff to ensure that the safety and soundness and BSA/AML examinations are integrated and comprehensive. The Federal Reserve has found that there is an important synergy gained by integrating the safety and soundness and BSA/AML supervisory processes.  Enforcement actions The Federal Reserve focuses significant resources on the prevention and early resolution of deficiencies within the supervisory framework. When problems are identified at a banking organization, they are typically communicated to the management and directors in a written report. The management and directors are requested to address identified problems voluntarily and to take measures to ensure that the problems are corrected and will not recur. Most problems are resolved promptly after they are brought to the attention of a banking organization’s management and directors.  In some instances, however, examiners identify problems relating to anti-money laundering measures that are pervasive, repeated, unresolved by management, or otherwise of such serious concern that use of the Federal Reserve’s enforcement authority is warranted. If the problem does not require a formal action, the Reserve Banks have the authority to take informal, non-public supervisory action, such as requiring the adoption of an appropriate resolution by an institution’s board of directors or the execution of a memorandum of understanding between an institution and the Reserve Bank.  When informal action will not suffice, the Federal Reserve has authority to take formal, public enforcement action to compel the management and directors of a banking organization to address anti-money laundering and BSA compliance problems. These actions include written agreements, cease and desist orders, and civil money penalties, and are legally enforceable in court. These actions are not delegated to the Reserve Banks, and are undertaken only with the concurrence of the Board’s General Counsel and the Board’s Director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation. Because these actions are public, they can have a significant impact on a banking organization, particularly one that is a public company. In determining whether formal action is appropriate, Federal Reserve staff considers all relevant factors, including the nature, severity, and duration of the problem, the anticipated resources and actions necessary to resolve the problem, and the responsiveness of the directors and management.  In cases where examiners have identified a violation of the compliance program requirement, the federal banking agencies are bound by law to take formal enforcement action. The same law requiring the banking agencies to promulgate rules requiring the four-part compliance program that I discussed earlier provides that if an institution fails to establish and maintain the required procedures, or if it has failed to correct any previously identified problem with the procedures, then the agency must issue a formal action requiring the institution to correct the problem. The Federal Reserve takes this responsibility very seriously and has issued a number of public actions against banking organizations in fulfillment of this statutory mandate. Federal Reserve staff exerts every effort to ensure that this statute is implemented consistently, and Board staff acts as a central coordinator for the examination and enforcement staff at the different Reserve Banks. Over the past three years, for example, the Federal Reserve has taken approximately twenty-five formal, public enforcement actions addressing BSA/AML-related matters. Actions have been taken against large banking organizations as well as smaller ones - the one constant is that the examination process identified regulatory violations in the organizations’ compliance programs that, under the law, mandated the supervisory actions.  In addition to taking action itself, the Federal Reserve may refer a BSA-related matter to Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) for consideration of an enforcement action based solely on BSA violations, rather than a program failure or issues relating to safety and soundness. Treasury has delegated to the federal financial banking agencies the authority to examine for BSA BIS Review 35/2004 3 
compliance those institutions they normally examine for safety and soundness; however, Treasury has not delegated the authority to take an enforcement action, such as the assessment of a fine, for violations of the Bank Secrecy Act.  Federal Reserve staff coordinates enforcement actions with other regulators or agencies, including in the area of anti-money laundering. If a banking organization’s problems involve entities supervised by different regulators, resolution of enterprise-wide problems may involve multiple enforcement actions. For example, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), FinCEN, and the Federal Reserve coordinated their recent enforcement actions against Riggs National Corporation; Riggs Bank, N.A.; and Riggs International Banking Corporation, the bank’s Edge Act subsidiary, to ensure consistency and concurrent resolution of open issues. The Federal Reserve coordinates enforcement actions with state banking supervisors on a regular basis, and enforcement actions involving operations of foreign banking organizations may be resolved in cooperation with supervisors abroad. In several recent matters, there was close coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice as well.  The applications process Before I describe some more aspects of the Federal Reserve’s supervisory process, let me touch on a very important component of the Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering process - the processing of applications and notices filed with the Board. The Federal Reserve has had a longstanding practice of considering an applicant’s compliance with anti-money laundering laws in evaluating various applications, including bank mergers and acquisitions of insured depositories by bank holding companies as well as applications filed by foreign banks to establish U.S. banking offices under the Foreign Bank Supervisory Enhancement Act. The USA Patriot Act included a provision memorializing our practice in the application area and required the Board to take into account the effectiveness of an applicant’s BSA compliance program when it considers applications under various laws.  Under our longstanding protocols as well as the new law, every application matter considered by the Federal Reserve includes a BSA/AML compliance-related component whereby staff has to make specific judgments regarding an applicant’s compliance with the law in this important area. While I cannot, of course, comment on specific cases, I can report to you that Board staff has on some recent occasions advised banking organizations considering expansion or other activities requiring the filing of applications with the Federal Reserve to concentrate instead on their BSA/AML programs. While not the full equivalent of an enforcement action, I am sure that you can appreciate the fact that every banking organization that is seeking or planning on seeking Federal Reserve approval of an application makes every effort possible to ensure that its anti-money laundering program is considered to be fully satisfactory by examiners and that any deficiencies that may be identified are addressed as expeditiously as possible. The applications process gives the Board a strong tool in the BSA/AML area.  Guidance to banking organizations Turning back to the Federal Reserve’s normal supervision process, Board and Reserve Bank supervisors seek to provide guidance to banking organizations to assist them to fully understand applicable regulatory requirements and what is expected by the regulators. While financial institutions are, of course, fully responsible for their own compliance, the supervisors play an important role in ensuring that regulatory requirements are correctly understood and uniformly applied. This is particularly true in areas such as compliance with new regulations promulgated since the USA Patriot Act.  The Federal Reserve views its supervisory role as including initiatives to enhance awareness and understanding by examiners throughout the Federal Reserve System, by banking organizations under Federal Reserve supervision, and by the financial industry at large. To promote a full understanding of anti-money laundering requirements, the Federal Reserve issues Supervision and Regulation letters, which are used to advise Reserve Bank supervisory staff, supervised institutions, and the banking industry about policy matters; provides on-going training to examiners; speaks regularly before the financial industry; and issues guidance in conjunction with other regulators and Treasury. These initiatives are meant to respond to or anticipate questions that arise regarding anti-money laundering requirements. The Federal Reserve is keenly aware of the resources that anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing requirements demand of financial institutions and believes that it is our duty to assist them in meeting their obligations.  4 BIS Review 35/2004 
Federal Reserve resource commitment The Federal Reserve’s BSA/AML function ranges from supervising and regularly examining banking organizations subject to Federal Reserve supervision for compliance with the BSA and relevant regulations, to requiring corrective action for detected weaknesses in BSA/AML programs, to enhancing money laundering investigations by providing expertise to the U.S. law enforcement community, and to providing training to U.S. law enforcement authorities and various foreign central banks and government agencies. Over the past three years, for example, Federal Reserve experts in BSA/AML-related matters have participated in special reviews of funds transfers for federal law enforcement and intelligence authorities, taught classes at FBI and Department of Homeland Security training academies, held seminars for central bank and foreign supervisory authorities in over ten countries, including Botswana, Mexico, Russia and the United Arab Emirates, and engaged in discussions on AML-related matters at international fora such as the Basel Cross-border Group and the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF).  Over the course of the past ten plus years, the Federal Reserve’s anti-money laundering program has grown dramatically. From a senior official at the outset assigned to coordinate the Federal Reserve’s BSA activities in the late 1980s, to the creation and staffing in early 2004 of a new section within the Board’s Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation dedicated solely to anti-money laundering efforts (the Anti-Money Laundering Policy and Compliance Section), the Federal Reserve continues to commit a growing number of its resources to BSA/AML compliance. In 1993, the Federal Reserve System began the practice of designating a senior examiner at each of the twelve Reserve Banks to serve as a Bank Secrecy Act coordinator for the BSA examiners at that Reserve Bank. The number of senior BSA examiners throughout the System has grown tremendously, particularly since the enactment of the USA Patriot Act and the increasing complexity of BSA examinations. The web of BSA examiners throughout the Federal Reserve System is brought together through a direct communication channel with the Board’s AML Policy and Compliance Section. This communication is an important tool for gathering examination experiences and providing consistent guidance throughout the Federal Reserve System.  By any standard, the Federal Reserve has taken a leadership role in the U.S. government’s and international banking and regulatory community’s anti-money laundering efforts.  Supervisory coordination Due to the complexity of financial institutions today, it is imperative that the Federal Reserve coordinate with a long list of agencies on issues tied to the Bank Secrecy Act. First, the Federal Reserve views the Department of the Treasury and FinCEN as important partners due to their leadership role in administering the Bank Secrecy Act. In addition, for a number of complex financial institutions, the Federal Reserve shares supervisory and regulatory responsibilities with the OCC, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of Thrift Supervision at the federal level, with the banking agencies of the various states, and with foreign banking authorities for the international operations of U.S. banks and the operations of foreign banks in the United States.  This network of partners requires a high degree of coordination. The regulatory authorities communicate constantly regarding BSA-related matters. For example, among bank regulators, there are a number of electronic systems in place that allow secure access to examination information. This allows regulators to monitor the status of organizations under their direct or indirect purview. It is also the Federal Reserve’s practice to notify relevant functional regulators when a supervisory action may have impact on an institution subject to their supervision.  In addition, bank regulators collaborate in the development of consistent examination procedures and examiner training. The USA Patriot Act required a surge of rulemaking activity, and the Federal Reserve and its regulatory colleagues continue to advise Treasury as it completes this important work.  Law enforcement coordination The Federal Reserve routinely coordinates with federal and state law enforcement agencies with regard to potential criminal matters, including anti-money laundering and financial crime activities. This coordination may occur when the Federal Reserve takes action to address matters that are also addressed in a criminal proceeding, when the financial condition of a bank is affected by a criminal matter, or when law enforcement draws on Federal Reserve staff expertise in its investigative work. BIS Review 35/2004 5 
The Federal Reserve maintains open channels of communication with law enforcement, whether through interagency working groups or informal staff level contacts.  Conclusion The Federal Reserve believes that banking organizations should take reasonable and prudent steps to combat illicit financial activities such as money laundering and terrorist financing, and to minimize their vulnerability to risks associated with such activity. For this reason, the Federal Reserve’s commitment to ensuring compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act continues to be a high supervisory priority. The Federal Reserve has an important role in ensuring that criminal activity does not pose a systemic threat, and, as important, in improving the ability of individual banking organizations in the United States and abroad to protect themselves from illicit activities.  Thank you again for inviting me today to explain the Federal Reserve’s work in this important area.  6 BIS Review 35/2004 
Lars Nyberg: Economic activity and housing finance in Sweden Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference, in Frankfurt am Main, 4 June 2004. *      *      * I would like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here to Frankfurt and introduce “EuroCatalyst Investment Focus: Nordic covered bonds”. I shall start with a few words about the Riksbank’s activities. With the objective of maintaining price stability, the Riksbank conducts a clear monetary policy with an inflation target of 2 per cent one to two years ahead, with a tolerance for deviations of plus/minus 1 percentage point. In addition, the Riksbank has the task of promoting a safe and efficient payment system. As part of its work on carrying out these two tasks, the Riksbank publishes an Inflation Report four times a year and a Financial Stability Report twice a year. The most recent Inflation Report was published last week, while the latest Financial Stability Report was published the day before yesterday. For those of you that are interested in economic and financial developments in Sweden, I would recommend that you read both Reports.  Economic activity Everything I mention now about economic activity and the assessment of inflation is taken directly from the Riksbank’s latest Inflation Report (2004:02), which was presented on Friday, 28 May. In the Report we forecast GDP growth in the OECD area to average around 3 per cent over the coming three years. With regard to the outlook for Sweden, the Riksbank foresees an average annual growth rate of almost 3 per cent in the coming years.  Looking at inflation prospects, the rate of price increases is expected to rise in the period ahead as resource utilisation increases in Sweden and abroad. However, a continuation of relatively weak labour market conditions and a favourable cost situation mean that the rise in inflation is expected to be relatively moderate in Sweden. Our forecast in the Report is for a risk-adjusted inflation rate of 1.1 per cent one year ahead and 1.8 per cent two years ahead, measured as UND1X inflation. Swedish housing finance On 1 July this year the Act on issuing secured bonds (2003:1223) will come into force. One of the main incentives behind the new Act is to offer Swedish mortgage institutions the same favourable financing opportunities that these institutions face in European countries that have already introduced similar legislation. So will this new legislation result in a new financing structure for Swedish mortgage institutions and in large issue volumes in the international markets? This remains to be seen. The Riksbank has, for reasons of principle, been hesitant towards the introduction of the legislation on secured bonds, primarily because the supervisory task charged to Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) could be perceived as an implied government guarantee, but also because the legislation in this field entails a return to regulation in the credit market, which in itself can be questioned. However, similar legislation has been introduced in several European countries, and mortgage bonds regulated according to this legislation on secured bonds have come in various ways to be viewed as more creditworthy than mortgage bonds that are not. It can therefore be claimed that Swedish mortgage institutions should be given the same opportunities to issue secured bonds as mortgage institutions in other countries, which is also the view held by the Riksbank.  Swedish mortgage institutions today already observe such strict legislation that they can be viewed as a kind of special company in a securitisation. The potential effects of introducing particular legislation for secured bonds are therefore possibly less in Sweden than in other countries, and it is difficult to see that the legislation regarding secured bonds would entail any dramatic change in the activities of Swedish mortgage institutions. However, there are advantages involved in introducing such legislation. Having legislation that is in line with that of other European countries will contribute to reducing any uncertainty, particularly from foreign investors, regarding the terms connected with owning securities issued by Swedish mortgage institutions. This should reasonably result in a broader circle of investors that are willing to invest in securities issued by Swedish mortgage institutions, and hopefully also BIS Review 35/2004 1 
reduce their borrowing costs. In addition, European central banks currently regard this type of mortgage bond as more creditworthy than mortgage bonds not covered by legislation on secured bonds, when market participants pledge collateral with them. Even the Basel II regulations, which will come into force in 2007, provide scope for regarding mortgage bonds covered by legislation on secured bonds as more creditworthy than mortgage bonds not covered by such legislation. However, the Swedish market for mortgage bonds is already a large, liquid market that has functioned well since its deregulation at the end of the 1980s. It is the third-largest mortgage bond market in Europe, after the German and Danish markets. After the Swedish government, Swedish mortgage institutions are the largest issuers in both the money and bond markets in Sweden. As much as around 40 per cent of all lending to the non-bank public is mediated via mortgage institutions, which largely finance their activities by issuing bonds and certificates in the securities markets. The market is dominated by five mortgage institutions, which together account for around 99 per cent of all borrowing. The four largest mortgage institutions are subsidiaries of the four largest Swedish banks, while the fifth, SBAB, is state-owned. The mortgage institutions’ annual reports show that as much as around 30 per cent of securities borrowing is carried out abroad, which suggests that there was already considerable interest among foreign players before the legislation on secured bonds was proposed. However, there are considerable differences between the institutions. Some institutions have an explicit policy of raising half of their borrowing requirement abroad in their own name, while others manage their borrowing abroad via their parent bank, which issues securities in the banking group’s name so as to ensure the lowest possible borrowing costs. Neither is it unusual for banks that own mortgage institutions to buy bonds issued by the mortgage institutions of competing banking groups. The reason for doing so is that banks are not allowed to use bonds issued by their own institutions as collateral when borrowing from the Riksbank, while they are allowed to pledge bonds issued by institutions outside their own banking group. As a result, mortgage bonds are largely owned by the banks, which contributes to reducing liquidity in the mortgage market. There are several factors that affect the ability of companies to borrow in the market. These include, of course, the possibility to easily assess the borrowers’ credit ratings and the quality of their assets. This is made easier if the borrower has an extensive contact network so that institutional investors are familiar with the borrower and its activities. Building up and maintaining this type of contact network and credibility requires time and considerable resources. The Swedish mortgage institutions have long established such contact networks, primarily in the Swedish securities market, where the liquidity for Swedish mortgage bonds is greatest. A rough measure of liquidity, the ratio of bonds sold and the stock of outstanding bonds, shows that bonds were sold around 4 times during one year in the Swedish mortgage bond market. This can be compared with the market for Swedish government bonds, where the corresponding turnover rate is around 7. The difference is not insignificant, and indicates that more can be done to create a more liquid secondary market for Swedish mortgage bonds.  The new legislation will create the conditions for improved terms for mortgage institutions and housing finance. However, the responsibility for making use of these conditions will lie with the banks and mortgage institutions themselves. A decisive factor as to whether the banks and mortgage institutions will succeed in utilising the new conditions offered through secured bonds is that they listen to investors’ wishes. First and foremost, this requires establishing a liquid secondary market for secured bonds. This requires willingness to issue large volumes of bonds in the primary market. Maturities and constructions must also be tailored to investors’ requirements. The institutions have not always had to work in this way in the domestic market. The composition of mortgage institutions’ loan portfolios, and the state of the institutions’ borrowers, are of course decisive factors in pricing the securities issued by the mortgage institutions. The mortgage institutions’ lending, broken down into different types of property, shows that most of the lending, around 94 per cent, goes to financing ownership of single-family dwellings and apartment buildings. It is therefore primarily the developments in the household sector and in the housing market that are important when assessing the mortgage institutions’ assets.  The Riksbank’s Financial Stability Report contains analyses of the household sector and the property market. The most recent Report observed that Swedish households are continuing to increase their debt burden at a rapid rate. Improved disposable incomes, low interest rates and high turnover in the housing market are some of the most important reasons behind this. Households’ debt in relation to disposable income has increased from around 90 per cent in the mid-1990s to almost 120 per cent 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
today. However, interest payments after tax on these loans have comprised around 5 per cent of disposable incomes, which can be compared with levels of almost 11 per cent at the beginning of the 1990s. Both the debt ratio and the interest ratio are expected to continue to increase over the coming years. Nevertheless, Swedish households’ ability to service their debt is relatively good. In addition to their disposable incomes, households also have assets that can be used as a buffer for increased borrowing costs. Their total assets exceed their total debts. A special article studies household debt and households’ ability to service this debt in different income classes. In the article the Riksbank has examined how households would be affected by increased interest costs or rising unemployment. The results show that a significant part of the debt is accounted for by households that have both substantial assets and fairly sizable margins; not even a sharp increase in interest rates or unemployment would affect their ability to service debt to an extent where it would seriously increase the risks in lending to Swedish households. The risks in lending to the household sector therefore remain small, even when individual households are studied. Here it can be added that it was not the household sector that caused problems for the banks during the financial crisis of the early 1990s; despite the fact that the interest ratio rose to 11 per cent in 1991 and unemployment peaked during 1993 at 8.5 per cent. With regard to developments in house prices, the assessment is still that Swedish house valuations are relatively reasonable. Fundamentals such as rising disposable incomes and falling interest costs could to a large extent explain the observed price trend. The demand for housing is expected to grow more rapidly than the supply. However, developments in house prices in Sweden vary considerably from region to region. Prices in metropolitan regions have risen by a significantly larger amount than for the country as a whole, although prices in the Stockholm region have stagnated over the past two years. There has also been a steeper price rise for tenant-owned apartments than for single-family dwellings. It is difficult, at present, to envisage any tendencies towards imbalances that could lead to a substantial fall in prices. Some form of unforeseen event, such as changes in regulations or macroeconomic shocks, would probably be necessary to cause prices to fall sharply. The fact that interest rates will rise in the long term should be included in household expectations and can hardly be regarded as an unforeseen event in any economic scenario. The market for apartment buildings has also been characterised by rising prices since 1994. Regulations such as those on utility value, and the system of central rent negotiations, normally leads to stable, even developments in the prices of apartment buildings. However, the conversion of rental properties into tenant-owner associations has resulted in recent years in relatively sharp price rises for apartment buildings. Price developments can, of course, be affected by changed conditions such as a substantial increase in new construction or a rapid decline in demand. However, a low level of housing construction and a high demand for housing, particularly in metropolitan regions, indicates that this will not be the case. Conclusion The Riksbank’s work on monetary policy and financial stability emphasises the importance of transparency, clarity and predictability. These are also important factors in the securities markets in which mortgage institutions are active. I hope that mortgage institutions’ own actions, coupled with the new legislation, will help to render the market for housing finance more efficient. BIS Review 35/2004 3 
European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 3 June 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. However, I should first like to inform you about some decisions we have taken regarding the publication of staff macroeconomic projections.  As you are aware, twice a year Eurosystem staff, that is, staff of the ECB and the euro area national central banks, jointly produce a set of macroeconomic projections. These serve as one of the inputs into the deliberations of the Governing Council. Subsequently, the projections are published in the June and December issues of the Monthly Bulletin. As you also know, in the interim period, that is, for March and September, ECB staff produce what is basically an update of the Eurosystem staff projections. These projections also serve as input into the meetings of the Governing Council, but so far have not been published.  The positive experience and familiarity gained over the past few years with the publication of macroeconomic projections have given us the confidence to go a step further by also publishing the interim ECB staff projections. Therefore, in the spirit of transparency and accountability, the ECB staff projections will also be published from September 2004 onwards.  In all cases, that is, four times a year, the projections will be published in the appropriate form in the Monthly Bulletin. In addition, as a further step towards providing relevant information in a timely manner, we will from today onwards provide you with an advance copy of the Monthly Bulletin section covering the projections. This advance copy will be made available shortly after the end of this press conference, both in hard copy and on the ECB’s website. The same procedure will be applied in September and every three months thereafter.  The fact that we have decided to publish the interim ECB staff projections in future does not change their role as one of the inputs into our deliberations. The Governing Council continues to base its monetary policy decisions on a comprehensive economic analysis, which is cross-checked with the monetary analysis. Let me now turn to today’s monetary policy discussion.  In summary, we noted that the economic recovery has strengthened over recent months. At the same time, we have also witnessed stronger inflationary pressures over the short term. Nevertheless, we are still of the view that the medium-term outlook remains in line with price stability. Accordingly, we left the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The low level of interest rates continues to support the economic recovery. We will remain vigilant with regard to all developments which could affect the risks to price stability over the medium term. I shall now explain our assessment in more detail. In the context of our economic analysis, the latest data releases confirm that the economic recovery in the euro area is under way. According to Eurostat, real GDP grew by 0.6% quarter on quarter in the first quarter of this year, and quarterly real GDP growth for the fourth quarter of last year was revised upwards from 0.3% to 0.4%. The more pronounced pace of real GDP growth mainly reflected both stronger private consumption and buoyant exports. Latest survey data still provide mixed signals with regard to the underlying strength of the recovery but remain fully consistent with ongoing growth in the current quarter.  Looking ahead, the conditions for a continuation of the recovery remain in place. Economic growth outside the euro area continues to be strong and should promote export growth. On the domestic side, investment should benefit from the positive global environment as well as from the favourable financing conditions. Improvements in corporate efficiency and higher profits are also supporting business investment. Moreover, private consumption should gradually recover from the stagnation witnessed during most of 2003, broadly in line with growth in real disposable income which, with the usual lag, should be further underpinned by an increase in employment growth later on.  BIS Review 35/2004 1 
Accordingly, we expect an ongoing recovery in euro area economic growth over the coming quarters, leading to a broader and stronger upswing in the course of next year. This is also reflected in the Eurosystem staff projections, which envisage euro area real GDP growth of between 1.4% and 2.0% on average in 2004, rising to between 1.7% and 2.7% in 2005. Available forecasts from international and private organisations convey a broadly similar picture. With regard to this scenario, there are risks and uncertainties in both directions. On the one hand, the current rather robust pace of economic growth outside the euro area, the recent development in private consumption as well as some survey data imply a potential for stronger growth dynamics, particularly in the short term. On the other hand, high oil prices could pose a downside risk. Over a longer horizon, concerns also remain about the persistence of global imbalances. Concerning prices, recent oil price developments have created considerable upward pressure on consumer prices. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.5% in May, partly due to base effects, after standing at 2.0% in April. Markets expect oil prices to decline gradually from recent peaks. If they were to remain at their recent high levels, it is to be expected that inflation rates would continue to be higher than previously anticipated and stay above 2% for longer than just a few months ahead. When assessing price trends over the medium term, however, the outlook remains favourable. In particular, overall import price developments should remain moderate and inflationary pressure from wages and unit labour costs should be contained. Both factors should help to bring annual rates of consumer price inflation back to below 2% in 2005. These views are in line with the Eurosystem staff projections, which put average annual HICP inflation at between 1.9% and 2.3% in 2004 and between 1.1% and 2.3% in 2005. They are also broadly consistent with recently released forecasts by international and private organisations. These forecasts and projections are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Concerns relate in particular to oil price developments. Moreover, there is insufficient knowledge today about future changes in indirect taxes and administered prices; information on these items typically becomes available only towards the end of the year. Against this background, the potential risk for second-round effects via wages needs to be monitored closely. Finally, there has been an increase in measures of long-term inflation expectations derived from financial market indicators. While these indicators should be interpreted with caution, the recent upward trend calls for particular vigilance. Moving on to the monetary analysis, we have seen increasing evidence of a normalisation of the portfolio behaviour of private investors. As a consequence, annual M3 growth has fallen quite significantly over recent quarters. Still, the low level of interest rates continues to fuel monetary growth and the amount of excess liquidity remains high in the euro area. In an economic upswing, the persistence of excess liquidity could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that the main scenario for the outlook for price developments over the medium term remains in line with price stability. However, short-term pressures on inflation have increased recently and some upside risks need to be taken into account. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis also supports the case for vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability. Given the signs that the economic recovery will continue, it is particularly important that fiscal policies and structural reforms play their part in improving the economic fundamentals of the euro area. It is regretful that recent fiscal developments have not been helpful in this respect. A growing number of countries are reporting significant imbalances and fiscal consolidation efforts fall disappointingly short of commitments. In order to strengthen confidence in a sustainable upswing, it is now essential that clarity about the future course of consolidation of fiscal policies is re-established in all countries concerned. This requires credible measures with an emphasis on structural expenditure reform so that imbalances are redressed, tax/benefit systems become more growth-friendly and social security systems are put on a sound financial footing. These measures, together with a revived momentum towards effectively implementing structural reforms in labour and product markets, would provide very valuable support to the current economic upswing.  We are now at your disposal for questions. 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
David A Dodge: The Bank of Canada’s commitments to Canadians Remarks by Mr David A Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Town Hall Meeting, Ottawa, 18 May 2004.  *      *      * Good morning everyone and welcome. Welcome also to those of you joining us by videoconference. Today’s gathering is very important, so I’m glad you have taken the time to attend. Before I begin I want to say hello to the members of the Management Forum and Executive Management Committee who are with us today. These Town Halls are becoming a bit of a springtime tradition. The snow melts and the time comes for us to get together. We take stock of where we are, where we’re going, and how we want to get there. As you know, many institutions, both governmental and private, are currently concerned about governance structures, accountability and rules of behaviour. Of course we focused on these issues a couple of years ago when we established our Compass. And it’s our Compass I’d like to focus on now. It is an amazing document. I think it captures the essence of who we are. And one of the truly great things about it is how it came to be. Creating the Compass was a comprehensive exercise. It was top down, bottom up and side to side. Staff had an opportunity to take part in the consultation, debate, and careful consideration that went into the making of it. Together, we produced a remarkable set of commitments to Canadians, to excellence, and to each other. We really don’t need to worry about producing something new. But it is useful as we get together, to remind ourselves of what it is that we created. Our commitment to Canadians placed our legislated mandate into very concrete terms. Canadians need to have confidence in the value of the money they earn and the quality of the bank notes that they carry around. They need to have confidence in Canada’s financial system. They want to know that the Bank is managing the government’s funds with integrity. And that we are communicating and being accountable for what we do. When we say we are committed to Canadians, we’re saying we’re committed to fostering their confidence in our integrity as a central bank. Our second commitment is to excellence. It reflects the high standards we set for ourselves in our work on behalf of Canadians. It goes hand in hand with the statement we made when we launched the Compass and the Medium Term Plan. Namely: that we are committed to performance that is second to none among the central banks of the world. It was a challenging goal then, and it still is. But we’re getting there. We’re doing outstanding work in monetary policy; I’m very proud of the way we have continued to meet our inflation control targets. In the area of currency we’re producing new bank notes in the Canadian Journey series. The new $100 bill represents the first of three new notes being issued this year; notes that are designed to be secure, durable and well-accepted. Here at the Bank we are fostering an ongoing atmosphere of trust, respect and innovation through our strong system of values. We continue to place a strong emphasis on research and analysis in all aspects of our work. How else is our commitment to excellence in evidence? There are the partnerships we are cultivating both within and outside the Bank. We are communicating clearly and openly. We are nurturing leadership at all levels. And we are cultivating diversity, both of people and of ideas. Together, in all of these ways, we have been achieving excellence. The third commitment we made was to each other. We were clear that we wanted our work environment to be founded on a strong set of values. The first of these is that we articulate our own ideas and listen to those of others. We agreed to share knowledge and experience so that we could all learn from each other. BIS Review 35/2004 1 
Then, there was a pledge to develop our talent and careers to achieve personal excellence. Your own development, of course, has always rested first and foremost with you. But the Bank has been providing some of the impetus, and helping to create an environment that is conducive to learning and growing and an environment where the two official languages are used interchangeably. “Knowledge sharing” is vital to our organization. I hope that together we can progress further in making the Bank a true knowledge-sharing institution as we complete our medium-term plan. And while the Bank is encouraging you to excel by developing yourself, there is also the recognition of the fact that you have a life outside the Bank. We committed ourselves to working in an environment where each employee is respected. When we respect each other as individuals, then we can have the kind of debates that we need to help us become the best we can be. We can have clashes of ideas secure in the knowledge that there are no winners or losers. Or rather, that we’re all winners, because what we’re doing is exploring all aspects of an issue. And finally, we said we would recognize those who demonstrate our commitments. I encourage you to continue to think about ways that you can recognize people in your areas who live these values. We need to celebrate their successes. We need to share their ideas. That was the direction we laid out. Three strongly stated commitments, and a number of simply stated values intended to help us meet them. I was impressed by the Compass when it was written, and I’ve been impressed by how well we are all living by it. You showed real leadership in making this strong statement about who we are and what we stand for. The Compass serves us well. But as you know, with today’s emphasis on corporate governance and accountability, other organizations, both private and public, are now searching for ways to achieve what we have already achieved. Many of these organizations are setting about doing this by putting in place a set of highly detailed rules to constrain behaviour. But I am sure that a lot of highly detailed rules is not the answer for us. I don’t think we need much more than the Compass. I think, to a large extent, it is a part of us now. And I think the proof of that is that integrity - your integrity - is clearly one of the towering strengths of this institution. So I don’t think we need a lot of new rules to govern our behaviour. And where we do need more explicit guidelines and procedures, I’d like us to tread rather lightly. But I do want to say a couple of words today about two particular areas: disclosure of wrongdoing and conflict of interest. First, let me deal with disclosure of wrongdoing. We have had a policy for some time now, but we on the Executive Management Committee thought it was important that we also have procedures that conform more generally with procedures that the government of Canada is proposing. I encourage you to examine those procedures closely; if you have any questions, please talk to your manager. The second point I wanted to make was regarding our conflict of interest policy. The sign-off we all do here is important. Not because anything wrong is going on, but because our policy helps ensure that we don’t run into these kinds of conflicts. So we do have, as an organisation, a few things in place beyond the Compass. But the Compass is what I always find myself coming back to. Practically everything we need is in there. And it’s a respectful document. It gives each of us the responsibility of exercising good judgment. And more importantly, it says that we trust each other to do so. I’m really proud to be in an institution where we can operate that way. And the fact that we can is something I believe each of you should take pride in. Because, let’s face it, it’s not something that happened by itself. It’s not a coincidence. It was your ideas that shaped the Compass. And it’s no coincidence that the Compass is even more relevant today than when we put it together. So, congratulations not only for creating it, but for living by it. 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
Donald L Kohn: The outlook for inflation  Remarks by Mr Donald L Kohn, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the National Economists Club luncheon meeting, Washington DC, 4 June 2004. *      *      * Inflation has picked up this year, and by enough to raise questions in the minds of some about whether it might be on a rising trend that poses a risk to price stability. Total consumer price inflation as measured by the chain price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has risen from 1.4 percent over the twelve months of last year to an annual rate of 3.0 percent over the first four months of 2004. Of course, a portion of this acceleration is due to the faster increase in energy prices this year. But the strengthening in price increases has not been confined to energy markets. PCE prices excluding food and energy have risen at an annual rate of 1.7 percent this year, up from 0.8 percent last year. The consumer price index has shown a similar pattern of acceleration.  The recent shift up in inflation can be seen not just in the price indexes but also in attitudes, anecdotes, and expectations. Businesses report that the prices of many inputs to the production process are increasing, and they also sense a return of “pricing power” that has allowed them to pass on at least some of these cost increases to their customers; my impression is that of late a greater number of stories in general-circulation newspapers have focused on rising prices and their effect on households; and expectations by economists and households of near-term inflation have moved higher.  The commitment of the Federal Reserve to maintaining price stability remains strong and unaltered. Price stability is our responsibility, and the record of the past thirty-five years demonstrates how important it is that we meet it. Allowing businesses and households to plan and operate without worrying about increases in the general price level over the long run is how we contribute best to fostering economic efficiency and rising standards of living. A number of members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), myself included, have been quite explicit in noting that the current level of the federal funds rate will not be consistent, over time, with the objective of preserving price stability. The question is what path of tightening is likely to be necessary to accomplish that objective, and the answer to that question will depend critically on the behavior of inflation.  Although inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, the stance of policy - measured either by interest rates or liquidity provision - is not connected in a direct and simple way to the rate of inflation. Individual prices are determined by supply and demand in the markets for goods and services, and the average of those prices by relationships of aggregate supply and demand. Monetary policy acts on inflation indirectly by altering the balance among the multiplicity of factors that affect supply and demand. To make well-informed policy decisions, we need to analyze the elements behind the recent increase in inflation and form some judgment about its likely future course.  Like many economists, I believe the inflation process is influenced by a number of factors, chief among which are: the degree to which the productive capacity in the economy is being utilized; one-time shifts in product prices resulting from shocks to important supply and demand curves; changes in productivity growth; and inflation expectations. This basic model is a rough approximation of a complex and constantly evolving mechanism of price determination, and its track record can hardly be considered flawless.1 But it does offer a useful framework for the analysis of inflation, and I am going to use it for that purpose here.  I want to emphasize that I am speaking for myself today. The analysis and views are my own, and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the FOMC.2                                                        1  In simulations of the FRB/US model, which uses such a framework, the 70 percent confidence interval around the four-quarter forecast of core PCE inflation is 1-1/4 percentage points wide. 2  David Wilcox, John Roberts, Jeremy Rudd, and Peter Tulip of the Federal Reserve Board’s staff provided valuable assistance. BIS Review 34/2004 1 
The data Before beginning to examine the determinants of inflation, we need to remind ourselves of the inherently noisy nature of the price data. They are highly variable month-to-month and quarter-to-quarter, and they are imperfect proxies for the true change in general prices. As a consequence, discerning the underlying trend of inflation is no easy task.  Had I been speaking to you just a year ago, you would have expected me to address the possibility of deflation and what the Federal Reserve might do either to head it off or to deal with it once interest rates had reached zero. In newspapers and in market reports, you would have read that the integration of China and India into the global trading system meant persistent excess supply of labor and products that would place downward pressure on wages and prices in the developed world for years to come. Now the concern has shifted to whether inflation is rising, and those earlier stories are frequently being turned on their heads. It is increasingly common to hear that strong demand for energy and other basic materials, importantly including demand from Asia, has been boosting inflation here.  To be sure, the underlying economic situation has changed over the past year - most particularly, growth has picked up in the United States and elsewhere around the world. But actual circumstances probably have not shifted as dramatically as the commentary, which serves as a warning about how important it is to try to gauge the fundamental forces bearing on inflation so as to reduce the chances of being misled by noisy data.  In that regard, although a weak economy, associated slack in resource utilization, and rapid increases in productivity were undoubtedly reducing inflation last year, core inflation - especially as measured by the core CPI - seems to have fallen by more, and to a lower level, in 2003 than these fundamentals can explain. Typically, such departures from historically normal behavior do not persist, and inflation tends to return to a level more in line with its fundamental determinants. Indeed, the step-up in inflation this year from last year’s pace may partly reflect such a return.  Within the CPI, the component called owners’ equivalent rent, which accounts for nearly a quarter of the overall index, seems to have been an important factor in the surprising decline in inflation last year. That series uses movements in home rents as a proxy for changes in the cost of home ownership. Owners’ equivalent rent rose only 2 percent in 2003, down from 3-1/4 percent in 2002. Some deceleration in rents is to be expected when low interest rates hold down the user cost of owning a home, favoring home ownership over renting. However, owners’ equivalent rent softened more than one would have predicted from historical relationships between rents and interest rates. So far this year, owners’ equivalent rent has risen at an annual rate of 3 percent, returning to a more typical relationship with interest rates and contributing to the pickup in core inflation.  Of course, even if some of the rebound in core consumer price inflation represents simply a reversal of some of the factors that kept inflation unusually low last year, other influences might be at work that would cause inflation to continue to rise. To get a sense of whether we are on the cusp of worsening inflation, we must examine what might be affecting the supply and demand for goods and services.  Determinants of inflation Economic slack. Judgments about the source of the recent increase in inflation and the likely course of prices over the next year or so rest in part on an assessment of how close the economy is to producing at its long-run potential. History indicates that when capital and labor are not fully employed, competition for market share and for jobs tends to push down the rate of inflation.3  Using measures of potential output and economic slack in real-time forecasting and policymaking presents daunting challenges. That is because potential output is not something that can ever be observed and directly verified; we infer it from the behavior of other variables, including prices themselves, that we do observe. Estimating potential output and slack also is complicated by changes over time in labor and product markets that alter the degree of resource utilization that is consistent with stable inflation.                                                        3  We need to be careful not to overstate the importance of slack for determining the future course of inflation, however. In most econometric models, measures of slack account for only about one-fourth or less of the year-ahead fluctuations in core consumer price inflation. 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
That said, most indicators we have suggest that the economy continues to operate with an appreciable - albeit diminishing - margin of slack. For about the past six months, the unemployment rate has averaged a little less than 5-3/4 percent. This rate is down from its peak of about 6-1/4 percent in the middle of last year, but it is still somewhat above a level that, on the basis of the experience of the last decade or so, appears to be consistent with stable inflation. Capacity utilization in manufacturing has recovered to a little more than 75 percent in recent months. But that level remains well below its long-run average of 80 percent.  A number of observers have argued lately that a pickup in the pace of technological change and a more rapid evolution in the character of global competition have increased the speed at which capital equipment is becoming obsolete and at which workers’ skills are becoming poorly matched with job requirements. If these effects are important, current consensus estimates of the natural rate of unemployment as well as of the “natural rate of capacity utilization” could overstate the degree of effective slack.  I am skeptical of these arguments for a couple of reasons. In the labor market, the behavior of compensation in recent years has been consistent with standard models of wage dynamics incorporating a natural rate still somewhat below the current unemployment rate. Moreover, one of the surprising developments of the current cycle has been the extent of the decline in labor-force participation. Many analysts have adopted the working hypothesis that this decline reflects a type of “discouraged worker” effect, albeit one that is not captured in the standard statistical series attempting to measure that phenomenon. Presumably, many of the people who exited the workforce in the face of poor employment prospects now stand ready to resume competing for jobs as the market improves. If that is correct, then the current level of the unemployment rate relative to estimates of the natural rate, may, if anything, understate the availability of labor resources.  In addition, I do not believe that the relationship of the Federal Reserve’s measure of capacity utilization to available slack in the manufacturing sector has changed materially of late. This measure is, for the most part, benchmarked to utilization rates from a large survey of individual plant managers who would be aware of, and take into account, the technological obsolescence of the equipment in their own factories. These survey data, as well as data on capacity from various trade sources, should fully reflect permanent plant closings within, at most, a year or so.4  Most measures of resource utilization have not changed very much from a year and more ago, when inflation was falling. The unemployment rate hovered near 5-3/4 percent through much of 2002 and the first quarter of 2003; capacity utilization has recovered only a fraction from its lowest level since the very deep recession of the early 1980s. The structure and functioning of markets and the pace of obsolescence simply do not change enough over a year to alter materially the implications of a given reading on these particular indicators. The net decline in core measures of inflation over the past few years - even after taking account of possible understatement of inflation last year - is consistent with a noticeable gap in resource utilization still existing today.  Going forward, I anticipate continued strong growth in demand but, given persistent solid gains in productivity and potential output, only a gradual closing of the output gap. Under these circumstances, ongoing competitive pressures in labor and product markets should help to contain cost and price increases. The downward pressure will probably diminish over time, but at least for a while, economic slack should continue to operate as a restraining force on the overall trend in inflation.  Of course, I may be wrong in this assessment of slack in the economy. As central bankers, we need to be cognizant of the uncertainties associated with our estimates of potential output and adjust policies if events prove us wrong. But for now, I believe the balance of the evidence points to the conclusion that the recent rise in inflation probably does not signal that the economy has been producing beyond its                                                       4  In the view of some observers, the argument that the Federal Reserve’s capacity measures overstate available slack has been lent some credibility recently by the much higher capacity utilization numbers published by the Institute of Supply Management (ISM). The differences between the ISM and Federal Reserve’s estimates of operating rates likely lie in the definitions of capacity. The Federal Reserve’s measure assumes the availability of additional labor, if needed. The ISM measures the capacity of plants to produce with their current labor force. In the wake of a significant cyclical contraction in manufacturing employment, such as we have experienced in recent years, a definition of capacity that relies on workers in place will indicate much less slack than a definition that does not include current labor as a limiting factor. Since labor can be added relatively quickly, the Federal Reserve’s definition of capacity utilization seems more relevant for assessing effective slack in the manufacturing sector. BIS Review 34/2004 3 
sustainable potential, but rather that other causes have been at work. I now turn to these other causes.  Price shocks. Quite a few prices have been pushed higher in recent quarters by special influences on the supply and demand for the specific products involved. Such increases are probably contributing to the broad pickup in inflation that we have seen this year, but most likely they are not going to be a source of continuing upward pressure on prices.  It is not surprising that the substantial strengthening of aggregate demand here and abroad has boosted prices for inputs into the production process, with the most noticeable effects on products for which the short-run supply is relatively price-inelastic. Increases in commodity prices are typical as an expansion gathers momentum, but they have been unusually large in the current episode because of the synchronous strengthening here and overseas, especially in Asia. Petroleum prices have been under particular pressure, reflecting not only stronger demand but also risks that supplies could be constrained by terrorism or political disruption.  The decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar over the past year or so has contributed to the rise in the price of imports in the United States. The prices of core non-energy imports began to increase more rapidly than the general level of core consumer prices in 2003, and the difference widened in the first quarter of this year, adding to general price increases. In addition, the dollar’s decline has reduced the intensity of foreign competition felt by U.S. producers, which may be one source of the sense among domestic producers that their pricing power has returned.  Commodities and imports are only a small part of what we consume, and changes in their prices as well as in the price of energy usually do not affect measured core consumer inflation very much. But the recent situation has been notable for the size and number of price shocks going in the same direction, so that even with limited pass-though of individual price movements, the total effect probably has been significant. Judging from the results of statistical models incorporating the factors we have been examining, increases in commodity, energy and import prices together might have boosted core consumer inflation on the order of roughly 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point over the past four quarters.  But we are already seeing evidence of the limited nature of these types of price-level adjustments. The prices of many non-energy commodities have come down from their peaks lately, perhaps reflecting an actual or expected moderation of growth in Asia and ongoing demand and supply responses to higher prices. In addition, the dollar has stabilized as optimism has increased about the strength and durability of the expansion in the United States. Energy prices have continued to climb, but futures markets see some moderation of these prices getting under way before long. If these circumstances prevail, shocks to commodity, energy, and import prices should no longer be adding as much to inflation.  Of course, over the longer haul, whether or not these one-off shifts in the price level lead to ongoing price inflation will be determined by their effects on inflation expectations and the response of monetary policy, an issue I will refer to shortly.  Productivity. The rate of increase in productivity also can have important effects on inflation pressures. In the past few years, for example, the juxtaposition of very rapid productivity growth and weak aggregate demand has resulted in the slack in resource utilization I talked about earlier, which contributed to the decrease in inflation. But productivity growth also influences inflation through its effects on labor compensation and profit margins.  Over the long run, real labor compensation tends to track labor productivity. This implies that when productivity accelerates, compensation eventually will as well. The record of the post-World War II period suggests, however, that changes in compensation tend to lag well behind changes in productivity trends. Thus, when underlying productivity growth picks up, firms tend to enjoy a wider profit margin for a time because unit labor costs tend initially to decelerate. The economy can enjoy the fruits of more rapid productivity growth for a while in the form of unusually high levels of production without added inflation or in the form of lower inflation. We realized some of each in the last half of the 1990s after productivity growth picked up. Over time, as compensation catches up to productivity, profit margins tend to come back toward more normal levels, and output must return to its long-run potential if inflation is to be avoided.  Productivity increased especially rapidly through the recent downturn and the initial stages of the subsequent expansion. We will not know for some time with any degree of confidence whether this increase marked a further pickup in structural productivity growth - that is, over and above the already rapid rate of increase of the late 1990s. We can be reasonably certain that a portion of the 4 BIS Review 34/2004 
extraordinary increase in productivity over the past few years was a response to the particular circumstances that were prevailing. These included the pressures on the profits and finances of firms when the economy was sluggish and the availability of efficiency gains as businesses continued to find better ways to utilize the large amounts of new technology and capital that became available in the 1990s. The extraordinary increase in productivity in recent years reduced unit labor costs and elevated profit margins to near record levels, even as inflation continued to decline.  I think we can anticipate that productivity growth will remain strong on a sustained basis, even if it is unlikely to match the outsized gains of the past few years. Meanwhile, compensation growth should strengthen as labor markets tighten and businesses bid harder for labor to take advantage of profit opportunities. Nonetheless, the high level of business profit margins suggests that, even if unit labor costs begin to rise more quickly than prices, the effect on inflation could be muted for a time because firms would have room to absorb some of the cost increases in the form of reduced profit margins. Such was the experience in the late 1990s. The initial surge in productivity showed up mostly in higher profit margins in 1996 and 1997. From 1998 through 2000, as compensation caught up to productivity, unit labor costs rose more rapidly than prices without placing inflation under significant upward pressure. To be sure, margins cannot shrink forever - just as they cannot grow to the sky. But elevated margins provide some cushion against cost pressures being passed through to prices - so long as the central bank does not allow excess demand to develop in product markets.  Inflation expectations. Inflation expectations play a key role in price determination. Among other effects, a rise in inflation expectations tends to become self-fulfilling as people seek to protect themselves in the process of setting wages and prices.  Expectations of price increases over the near-term - specifically, over the next year - have, in fact, risen noticeably on the heels of the actual increase in inflation. But, as I have discussed, some of the price shocks giving rise to the increase in inflation in the past few months look as though they are unlikely to be repeated and may already be in the process of partially reversing, and expectations should subside with actual inflation.  Moreover, available surveys suggest that the recent uptick in total and core inflation has not materially affected expectations of inflation over the longer term. This stability of long-term inflation expectations is evident in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and in the median expectations of households responding to the University of Michigan survey.  However, the pattern of inflation compensation in Treasury securities markets has been less reassuring. A widening of the spread between the ten-year nominal and ten-year indexed securities is not itself surprising; part of that widening is accounted for by the increase in short-term inflation expectations. But part could be read also as signaling investor concerns about inflation over a more distant horizon. The spread of the forward rates embedded in the nominal yield curve from five to ten years out over the forward rates derived from the indexed yield curve has widened more than 50 basis points since late March.  Changes in this spread can be a misleading indicator of inflation expectations. It is affected by idiosyncratic movements in either nominal or indexed yields, and it reflects changing liquidity in these markets and compensation for inflation risk as well as for inflation itself. But it could be a warning sign. Long-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at price stability make the task of keeping inflation low much easier. The Federal Reserve has made plain its commitment to preserving price stability, and I am confident that we would act decisively to counter any deterioration in longer-run inflation expectations that threatened that objective.  Summary and policy implications The evidence and analysis I have just reviewed suggest that the recent pickup in price increases probably does not represent the leading edge of steadily worsening inflation. Much of the acceleration in the early months of this year likely reflects a rebound from unexplainably low inflation last year and the feed-through of increases in commodity, energy, and import prices. The best indications are that some economic slack persists and that long-term inflation expectations are stable, which bolsters the inference that the economy has not entered a situation of steadily rising inflation. Most economic forecasts point to a gradual approach toward full utilization of the productive capacity of the economy. Commodity, energy, and import prices are unlikely to continue moving up at the speed of recent quarters. Productivity growth is still strong. And elevated profit margins are available to absorb BIS Review 34/2004 5 
increases in unit labor costs for a while. As a result, inflation is most likely to remain at levels consistent with a continuation of effective price stability.  That said, the federal funds rate cannot be held at its current level indefinitely if price stability is to be preserved. The very accommodative stance of policy - including both the low level of the funds rate and the FOMC’s indications that it was intending to hold it at that level for a while - was put in place to counter unusually weak demand and declining inflation. Circumstances have changed and policy will respond. The challenge we face is to remove the accommodation in such a way as to foster both the return to full employment and the maintenance of price stability.  Because I believe that the rise in inflation will be limited and because I agree that growth of output is likely to only moderately exceed the growth of the economy’s potential, I supported the FOMC’s assessment at its last meeting that accommodation likely can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured.  But experience counsels caution. There is much about the inflation process that we do not understand, and I have been surprised at the extent of the pickup in core inflation this year. Moreover, measures of inflation expectations will require careful scrutiny as we move forward. An examination of the variables believed to proxy for aggregate demand and potential supply can help to explain inflation and to forecast future price developments, and the concepts are integral to making monetary policy. But given our limited understanding of price determination, we must also keep a close watch on actual inflation outcomes.  It took about twenty years to undo the effects on economic behavior of the inflationary episode of the 1970s. We must preserve those gains if we are to meet our responsibilities for fostering economic growth and stability.  6 BIS Review 34/2004 
Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Interaction of monetary and financial stability in small open economies Welcoming address by Mr Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the SUERF Seminar, Reykjavík, 3 June 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentleman On behalf of the Central Bank of Iceland, I warmly welcome you to this seminar on the Interaction of Monetary and Financial Stability in Small Open Economies. It is an honour for us to co-sponsor the seminar with SUERF. We are grateful to David Llewellyn, Eduard Hochreiter, Beatrix Krones and Micheal Bailey at SUERF for the excellent cooperation which we have enjoyed with them in its preparation. The topic of the seminar is an appropriate one which is attracting increasing attention, both within and outside central banks. I trust that the presentations and discussions over the next two days will leave us with a better understanding of this interaction and of the issues on which we wish to focus our attention in the period ahead. We will be assisted by very impressive speakers and participants. I wish to extend my gratitude to those who have agreed to give lectures and present papers and I look forward to inspiring and stimulating contributions by them. In this address, I will briefly describe our own recent experience in the areas of monetary and financial stability. The current Act on the Central Bank of Iceland was adopted in 2001. It assigned to the Central Bank the main objective of pursuing price stability. The Bank was granted instrument independence to pursue that main objective, its financial independence was enhanced and the Act included clear provisions on transparency and accountability. The Act also stated that the Bank should promote an efficient and safe financial system, including payments systems domestically and with foreign countries. In addition to price stability, the Bank was, in other words, given a clear mandate to concern itself with financial stability. An inflation targeting framework was adopted at practically the same time with a joint declaration of the Government and the Central Bank which set a target for inflation of a 2½% twelve-month rise in the CPI. The framework imposes strong demands on the professional capacity of the Central Bank. The Bank regularly publishes a macroeconomic forecast and inflation forecast, with an associated inflation report. The inflation forecast provides the foundation for the inflation targeting policy. In its quarterly Monetary Bulletin, the Bank publishes a detailed analysis of current economic and monetary developments and prospects. It also presents the rationale behind the decisions by the Board of Governors to change or not to change interest rates, as well as signalling the monetary policy intentions for the period ahead. In these endeavours, the Bank seeks to be as transparent as possible. When the inflation target was adopted, the economy was quite unbalanced. It had boomed during the second half of the 1990s. The upturn was originally well balanced being led by foreign direct investment and exports. But eventually it turned into overheating and a surge in private consumption, which was fuelled, among other things, by rapid credit expansion in an increasingly liberalised financial environment. In due course, the imbalances began to have a negative effect on expectations, partly because of a sharply deteriorating current account. The currency began to slide and fell by a third in trade-weighted terms over a period of a year and a half until late 2001. This development affected inflation as rising import prices fed into domestic prices. When the inflation targeting framework was adopted, the most recent measure of the twelve month rise of the CPI was about 4%. The króna continued to depreciate for some time after the adoption of the target and inflation rose significantly above the upper tolerance limit of the inflation target. The Central Bank pursued a restrictive monetary policy, repeatedly raising its policy interest rate which reached a historically high level. This ultimately led to a rapid fall in inflation after January 2002 and by late that year it had fallen under the inflation target, where it has remained more or less since until the most recent measure. BIS Review 34/2004 1 
We have now pursued an inflation targeting policy for more than three years. Our view is that it has been successful. Inflation was brought under control relatively quickly after the adoption of the inflation target in very unbalanced economic circumstances. There is also firm evidence that the inflation targeting regime has earned credibility in the markets and the community. The monetary regime will be further tested in the period ahead, which will among other things be characterised by an exceptional level of foreign direct investment in the aluminium industry and associated publicly owned and debt financed power plants. Our experience is a strong indication that inflation targeting is a policy which can be pursued in a very small and open economy as in a large economy with very deep financial markets. This policy is resource-demanding and imposes by necessity a very strong discipline on the respective central bank. In our view the increased focus on financial stability in the Central Bank Act of 2001 was natural and well within the accepted framework of central bank activities. The Bank was responsible for banking supervision until the end of 1998 when that function was merged with the Insurance Supervisory Authority in a new and unified Financial Supervisory Authority, with which the Central Bank cooperates quite closely on financial stability issues. While the Central Bank had responsibility for banking supervision, its attention was necessarily focused on individual institutions and overseeing that their operations complied with existing laws and regulations. Before banking supervision was transferred elsewhere, the Central Bank had also begun to focus its attention on broader financial stability issues along the lines that many other central banks were doing at that time. A logical part of that process was that in 2000 the Bank began to publish semi-annual financial stability analyses in its quarterly Monetary Bulletin. One reason for the increasing focus of the Bank on systemic financial stability issues in the late 1990’s was the growing perception in a liberalised financial market that a weak financial system could undermine economic and monetary stability just as much as economic imbalances and weak policies could undermine an otherwise sound financial system. A sound financial system, including safe and secure payment and settlements systems, is also an important precondition for the effective implementation of monetary policy. Capital movements were fully liberalised in the 1990’s, as was the domestic financial market which also underwent significant structural change, including the withdrawal of the government from direct ownership in banking institutions. These developments stiffened competition at home and linked the domestic financial system much more closely to international markets. Consequently, in its analyses, the Central Bank consistently draws attention to the potential vulnerability of the domestic financial system to changes in the external environment, including the ready availability of foreign credit for refinancing purposes, and its vulnerability to sudden changes in the exchange rate. The developments in the Icelandic economy towards the end of last decade and into this one resembled in many ways those experienced in some of the other Nordic countries a decade earlier. Needless to say, and in view of the experience of other Nordic countries, these developments caused considerable concern about the underlying stability of the financial system. The Central Bank candidly expressed these concerns in its financial stability reports, most notably in the spring of 2001. At that time the IMF also issued its Financial Stability Assessment which questioned the strength of the financial system in Iceland in view of the tremendous imbalances in the economy and what was perceived to be an underlying weakness in the banking institutions. The IMF identified a potential risk of a rapid depreciation of the currency, which it felt could further weaken the banks and pose a threat to them. Early on in the upswing, amidst a rapid expansion of lending and external indebtedness of the banks, particularly their short-term foreign debt, the Central Bank imposed a liquidity requirement on the commercial banks. Its purpose was to stem the growth of foreign borrowing and to shift the weight of foreign indebtedness from the very short end of the maturity spectrum. Another prudential rule set by the Central Bank concerns the foreign exchange exposure of commercial banks. This sharply limits their scope for taking direct foreign exchange risk. Beyond these prudential regulations, the means which the Central Bank has to affect the practices of the banks are through public pressure, for example in its semi-annual financial stability reports or in other public or private statements. The Bank has used all these methods with varying degrees of success. In line with the traditional role of central banks, the Central Bank of Iceland can serve as a lender of last resort if a domestic bank experiences a liquidity shortfall. The Central Bank has also systematically built up its foreign exchange reserves in order to strengthen the external liquidity position of the economy. 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
As it happened, the Icelandic economy landed remarkably softly after the turbulent period of 1998 to 2001. I mentioned earlier that inflation was brought under the inflation target in late 2002. The external current account was more or less in balance in 2002 only two years after the deficit had measured 10% of GDP, credit growth came to a halt, and in stark contrast to what happened in other Nordic countries a decade earlier, the banks emerged from the period in a satisfactory position and have gained considerable strength since. No doubt there are many reasons for this relatively favourable outcome. One could mention the generally good external conditions during the adjustment period, a relatively sound fiscal policy, and the swift correction of the external imbalance, as well as the rapid turnaround in the exchange rate after it reached its trough and the decline in the rate of inflation to below the inflation target. In a follow-up to its report of 2001, the IMF recognized in mid 2003 the successful adjustment of the Icelandic economy, the significantly increased strength of the financial system and important changes in the regulatory framework. The principal objective of the monetary policy of the Central Bank of Iceland is price stability, as I mentioned earlier. Its other principal goal is financial stability. The financial stability analyses focus on macroeconomic stability factors and on the strength and soundness of the financial system as a whole. The Bank addresses both these principal areas with a strong professional ambition. Its two main fields of analysis reinforce each other and benefit from close cooperation among the staff. Both areas have forced us to put our analyses, projections and policies on a longer-term perspective which provides an opportunity for better overall economic and monetary policy management. Although much remains to be explained about the nature of the interaction of monetary and financial stability, I mentioned earlier that a sound financial system is a precondition for economic and monetary stability and the implementation of an effective monetary policy. In this respect, these areas support each other. Since financial liberalisation was introduced, we have not faced circumstances where financial stability concerns have directly affected or conflicted with monetary policy decisions. Our aim is to prevent such a situation from arising. The potential risks to financial stability at the end of the last upswing were defused by the swift achievement of monetary stability and the restoration of internal and external balance. In conclusion, I would like to repeat my warm welcome to all the participants in the seminar. I trust that both the seminar and your stay in Iceland will be interesting and rewarding, professionally and socially. BIS Review 34/2004 3 
Jaime Caruana: Risk management trends and the supervisory structure Remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the 31st General Assembly of the Geneva Association, Madrid, 27-29 May 2004. *      *      * I. Introduction and overview I would like to thank Mr de Castries, Mr Liedtke, and the members of the Geneva Association for inviting me to participate in your 31st General Assembly. As the chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, I am honoured to address another organisation that names itself after a distinguished city in Switzerland. It is a special privilege for me to do so here in Madrid, not far from the Bank of Spain. Our organisations may hail from different Swiss cities and different sectors of the financial services industry, yet both organisations monitor trends in risk management and work to encourage advances in that discipline. This is a difficult but enormously important duty for all of us. Financial organisations - whether they are insurance companies, securities firms, or banks - compete on their knowledge of their customers. They seek to tailor products and services to each customer’s ever changing needs. To succeed in an environment where products and services must evolve quickly, financial service providers must understand thoroughly the benefits, costs and risks of their current activities, while watching the horizon carefully for future changes that might alter the balance between risks and rewards.  Supervisors, for our part, must ensure that the regulatory system encourages banks, securities firms, and insurance companies to be capable of managing their risks today and ready to respond to new challenges tomorrow. Risk management and the supervisory system cannot and should not evolve independently of each other. On the contrary, supervisory agencies and financial services providers are currently working in tandem to develop a “virtuous circle” in risk management and supervision. Together, we want to ensure that supervision reflects the best practices being developed by the industry, while at the same encouraging institutions to improve those practices constantly. This morning, I would like to share a financial supervisor’s perspective with you on the “virtuous circle” that is emerging to encompass risk management and supervision. I’ll begin my remarks with the results of a study that outlines the great advances achieved by leading financial institutions around the world in developing more rigorous and comprehensive risk management approaches.  At the same time that commercial organisations made improvements to their internal processes, supervisors have sought to incorporate those improvements into the supervisory structure, which is my second topic. We are moving toward a more flexible and forward-looking approach to financial supervision that seeks to motivate prudent management - and thereby complete the “virtuous circle” - by encouraging further advances in risk management. The reforms underway are especially evident in the banking world under the Basel Committee’s “Basel II” framework. I should add that the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), a fellow association of supervisors in the insurance area, is now discussing a supervisory framework that would apply to all insurance regulatory systems globally.  Evolution in risk management and the reform of financial supervision should complement and reinforce each other, and the progress in each area will be influenced by the work underway globally to revise accounting guidelines. The Geneva Association has taken a great interest in this topic, so I will conclude my remarks with some brief thoughts from my perspective on the convergence of accounting standards, advances in risk management, and supervision.  II. Trends across financial services sector Allow me to begin with an overview of recent trends in risk management. Last year, a body representing major financial supervisory agencies conducted a study of 31 banks, securities firms, and insurance companies in 12 jurisdictions. This body - called the “Joint Forum” - consists of expert supervisors from member agencies of the Basel Committee, the International Organisation of BIS Review 34/2004 1 
Securities Commissioners (IOSCO), and the IAIS. The Joint Forum seeks to identify best practices and develop guidance for activities across the financial services sector. In its report, which was published in August 2003, the Joint Forum identified two important and recent trends among large, complex firms engaged in banking, securities, or insurance, or in some mix of these activities. A. Integration of the risk management function. One of the most notable advances in risk management across all three financial services sectors is the growing emphasis on developing a firm-wide assessment of risk. This constitutes the first trend in the Joint Forum’s report. Improvements in technology and telecommunications have made it easier for firms to gather, collect, and analyse large amounts of data on their exposures and business activities efficiently and increasingly in near “real time.” To make the best use of firm-wide data, some organisations have established a dedicated risk management function to foster more highly integrated and systematic approaches to risk measurement and management. The risk management function typically promotes the use of common risk measures across business lines. It can then report the firm-wide risk data to senior management. Reports may range from daily updates on “value-at-risk” trading positions to regular, if less frequent, compilations of the results of stress testing.  The broader use of shared definitions to guide the comprehensive reporting of risk across the firm enables the integrated risk management function to identify concentrations of risk. Concentrations matter particularly when various business lines within the firm have different kinds of exposures to the same counterparty. Comprehensive and consistent reporting helps, moreover, to ensure that the firm is aware of the wide range of risks to which it is exposed; that it understands the relative importance of various risks and how they may interact; and that the firm is less likely to ignore material sources of risk. The Joint Forum’s study suggests that no single model for organising an integrated risk management function has become dominant. In some financial organisations, the function may exercise a considerable degree of control over individual businesses. In others - and especially in insurance companies - local business units continue to operate autonomously to a great degree.  Yet nearly all firms that establish integrated risk management units are highly dependent on the quality of their information technology to collect, analyse, and report firm-wide data efficiently and effectively. Some participants have found that the greatest challenge in developing a centralised risk management structure lies in constructing compatible and efficient management information systems across all of their businesses. As a result, they devote substantial resources in terms of personnel and expenditures to the maintenance and enhancement of their management information systems. B. Risk aggregation into a single measure. Collecting risk data across many business lines has catalysed further efforts to aggregate those measures of risk by quantifying them in a rigorous fashion. This is the second major risk management trend identified in the Joint Forum report. The quantification of risk is certainly not a new concept in the insurance industry. Actuaries have long sought to estimate the likelihood of various events taking place. In recent years, however, we have seen financial risk managers and researchers apply mathematics, statistics, and modelling to many risk exposures that were previously not thought to be readily quantifiable.  In the banking industry, for example, statistical and computational analyses developed for evaluating exposures to market risk led, over the past decade or so, to the application of similar techniques to credit risk. Indeed, the introduction of increasingly reliable estimates of the drivers of credit risk, such as the probability of default, led to many of the proposals that form the basis for the Basel II bank capital framework, as I will discuss in a few minutes.  The Joint Forum found that the “ultimate expression” of risk aggregation is the summation of many types of risk into a single risk measure. This measure, often called “economic capital,” estimates the amount of capital a firm requires to protect itself against all risks with a certain degree of confidence.  But the benefits of developing more aggregated measures of risk across diverse business lines are especially appealing to complex financial organisations whose activities span many kinds of activities. 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
As a result, it is not surprising that large, mixed financial conglomerates have tended to invest the most in the development of economic capital estimates. III. The structure of financial supervision The two trends in the financial services sector to integrate risk management into a dedicated function and to aggregate risk measures into a single measure of economic capital form the first part of the “virtuous circle.” These trends are influencing much more than the behaviour of individual firms. They are similarly influencing the structure of financial supervision. This leads to my second topic this morning, namely how supervisors will complete the “virtuous circle” by adopting regulations that foster continued improvements in the measurement and management of risk. In the insurance sector, this movement is visible in the European Union’s “Solvency II” project. The IAIS’s initiative to establish a new international insurance regulatory framework will likewise be significant to the industry in the new future. But certainly a lot of attention has been paid to the work that the Basel Committee and other supervisors are undertaking to reform the international bank capital adequacy framework under Basel II. Basel II represents one of the most important reforms in banking supervision. For the past few years, central bankers, bank supervisors, and the industry have been discussing ways to revise the 1988 Basel Accord, which constitutes a cornerstone of the bank regulatory framework. The 1988 Accord was a landmark achievement in its own right. It represented the first internationally accepted “yardstick” for determining the adequacy of a bank’s capital. It was relatively simple to apply and, perhaps as a result of its simplicity, was adopted by supervisors in over 100 countries. But its simplicity may have led in some ways to its gradual decrease in relevance for sophisticated banks and systems. Leading banks made substantial improvements in their measures of risk. As the Joint Forum reported, industry leaders introduced integrated risk management functions and raised their standards for quantifying and aggregating various risks. Extraordinary growth in practices such as securitisation and in the use of sophisticated derivative products allowed banks to transfer credit risk in ways that the 1988 Accord does not capture. In addition, some banks began to manage their exposures to operational risk separately and as a comprehensive practice comparable to the management of credit or market risk.  By the late 1990s, it became increasingly clear to leading banks and their supervisors that the original Accord no longer provided meaningful measures of risk for the most sophisticated banking organisations. As a result, the Basel Committee and others began to discuss ways to revise the existing capital rules to account for these advances.  Supervisors sought more than a simple revision of the existing framework. We wanted to align our capital requirements more closely with the best measures of economic risks that banks actually face. We sought furthermore to fortify the stability of the banking sector so that banks could continue to serve as a source of credit through good years and bad. In our view, promoting financial stability will benefit not just banks, but also other businesses and consumers as well. To incorporate the latest advances in risk management, and to develop a more forward-looking approach to supervision, the Committee embraced a “three-pillar” approach to capital requirements. Rather than simply setting out a static minimum requirement for capital levels, the new capital framework will rely on three mutually reinforcing policy approaches. They consist of, first, risk-sensitive minimum requirements; second, a more consistent system of supervisory review; and, third, enhanced transparency and market discipline. Each of these three pillars offers unique benefits on its own, but the real strength of the three pillars stems from their ability to complement each other. The first pillar - which specifies the minimum capital requirements - constitutes a very direct approach to supervision. By applying a uniform set of rules to banks, the first pillar adds transparency to the regulatory process. Applying a shared set of rules to all banks makes it easier to compare organisations and get a sense of their relative degrees of solvency.  On a technical level, the Committee based the measures of risk on the advanced practices that banks are adopting. The rules reflect the evolution in credit risk management by allowing qualifying banks to rely partly on their own estimates of the drivers of credit risk to determine the amount of capital required against particular exposures. One such driver of credit risk might be the bank’s own estimate of a borrower’s probability of default. Similarly, the new capital rules will reflect the advances in operational risk measurement by incorporating an explicit capital charge for such exposures to loss. BIS Review 34/2004 3 
So the minimum rules will align capital charges more closely to better measures of the actual underlying economic risks that the industry is developing.  This is a clear example of how we are harnessing the advances made by the leading institutions within the industry.  Furthermore, to encourage those institutions which are not at the leading edge in this field to make enhancements in their internal controls and risk management processes, the New Accord will offer explicit economic incentives to adopt - over time - more accurate measures of risk and more sophisticated means for controlling their exposures to such risks. However, the Basel Committee recognised that relying on uniform rules alone would have introduced certain drawbacks. Rules tend to be inflexible and therefore might preclude or ignore innovation. Applying uniform rules may also fail to account for a bank’s unusual businesses or risk profiles.  Consequently, our second pillar, supervisory review, addresses some of those drawbacks. It introduces judgement into the policy mix. Banks and supervisors will exercise discretion in determining capital needs relevant to their particular businesses and risk profiles. That degree of discretion makes the supervisory framework more flexible and better able to adapt to change and innovation.  Finally, the third pillar, market discipline, adds greater transparency to the process. When a bank discloses information that offers meaningful insight into its risk positions and exposures, marketplace participants are better able to assess its financial health. Counterparties, investors, rating agencies, and even customers can reward banks that manage their risks properly and penalise those that hold unrealistically low amounts of capital for their risk. Their reactions provide economic incentives for banks to strengthen their management of risk and hold at least adequate levels of capital against their risks.  One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot. Each is essential to achieving our overall objective of financial stability. I realise that this analogy of the three pillars as a portfolio of policy options is an oversimplification. But it helps us to visualise why we think that the most “efficient frontier” involves a mixture of minimum rules, tempered by supervisory discretion, and supplemented by market-based incentives. IV. Consistency of accounting standards and a three-pillar system Of course, our three-pillar supervisory system is highly dependent on a firm’s internal measures of risk exposures. “Basel II,” for example, looks at a bank’s own measures of risk in Pillar 1. Supervisors then engage bank managers in a dialogue on their interpretations of those measures - and the steps managers take in response - in Pillar 2. Finally, Pillar 3 is intended to give the market greater insight into those measures of risk exposures and what the bank may do to control them. Because the three pillars are so dependent on the internal measures, neither supervisors nor bankers can ignore the mechanics that define how financial data are recorded and reported. Those mechanics, as you know, are governed by national accounting standards, which is the last topic I would like to address. Supervisors and global market participants face significant hurdles in exercising discipline on an entity whose operations span more than one jurisdiction. Business practices differ between countries. Legal systems may be unfamiliar. Deciphering balance sheets prepared under national accounting systems can be an extremely taxing undertaking.  Considering those burdens alone, it is easy to agree that supervisory and market discipline would be more effective under more harmonious - if not completely harmonised - accounting rules. But the task is formidable. In our duty to safeguard and reinforce financial stability, central banks and financial supervisors have a legitimate interest in the quality of accounting standards and their effective implementation. We believe that in order to help fortify the financial system, accounting standards should support - or at least be consistent with - sound risk management and control practices in use in the industry. In addition, accounting standards should facilitate market discipline by providing a more transparent “window” into an organisation’s financial position and performance and likewise into its measures and management of risk exposures. Finally, accounting standards should facilitate the effective supervision of financial institutions.  In the specific case of the insurance industry, I think it’s fair to say that almost all of us believe that, for international standards to be complete, we need a single, high quality standard developed to address insurance liabilities. The challenge lies in specifying a model that fits together seamlessly with other 4 BIS Review 34/2004 
international accounting guidelines and at the same time aligns well with sound insurance risk management and supervisory objectives. Given some of the issues we’ve faced in other areas of accounting, that seems unlikely to be a quick or easy job. That same challenge to align accounting guidelines to sound risk management objectives as well as supervisory objectives exists across the financial services sectors. It explains why financial supervisors, and especially the Basel Committee, attach great importance to playing an active role in the international debates on accounting. In the Basel Committee’s case, we seek to represent the supervisory perspective on key accounting issues relevant to banking, and we support the work underway in the accounting profession towards convergence in accounting standards globally.  With regard to Basel II, the Committee worked closely with our colleagues in the International Accounting Standards Board to avoid conflicts between Pillar 3 and the broader accounting standards. In fact, the Committee views Pillar 3 as a further refinement of the accounting standards that apply to banks’ specific exposures. Because we recognise that we have much to do in this area, we will continue to monitor accounting and market developments in the light of Pillar 3. Our dialogue with accounting standards-setting bodies and the accounting profession will continue to grow in the years to come. V. Conclusion This morning, I have shared some of my views on the need for risk management and supervision to evolve together and to reinforce each other. All of us recognise that both areas must keep pace with changes in accounting practices, and I think you would agree that the work we have to undertake in all three areas - risk management, supervision, and accounting - is quite demanding. To develop new ways of thinking about risk and about the techniques for measuring it, we will require hard research and significant resources. We must gather and pour over large amounts of data to sharpen our understanding of various risks and their relationships to each other. We must dedicate our talent, staff, and indeed funds to undertake this work. I would argue that is equally demanding to develop a supervisory structure that capitalises on and further encourages those advances, especially when we are trying to implement a shared framework across many jurisdictions. But the benefits are many. On a microeconomic level, the virtuous circle I have described should help individual firms to improve the quality of their controls in the short run and strengthen their competitiveness in the long run. Yet supervisors are especially motivated by the benefits we expect at the macro level. We believe that, when all financial institutions have the right incentives to pursue profits responsibly, the financial services sector becomes better managed, more resilient, and better able to serve as a source for sustainable growth for the economy. Attaining that promise of greater financial stability is a challenge that is worthy of all of our talent, of our time, and of our hard work.  With that, I would like to thank you for welcoming me to your conference. I offer my best wishes for fruitful and thought-provoking discussions. BIS Review 34/2004 5 
Philipp M Hildebrand: Switzerland - the challenges of being and remaining a leading financial centre Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Financial Management Association (FMA), European Conference Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, 3 June 2004. *      *      * I am pleased to be here this evening to reflect on Switzerland: the challenges of being and remaining a leading financial center. Moreover, I am honored to share this platform with Peter Wuffli, Walter Kielholz and Bruno Gehrig. The Financial Management Association should be commended; you have assembled three outstanding leaders and representatives of the Swiss financial industry. I very much look forward to their comments.  When I think about the Swiss financial industry, two closely linked thoughts come to mind: first, Switzerland’s status as one of the world’s leading financial centers and second, the important contribution of the financial sector to the overall vigor and resilience of the Swiss economy. Going forward, the key challenge for the Swiss financial industry will be to maintain its leading global status in a world of fierce competition. Because of the financial sector’s critical contribution to the overall economic well-being of the Swiss people, meeting this challenge is important not only to the financial sector but to all Swiss citizens who are concerned about the long-term vitality of their economy. Many of you are familiar with the relevant figures: roughly 10 percent of Switzerland’s real GDP derives from the financial sector. If one adds the insurance sector, that number is closer to 14 percent. That percentage has increased significantly since 1990 from a total of 10% of GDP or less than 7% for the banking sector only. Importantly, this does not take into account the many economic activities which are directly linked and in many cases dependent on a vibrant financial sector. In terms of employment, the financial and insurance sectors together employ approximately 185’000 people or 6% of total Swiss employment. The total federal and local tax contribution of the Swiss banking sector amounts to an estimated CHF 13 billion or 13% of total tax revenues. A mere perfunctory consideration of these figures should suffice to underline the importance of defending and maintaining Switzerland’s status as a leading global financial center. In a 1974 study, Charles Kindleberger traced the history of financial centers in Western countries. What is striking about Professor Kindleberger’s historical findings is that nothing should ever be taken for granted. Not unlike tides, cities and countries as international financial centers rise and fall. For the most part, this rise and fall seems to reflect dynamic criteria such as transportation infrastructure, political stability and regulatory patterns.1 Since the 1970s, the competition amongst international financial centers has of course become genuinely global with diverse places such as Luxembourg, Singapore, Hong Kong, Dubai and, most recently, Shanghai joining the race. Switzerland has good reasons to be confident about its ability to defend its status. Most importantly, it sets out from a position of strength. Particularly in the area of wealth management which comprises over half of the total added value of the banks, Switzerland is clearly one of the world’s leading provider of services. The value of total assets managed in customer accounts in domestic banks as of the end of the year 2003 amounts to CHF 3’300 billion, of which nearly 60% is held by foreigners. According to various estimates, this corresponds to approximately one third of the world’s total private wealth managed abroad.  Much has been said and written about the various strengths of the Swiss financial center which account for the dominant global position in wealth management. Political, economic and monetary stability, know-how, traditional high quality of services provided, guaranteed protection of privacy and strict conditions ensuring the prevention of abuse are all key ingredients to Switzerland’s past and future success. In the current global market place, some of these strengths represent structural competitive advantages. The Swiss authorities and the Swiss financial sector representatives rightly                                                       1  Charles P Kindleberger (1974): “The Formation of Financial Centers: a Study in Comparative Economic History”, Princeton Studies in International Finance, No 36, Princeton: Princeton University, November. BIS Review 34/2004 1 
make great efforts to defend these structural competitive advantages as much as other sovereign countries defend theirs.  Nonetheless, in a fierce global competitive environment, defense is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for sustained success. The offensive component of a comprehensive Swiss strategy must be an unequivocal commitment from politicians, regulators and financial sector representatives to competition and free markets. Such a commitment will foster innovation which will ensure the long-term viability of Switzerland as a leading global financial center. A commitment to competition includes a firm commitment to an effective regulatory system based on transparency, proportionality, predictability and an uncompromising fight against abuse. Such a regulatory framework does not stand in opposition to a commitment to free markets. To the contrary, it strengthens free markets by upholding the integrity of markets. Regulatory authorities must not loose sight of the primary aim of regulation: to uphold the integrity of markets and not to impede the functioning of markets.  Let me conclude my brief formal comments with a specific example of how innovation in the face of global competitive pressures can foster the viability of the Swiss financial center. In recent years, hedge funds have become an important segment of the global asset management industry. Recent figures indicate that total assets invested in hedge funds are approaching the USD 1’000 billion mark. In comparison, the total size of the open-end mutual funds industry in the United States is USD 7’500 billion. According to industry figures, the annual growth rate of the hedge fund industry appears to have accelerated to a level in excess of 15% in recent years. These figures suggest that investors increasingly look for largely unconstrained investment activities with a focus on absolute return. In addition, there has been an important shift from the traditional high net worth clients investing in individual hedge funds to funds being invested in hedge funds via diversified pools and formal fund of funds structures. These pooled assets, coupled with liberalizing regulatory developments have opened up hedge funds to a more diverse universe of investors, including a wide range of institutional and retail investors.  Currently, the total size of funds invested in hedge funds via pooled structures is estimated to be approximately USD 300 billion or nearly a third of the underlying hedge fund industry. Remarkably, annual growth rate estimates of the pooled funds suggest that their expansion has proceeded at a more rapid pace than the underlying hedge fund industry. This implies that a significant portion of new assets flowing into hedge funds does so via collective asset management pools.  In a competitive environment, the Swiss financial sector has succeeded in leveraging its position as one of the world’s leading asset manager to secure an dominant position amongst collective asset management pool operators in the hedge fund industry. Though many of the early formal funds of funds were registered under Luxembourg, Cayman Island or Bermuda law, Swiss financial firms today manage a significant part of the world’s alternative asset management pools. With the growing importance of this industry in recent years, Swiss regulators are easing regulatory restrictions to facilitate not only investment control of these asset pools by Swiss financial institutions but also the legal registrations of formal fund of funds vehicles under Swiss law. Moreover, Swiss financial firms have become leaders in financial engineering to structure underlying hedge fund asset pools according to differing client demands.  The example of managed asset pools in the hedge fund industry illustrates that Swiss financial firms are competitive and capable to respond to market demands, particularly in the area of asset management. In the future, Swiss financial firms will have to rise to new challenges to secure the position of Switzerland as a leading global financial center. One such opportunity might be to provide a wide range of trust-related services to its global wealth management clients. Regulators have an important and difficult role to play. Their primary responsibility is to safeguard the integrity of Switzerland as a financial center, thus bolstering its global standing. At the same time, they must not become an obstacle to innovation by impeding competitive Swiss financial firms to respond to rapidly evolving market developments in a vibrant global financial industry. 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
Hermann Remsperger: Real-time data and monetary policy Welcome address by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank Conference on “Real-time data and monetary policy”, Eltville, 28 May 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I have the pleasure of welcoming you to our conference on “Real-Time Data and Monetary Policy” which has been organised by Heinz Herrmann, Athanasios Orphanides and Pierre Siklos. Our conference concentrates on the uncertainty about the actual level of key macro variables. Until a few years ago, this issue received little attention in the academic debate on monetary policy. This has changed dramatically over the last few years, not least under the influence of economists attending this conference like Athanasios Orphanides or Dean Croushore. Awareness of the measurement problems in real-time data has important consequences. One could separate them into two classes which I would like to term “ex post” aspects on the one side and “ex ante” aspects on the other. With “ex post” aspects, I mean the implications for the empirical analysis of monetary policy. For instance, we have learned that the evaluation of forecasts based on final data may be misleading because it does not take into account which data were actually available at the time the forecasts were made. Or, as another example, when analysing monetary policy decisions, it is important to reconstruct the information set available to policy makers at the time the decisions were made. With “ex ante” aspects, I mean the implications of measurement problems for the conduct of monetary policy. This category includes questions like “How can we learn from past data revisions to improve our knowledge about future data?” or “How will the awareness of these measurement problems influence our policy decisions and the choice of our monetary policy approach?”. Obviously, all these topics are interlinked. Answers to these questions require real-time data sets for key variables like real and nominal GDP, potential output and inflation. At first glance, developing a real-time data set seems to be rather simple - just enter old data into spreadsheets and save them for future use. But in practice, old data are usually overwritten by new data without saving the older vintage. Producing a real-time data set thus requires a substantial amount of effort, including digging through old source data and figuring out what data were available at what time - a Herculean task, considering the lack of documentation for much of the data. In the US, research on real-time issues owes much to the efforts of Dean Croushore and Tom Stark from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia who developed a comprehensive real-time data set for the US economy. At the same time, Athanasios Orphanides reconstructed the real-time data and forecasts available to the FOMC from the Greenbooks which are prepared by the Federal Reserve staff for each meeting. The pioneering work of our American collegues has shown that measurement problems do indeed matter for the conduct of monetary policy. For example, we have learned from their studies that the problem of measurement error is likely to be particularly severe for the output gap - a concept which figures very prominently in much of the recent literature on monetary policy issues. Thus, it is not surprising that researchers outside the US, in particular in Europe, have taken up the issue of real-time data. This conference here in Eltville offers a good chance to present recent research on this issue. Today and tomorrow, we will listen to presentations of papers based on real-time national data for the US, the UK, Germany, Japan, Canada, Norway and Switzerland as well as realtime OECD forecasts for the G7 countries and the euro area countries. We at the Bundesbank started to compile a set of real-time data on the German economy two and a half years ago. And we have used these data for selected research topics. Let me give you three examples. BIS Review 33/2004 1 
First, Jörg Döpke has used the data set to calculate real-time output gaps (Discussion Paper 11/2004). In accordance with the studies by Orphanides and van Norden (1999, 2002), he finds that the real-time gaps differ considerably from their counterparts based on the latest vintage of data. One period when the difference between today’s estimates and the real-time perception of the output gap was particularly pronounced is the economic boom following German reunification. At that time, the measurement error for the output gap reached a size of up to four percentage points (depending on the estimation method used). In this particular case, the error was due to a temporary underestimation of actual output as well as to a more persistent overestimation of potential output. Doepke’s results thus provide additional evidence that measurement problems can seriously distort the assessment of current economic activity relative to its long-run trend. Second, Thomas Knetsch has analysed the importance of inventory investment for German business cycles. He finds that preliminary national accounts data of inventory investment are generally of poor quality. In another paper, he discusses how additional real-time information, in particular data from the Ifo Business survey, can be used to improve upon the preliminary official figures on the current level of inventories (Discussion Paper nine and 10/2004). Third, Christina Gerberding, Franz Seitz and Andreas Worms have used the real-time data set to re-examine the existing “evidence” that the Bundesbank’s monetary policy can well be captured by a standard Taylor rule. As you know, Clarida, Gali and Gertler claimed to have shown that the Bundesbank did not pursue a strategy of monetary targeting but in effect followed a forward-looking variant of the Taylor rule. I do not wish to anticipate the discussion at our conference. But I’m sure that we will hear some new arguments about monetary policy in Germany in the past. For instance, Gerberding, Seitz and Worms will present evidence that the Bundesbank did respond to deviations of real-time measures of money growth, expected inflation and output growth from their respective targets. In my view, the debate about the Bundesbank’s monetary policy directly leads to the “ex ante” aspects of data uncertainty, and thus to the following question: How should central bankers deal with measurement problems and other forms of data uncertainty during the decision-making process? I’d like to make four short remarks on that question. First of all, it seems fairly uncontroversial to me that concern about data uncertainty provides an additional and important argument against fine-tuning the economy with monetary policy instruments. We have to take into account that data on current output are exposed to considerable uncertainty. On top of that, it is even more difficult to estimate potential output. Hence, every attempt to fine-tune the economy bears the risk of policy errors with the corresponding negative effects on price stability. In my view, and that’s my second point, the more recent research on data uncertainty supports the principle of a cautious monetary policy approach (“steady as she goes policy”). As we know that important data on the economic situation are subject to revision, it generally can make sense to wait for newer, and more reliable, data. Cautious central bankers only change the status quo in monetary policy when the signs of an assumed change in the development of key macroeconomic variables become more apparent. The problem of data uncertainty suggests that we should not rely on one single indicator when we have to assess risks to price stability. Instead we should analyse a broad range of information variables. However, when following such a broad approach, we have to take into account that the extent of measurement problems differs from one indicator to the other. Very generally speaking, and that’s my third point, I’d like to emphasise that indicators from the monetary and financial sphere are far less affected by the problem of data uncertainty than real economic variables such as output and the output gap. Against this background, it comes as no surprise that a monetary policy approach should be as robust as possible against different forms of data and model uncertainties. In the past few years, a number of simulation studies have been carried out to assess which monetary policy approach achieves good results under various assumptions about the transmission process. These studies take into account model uncertainty. However, they largely disregard the problem of data uncertainty. Consequently, their value for practical monetary policy is rather limited. 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
I think, the search for a robust strategy in monetary policy could be broadened to include the kind of measurement problems that we will discuss here at this conference. Taking this broader perspective, and that’s my fourth and final point, a monetary policy would be considered robust if it performed well in the face of different forms of data and model uncertainty. Research in this direction has only just begun.1 I hope that this research will give further support to the ECB’s strategy. Let me conclude by emphasising that research on real-time data is of utmost importance for central banks. That’s why I am very much interested in the papers that you will present here today and tomorrow. I wish you thought-provoking discussions and a pleasant stay at our conference facilities. Thank you very much for your attention.                                                       1  See, for instance, Walsh, C (2003): “Implications of a changing economic structure for the strategy of monetary policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City”. BIS Review 33/2004 3 
John Hurley: The role of the central bank and the current issues being considered by the Financial Services Regulator Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, to the Joint Committee on Finance and Public Service, Dublin, 1 June 2004. *      *      * Introduction Thank you Chairman for the opportunity to address the Committee this afternoon. My colleagues and I are happy to discuss with the Committee the general issues arising from the overcharging by AIB of certain foreign exchange customers. I appreciate that you noted, in your invitation to us, that an examination into specific issues relating to AIB Bank is ongoing. Other serious issues have emerged since the time of your invitation. As you know, work on all these matters is now the responsibility of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority rather than the Bank. In my opening remarks I would like to deal with the following: • The role of the Central Bank in financial regulation following the restructuring that took place   last year;  • The Central Bank’s role in relation to financial stability; • The profile of the banking system in Ireland;  • The former responsibilities of the Central Bank in relation to foreign exchange charges; • The current issues being considered by the Financial Services Regulator; and • The compliance environment. Role of the Central Bank I would like to start by briefly putting the role of the Central Bank in context by describing the new regulatory structures that are now in place following the establishment of the new Financial Services Regulator and our own restructuring last year. On the first of May 2003 the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland was established. This body carries out all the activities formerly carried out by the Central Bank of Ireland as well as several additional regulatory functions, including those previously discharged by other regulatory bodies. The regulatory Departments of the Central Bank, i.e., staff and records, were transferred to the Regulatory Authority. Accordingly the CBFSAI has two distinct component entities:  1. The Central Bank  In addition to being the corporate entity with responsibility for central services, the Central Bank also has extensive other functions, including euro-area related functions. Our main functions are: a) Monetary policy operations; b) Financial stability; c) Economic analysis; d) Currency and payment systems; e) Investment of foreign and domestic assets. 2. The Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority As you know, this body is responsible for the regulation of all authorised financial entities including banking, securities and insurance and for consumer protection and consumer information matters. BIS Review 33/2004 1 
The Financial Services Regulator has clearly defined responsibilities and decision-making powers of its own. It is now responsible for the regulation of all financial services firms in Ireland. It also has greatly enhanced functions when it comes to consumer protection and consumer education. These regulatory powers and functions are exercised independently of the Central Bank.  There is a wide range of additional enforcement powers being assigned to the Financial Services Regulator under the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Bill, 2003. These additional powers, I know, are very much welcomed by the Financial Services Regulator and I believe they are both appropriate and timely.  There is now a new focus on financial regulation and this includes, in particular, more emphasis on the consumer. There is also growing recognition internationally of the desirability of all financial institutions being supervised by a single regulator as is now the case in Ireland. The Financial Services Regulator has as its focus the protection of consumers by helping them to make more informed decisions in a safe and fair market and to foster sound dynamic financial institutions. The Central Bank’s statutory responsibility in this regard relates to the stability of the overall financial system and not individual institutions. We have a common interest in the stability and solvency of the financial sector and the protection of the interests of the consumers. In discharging this function we aim to promote a vibrant financial services industry that can continue to prosper in a very competitive international environment. Financial stability Some concerns were expressed before the current arrangements were put in place that, somehow, the Financial Services Regulator might not be fully independent of the Central Bank. I can assure the Committee that this is not the case. The Central Bank’s role relates only to the stability of the overall financial system. This year, we will publish a stand-alone Financial Stability Report outlining the extensive work being undertaken by the Bank on financial stability. Financial stability work includes the development of various early warning indicators of systemic risks. These are events that could spread from one institution to another giving rise to serious problems in the financial system and the economy more generally. The work also includes the procedures required in the event of a systemic emergency. The reason for the strong focus on financial stability is that financial crises are very costly, not alone in financial but also in economic terms. Many countries have experienced crises that seriously impacted on economic growth - in some cases, 10% or more of GNP. On an international comparison, Ireland’s financial stability record has been very good.  It is worth noting that in discharging its financial stability role in the public interest the Central Bank is also protecting the consumers of financial services. In concluding my comments on financial stability, I should stress that while the events currently under investigation carry serious reputational risks, they have not given rise to adverse implications for financial stability.  Profile of banking system One of the unfortunate fallouts from the problems that have arisen is the tarnishing of the image of the Irish banking system, which has an excellent reputation internationally. This is most regrettable, as we have a sound and successful banking system that compares very well with international peers. The banks are also one of our largest employers with a workforce of nearly 40,000. The banking sector accounts for 4-5% of GNP and is a major contributor to Government revenue. Pensions and other types of savings hold significant shareholdings in banks so that the performance of banks is important for them. The banking industry is vital to this country. I should not pass without a brief reference to the IFSC. As you know, this has been one of our great success stories. The Centre has a solid record of success even during the global downturn of the early 90’s. There are now nearly 12,000 people directly employed in the IFSC making a significant contribution to the economy. In a large industry like the financial services, problems and improper practices inevitably arise from time to time; this is true of all countries. The most important point is that procedures and processes are in place to deal with them in a timely and expeditious manner, as the Financial Services Regulator is now doing. Despite the serious problems that have arisen, I believe that there has been a marked improvement in Corporate Governance standards in the industry in recent years. Any recommendations emanating 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
from the current investigation that suggest further improvements are necessary should be implemented without any delay. I should emphasise that no regulatory system - no matter how extensive or expensive can guarantee that mistakes, inappropriate practices or behaviour will never happen. However, it is essential that when such events occur - despite a comprehensive regulatory system being in place - the regulatory machinery is capable of dealing with them effectively and speedily. I believe that the measures put in place since the mid-nineties together with the forthcoming enactment of the new powers presently at Report stage in the Dáil, will provide such a system.  Foreign exchange charges There was no statutory control over bank charges prior to the enactment of the Central Bank Act, 1989. Section 28 of the 1989 Act placed a statutory requirement on banks to notify the Central Bank of every proposal to change any charge or associated term and condition. The Central Bank had power to direct a bank to refrain from changing the charge, term or condition. This power was frequently exercised. In addition to the legislative requirements, the Central Bank also required banks to advertise all changes to charges in the national press before they came into effect. I should mention that in having a statutory underpinning for the control of bank charges, the Irish system was much more stringent than that of most countries.  In 1994, the Government formally announced its intention to transfer responsibility for bank charges from the Central Bank to the Director of Consumer Affairs. From that time, the Central Bank decided that it would not consider any further applications for increases in charges; it did not wish to pre-empt, in any way, the future role and decisions of the Director. Some exceptions were made to this, such as the introduction of new services such as “laser”, with agreement with the Director of Consumer Affairs. When the legislation came into effect the Director considered all proposals independently and was advised, under the legislation, by all the institutions of the charges applied by them. Responsibility for approving bank charges is now vested in the Financial Services Regulator since 1 May 2003. As I indicated already, the issue of overcharging by AIB is the subject of an independent investigation which will report to the Financial Services Regulator and AIB. Recent developments When Liam O’Reilly and his team were before you in recent days they gave you information on the background to their investigation into the foreign exchange charging issues within AIB. An independent investigation - which I understand will be funded by AIB - into its foreign exchange charges has been established with direct involvement by the Financial Services Regulator. It is being carried out by an external firm of forensic accountants and is overseen by an independent assuror, Mr Lauri McDonnell. I understand that a full report on the issues will be issued.  The Financial Services Regulator is also engaged with another investigation, relating to matters concerning AIB Investment Managers Ltd (AIBIM) during the period 1989 to 1996. All of the issues raised by the investigations will be considered by the Regulator comprehensively and in detail. It will then decide what further actions need to be taken in this regard. I fully share the concerns already expressed by Liam O’Reilly regarding recent revelations, and that any improper practices within the financial services industry in Ireland are totally unacceptable. I fully support the approach that is being taken to these issues by the Financial Services Regulator.  The compliance environment I wish to offer a few words on the compliance environment. It is important to recognise that there has been a fundamental change in the way client funds are handled by investment firms, such as AIBIM, since the passage of the Investment Intermediaries Act 1995 and Stock Exchange Act, 1995. Since that time Codes of Conduct and Client Money rules have been issued and investment managers have been required to invest substantially in compliance functions. The systems of control are now more transparent than they would have been in the BIS Review 33/2004 3 
1989-1996 period and I think it is less likely that anything like what happened then could happen now and if it did it would be unlikely to go undetected.  With regard to tax matters generally, we have gone through a similar cultural change. Since the Public Accounts Committee DIRT investigations and since the development, during the late 1990s, of the money laundering regime - which includes tax evasion - which now applies to banks. Banks are being required to heavily invest in compliance. Money laundering is a special focus of the Financial Services Regulator’s inspections programme and there is now detailed guidance in place for banks in this regard. I feel that there is no similarity in the way tax issues are treated now and the way that they were treated in the early 1990s, either in the banks or, I think, among the public generally. The approach to all taxation matters is now much more rigorous. In relation to the remaining issues, it is best to wait to hear the outcome of the Financial Services Regulator’s investigation. Only then will the Regulator be in a position to give a full report on all the issues relating to AIB. Many of the matters of concern here have had their roots in an earlier period when the compliance environment was much weaker than at present. I think that there is a danger that by generalizing on the basis of events, many of which occurred several years ago, we are in danger of missing the improvements which have taken place and the significant changes in both the regulatory and compliance framework within which banks operate. Problems and improper behaviour will inevitably occur. But generally speaking, the attitude to compliance among Irish banks has improved in recent years and, I have no doubt that following these events, the standards will be further strengthened.  Conclusion To summarise my position, Chairman, I regard the events about which we are speaking today to be both very serious and deeply disappointing. These matters are being fully investigated by the Financial Services Regulator. The Financial Services Regulator has gone about its task in a comprehensive, detailed and pro-active manner. I have full confidence that it will reach the appropriate conclusions and take any necessary further remedial action. Thank you, Chairman, for permitting me to make this opening statement. My colleagues and I will be very happy to answer any questions the Committee may wish to put to us. 4 BIS Review 33/2004 
Jaime Caruana: Basel II - a new approach to banking supervision Remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Fourth Annual International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector: “Basel II - the international banking system at the crossroads”, Washington DC, 1 June 2004. *      *      * It is an honour to be invited to join you, the members of the global supervisory community, at this seminar on the future of banking supervision. I would like to thank our host, Chairman Greenspan, for his warm welcome into the hallowed halls of the Federal Reserve. Likewise, all of us express our gratitude to the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Federal Reserve for organising this seminar. To ensure rich, lively, and informed discussions, our sponsors have assembled an impressive array of speakers and participants, including senior supervisors, central bankers, and others from over 50 countries, an achievement that demonstrates, for the fourth time, excellence in international and inter-organisational cooperation.  Overview of remarks The new capital adequacy framework, or “Basel II,” figures into virtually every discussion today on the outlook for international banking tomorrow. This seminar will tackle its policy implications. They include the new framework’s potential effects on risk management within an individual firm; on competition between firms; on the stability of the financial sector and the future of supervision; and, most broadly, on the long-term growth of the economy.  What makes this seminar unique is its focus on the perspectives of countries that are not members of the Basel Committee and particularly those of emerging market countries. Consequently, I will try to focus most of my remarks from this very relevant perspective.  I would like to discuss three of the most sensitive policy questions that national banking authorities in those markets – but also elsewhere – have raised about Basel II. First, will Basel II harm the flow of capital to emerging and developing markets? Second, is Basel II appropriate for banks in those markets? And third, will Basel II lead to a deterioration in the level playing field? In my answers to these three questions, I will also highlight other related issues in the new capital framework, such as complexity and procyclicality. In some of the discussions that I have heard or read about these important issues, I have had the impression that perhaps too much attention is placed on the constraints of regulatory capital. While regulatory capital forms one of the overall constraints on banks’ activities, it is not usually the most binding constraint for the majority of individual banking decisions taken by leading institutions, which are much more affected by factors such as economic capital, the level of competition and general costs. At the same time, too little attention seems to be placed on another channel of influence of Basel II: the improvement of risk management practices fostered by the incentives and transparency enhancements contained in the new framework. In fact, this is one of the key innovations of Basel II compared to Basel I. Basel II is about much more than just setting quantitative minimum capital requirements. It is about establishing incentive-based approaches to risk and capital adequacy management, within a framework of three mutually-supporting pillars: minimum capital requirements, supervisory review and transparency. I think that Basel II represents an unparalleled opportunity for banks to improve their business strategies and risk management systems. In my view, the combination of better risk management, a stronger capital structure and improved transparency standards in the banking system could significantly improve the access of emerging economies to financial markets.  This raises two additional groups of relevant questions that I will also address later in my presentation: the first group relates to the transition by different jurisdictions to the new framework, and the second to the necessary cooperation between home and host countries to make its implementation more effective and consistent.  BIS Review 33/2004 1 
Our discussions on all of these topics will bear on the very well chosen title for this event: “the international banking system at the crossroads.” That wonderful image of a “crossroads” suggests two metaphors that we should keep in mind.  The most immediate image that the term “crossroads” calls to mind is, of course, a place where four roads meet. It is where a traveller, having followed one road to this point, must reflect to select one of the next three roads to continue a journey. That is an appropriate metaphor for us today. We must evaluate the environment we and our banks are entering and choose a way forward that enhances supervision and that contributes to the safety and soundness of our banks. At the same time, we should not invent new roads. There are already ‘roads’ of good practices used by leading banks that we can follow and support. We might discover a second relevant metaphor if we allow ourselves to be inspired by the beauty of the Federal Reserve’s Eccles Building and its architectural references to antiquity. In classical times, scholars divided the liberal arts into seven subjects. The first three related to language and formed the “Trivium,” which in Latin means “three roads.” In contrast, the “Quadrivium” – which is the Latin term for “four roads,” but also for “crossroads” – represented the study of four subjects related to numbers – namely, arithmetic and geometry, but also music and astronomy.  The classical metaphor of the Quadrivium, or of the “crossroads” of subjects related to numbers, seems equally well suited to a discussion of contemporary banking and supervision. Leading banks in recent years have sought to augment subjective assessments of risk with more objective and formalised, more rigorous, and more numerically oriented analytical techniques. After all, good numbers are the best friend of good judgement. Credit scoring, advanced statistical analysis, and financial modelling are among the ever expanding range of tools that credit officers and others use to lend more rigorous insight into risks that were once thought not readily quantifiable. The businesses of banking and risk management will always be more art than science. Still, the metaphor of the crossroads of subjects related to numbers reminds us that, for our system of supervision to remain relevant in the twenty-first century, it must reflect the industry’s advances in quantifying risk and in developing other tools to measure and manage risk. At the conclusion of this seminar, I hope that all of us will return to our home countries with deeper insight into Basel II and into our own readiness for a new approach to banking supervision. A Spanish proverb reminds us to “drink nothing without seeing it; sign nothing without reading it.” It is in that spirit that I would like to begin the substance of my remarks with my thoughts on why we need Basel II. Do we need Basel II? As you know, Basel II has attracted much more attention, from more segments of society, than probably any other reform of bank supervision. Mainstream newspapers have reported extensively on it. Politicians of all views have addressed it. Even non-financial business owners have discussed it extensively. The level of public debate reminds us that banks are charged with a special public trust and that capital requirements are intended to safeguard their ability to discharge that trust. Banks serve as custodians for the public’s wealth and as intermediaries of credit to consumers and businesses alike. No bank can discharge those duties for long if it lacks sufficient capital. When capital is exhausted, the bank fails, leaving public authorities – and taxpayers – responsible for making depositors whole again. The 1988 Basel Accord established the the first internationally accepted definition and measure of bank capital. In many ways, the 1988 Basel Accord was a tremendous success story. Perhaps because it was simple to apply, it was adopted in over 100 countries, including most of the countries represented here today. As a result, it became acknowledged as one of the benchmark measures of a bank’s financial health. While the simplicity of the 1988 Accord was an asset in promoting its acceptance, today its simplicity is quickly becoming a liability for some bankers and supervisors alike. Over the past 16 years, the methodologies for measuring and managing risk have evolved in ways that the architects of the 1988 Accord could not have anticipated.  For one, advances in technology, telecommunications, and markets have changed the way that banks collect, measure, and manage their risks. Having gained experience in quantifying exposures to market risk, leading banks today are quantifying and using increasingly reliable estimates of the credit risk associated with particular borrowers. Likewise, banks seek to quantify in a more reliable manner 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
their exposures to operational risk, or the risk of losses stemming from failures in internal processes or systems or from damage caused by an external disruption. Evolution in markets has likewise provided banks with more tools for managing and transferring credit risk, such as through securitisation transactions and credit derivatives.  As risk management becomes more sophisticated, the simple and static rules of the 1988 Accord are becoming less relevant. Leading banks increasingly view the old rules as a burden, constraining their abilities to administer their businesses relative to the best information and practices available today. Supervisors, for our part, have less confidence in the 1988 Accord’s measures of risk for banks that engage in the most sophisticated forms of risk taking and risk mitigation.  By the late 1990s, it became clear to banks and supervisors that we needed a new capital framework. But one person in particular knew that we should do more than merely revise the minimum requirements. Bill McDonough, the previous chairman of the Committee, and the former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, convinced leaders in the industry, in central banks, and in supervisory agencies that we should provide incentives to advance the state of the art in risk management across the industry. He did not seek to reduce the amount of capital held by the banking system but rather sought to increase the stability of the global financial system – a goal that would benefit not just banks, but more broadly businesses and consumers. To work toward greater financial stability, the Basel Committee is blending several policy approaches to replace the existing capital framework. As I have mentioned, Basel II consists of three mutually reinforcing pillars. The first pillar aligns the minimum capital requirements more closely to banks’ actual underlying risks. Qualifying banks will rely partly on their own measures of those risks, a rule that helps to create economic incentives for banks to improve those measures. The second pillar – supervisory review – allows supervisors to evaluate each bank’s assessments of its own risks and to determine whether those assessments seem reasonable. The third pillar, market discipline, strengthens external incentives for prudent management. It strengthens the ability of marketplace participants to reward well managed banks and to penalise poorly managed ones by enhancing transparency in banks’ financial reporting. One might say that Basel II seeks an “efficient frontier” of policy objectives through the three pillars. Each pillar provides something that the other two cannot. Each is essential to achieving our overall objective of financial stability.  The three pillars represent a far more sophisticated view of risk and a far more comprehensive approach to supervising bank capital than the “one-pillar” approach contained in the 1988 Basel Accord. As a result, the Committee has engaged in an exhaustive – and sometimes exhausting – public dialogue with bankers, supervisors, and other observers on Basel II’s structure and merits. That dialogue was critical to improving the quality of the new framework, and I would like to express my gratitude to all who took great pains to share their views and concerns. You provided us with the perspective of other markets and countries. You shared detailed comments on the proposals. You encouraged your banks to participate in our consultations. The improvements that the Committee made to Basel II would have been impossible without your contributions. Indeed, it was during those public discussions that policymakers in emerging market countries raised three sensitive questions. I would like to turn now to address those questions and help explain my belief that Basel II represents an opportunity for banks and supervisors in many countries.  1. Will Basel II harm the international flow of capital? The first key question in the discussion about the new framework and emerging markets is whether Basel II will harm the flow of capital across borders and especially to emerging markets. In this context, some observers suggest that the new capital framework’s heightened sensitivity to risk may reduce the flow of foreign investment in developing economies, since exposures to those economies might typically be considered of higher risk. As I will explain, I believe that Basel II will not have a material effect on the flow of capital. Basel II seeks to align capital regulations more closely to banks’ current practices – it will not change the way that banks actually evaluate risk to decide whether to invest in emerging market economies. To understand this answer, we must first understand the issue that may have triggered this debate. One of the valid criticisms of the 1988 Accord concerns its rather arbitrary treatment of country risk. The 1988 Accord assigns risk weights, and hence capital charges, to sovereign governments and related borrowers, as well as to banking organisations, based on whether the country in question is a BIS Review 33/2004 3 
member of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. The “OECD Club Rule,” as it has become known, assigned a zero percent risk weight to exposures to sovereign government borrowers that were members of the OECD, which means that no capital had to be held against such sovereign exposures. In contrast, exposures to all other countries were assigned the standard 100% risk weight, which is equivalent to an 8% capital charge.  The Club Rule was meant to help distinguish between higher and lower risk sovereign borrowers and their banks. In retrospect, it seems to be an unfair way to divide the world. Indeed, some OECD member governments have experienced serious economic shocks that threatened their repayment abilities, while several non-OECD member governments have performed extremely well in the international debt markets.  When the Committee set out to revise the 1988 Accord, we wanted to resolve the arbitrary treatment of country risk that the Club Rule introduced. Our solution in Basel II was to assign risk weights, and hence capital charges, to exposures to sovereign borrowers and to banks that reflected a measure of their credit risk. Banks on the standardised approach to credit risk will determine the risk weights on their exposures to sovereigns and to banks based on those borrowers’ external credit ratings. Banks adopting the internal ratings-based approach to credit risk will rely on their own sense of the credit risk involved.  Basel II eliminates the arbitrary distinctions imposed by the Club Rule and sets capital requirements based on external or internal measures of credit risk. Yet some observers have assumed that a more risk-sensitive approach might drive up not just capital requirements, but also the pricing of credit for loans to emerging market countries and banks.  This assumption is where the debate breaks down. Indeed, the arguments suggesting that Basel II will reduce flows of capital into emerging markets requires us to accept the view that regulatory capital drives loan pricing – something that has not been proven in any research.  In fact, research and the Committee’s own discussions with banks suggest that something else drives loan pricing. When determining the price of a loan, banks consider all of the economic risks associated with a particular borrower. It is factors such as “economic capital” and the level of competition that drive loan pricing, rather than regulatory capital.  Research on the pricing of international syndicated loans has confirmed that “pricing clearly varies positively with credit risk.” That finding should be no surprise to any banker or supervisor – banks that do not price their loans based on a borrower’s credit risk probably will not be in business very long. When applied in the context of sovereign or bank borrowers, this finding suggests that loan pricing already takes into account the credit quality of the borrowers. Studies such as this one have concluded that, consequently, even those countries that have the lowest credit quality will not likely experience a marked contraction in capital flows. Why would that be true? It is because banks that are managing their risks appropriately are already considering all of the risks that they face when they lend to higher risk borrowers – and thus a country’s lower credit quality is already priced into a loan, even under the existing capital rules today. Furthermore, there are additional elements in Basel II that can contribute to alleviate concerns about the impact on capital flows. Let me mention the reduction in capital charges for retail lending, residential mortgages, small and medium enterprises (exposures below € 1 million) and well-provisioned past-due loans.1 Also, the recognition of credit risk mitigants such as collateral and guarantees is significantly better in the new framework of Basel II. In a similar vein, I would like to address a related comment that I have often heard. Some observers argue that Basel II will have a detrimental effect on capital flows to emerging market economies because the new framework does not recognise the diversification benefits that characterise investments in such markets. It is true that Basel II falls short of recognising the diversification benefits of full credit risk models, although the internal-ratings based approach recognises the benefits of diversification to some degree by assuming that a bank’s assets benefit from the same degree of diversification as that of an                                                       1  In the standardised approach the risk-weight of residential mortgage is 35% instead of 50% in Basel I. For SME’s and other retail the new risk weight is 75% versus 100% in Basel I. Past due loans can have a capital charge of 50% when there are enough provisions (loss reserves > 50%).  4 BIS Review 33/2004 
average, internationally active bank. Under the evolutionary approach of Basel II, the Committee recognises the importance of continued active dialogue with the industry regarding both the performance of this models and their comparability across banks, and we have included this issue in our agenda for future work. Nevertheless, the main reason that we have not fully recognised diversification effects at this stage is because first we need to see clear evidence from many banks that they have robust systems in place themselves to assess and quantify such effects and that they rely on their measures of diversification in their daily risk management. Of course, as systems improve in the future, we would be happy to discuss them, and once there is a “best practice” in this field we will be better able to recognise it in the capital framework. In the meantime experience with internal credit models will provide us with highly valuable information. In addition, since loan pricing is not predominantly driven by regulatory requirements, banks are free to recognise diversification benefits in their own pricing calculations. Consequently, they can indeed capture their sense of the benefit of diversification in their credit decisions and loan pricing for every borrower, whether in an emerging market country or not.  From a different perspective, I think that what should be of concern to emerging market is not just the level of capital flowing into a country, but also the volatility of the level of capital that is flowing inwards. Abrupt changes in capital flows can be just as harmful as contractions in flows. Volatility erodes the confidence that businesses and governments have in the future supply of credit, rendering long-term planning meaningless.  I believe that banks adopting especially the advanced approaches to credit risk will increasingly take longer-term views of their international investments, as stress testing and other requirements will ensure that they consider how their risks would react to certain changes in the market environment. When banking systems are adequately capitalised, well-managed and risks are correctly assessed within the appropriate time horizon, the financial system becomes more stable, less procyclical, better able to promote sustainable growth, and more resilient during periods of distress. Risk assessment process that are more formalised and disciplined may facilitate early detections of deviations or mistakes, and that may facilitate making smoother corrections at an early stage, reducing the probability of sudden changes in investment decisions. This, in turn, should benefit emerging market economies by improving the degree of confidence that they can have in the future level of capital inflows. Procyclicality This is very much related to the discussion about procyclicality, an important issue that we at the Committee have taken up and addressed seriously. In particular, some have suggested that the internal ratings-based approaches will drive up the cost of credit for borrowers precisely at times when its supply is falling, namely during downturns in the business cycle. This has led to concerns that Basel II may exacerbate fragility in emerging markets. There is some degree of procyclicality inherent in banking behaviour. The question that we should consider is whether Basel II will unduly exacerbate this behaviour. In response, I believe that concerns in this respect may reflect the perception that I have already challenged – that regulatory capital charges directly drive credit pricing decisions. As I noted, research suggests that it is economic capital that drives credit pricing, not regulatory capital. Consequently, Basel II will simply align regulatory capital rules more closely to banks’ actual practices; it will not change how they price credit facilities. Nonetheless, the Committee recognises that any risk-sensitive capital framework will cause the capital requirement to fluctuate for the same exposure if a borrower’s creditworthiness strengthens or weakens. To mitigate excessively wide swings in capital requirements, the Committee has flattened the risk weight curves that apply under the “internal ratings-based approach” to credit risk so that a small change in credit risk does not lead to a large change in capital requirements. At the same time, the Committee will require banks adopting the more advanced approaches to credit risk to adopt a more forward-looking approach to credit risk management by requiring meaningful stress testing of their credit portfolios. Stress testing is intended to help banks understand how their exposures to credit risk may change in the future should sudden shocks affect the market in some way. BIS Review 33/2004 5 
2. Is Basel II appropriate for banks in emerging market countries? The first key question addressed Basel II’s potential impact on investment and capital flows between countries. The second key question is whether Basel II is even appropriate for banking systems in emerging markets, which I would like to address now. In my view, the principles and vision of supervision in Basel II are valuable for supervisors and banks in all markets. I must acknowledge that its advanced approaches to risk measurement are mainly intended for those internationally active banks that have the greatest potential to increase systemic risk, and are very demanding in terms of the investments that they pre-suppose in the banks’ own systems, and the qualitative requirements that they set. The 1988 Accord itself was created initially to apply a more consistent set of rules to globally competitive banks, and the shortcomings of the existing rules today are especially evident in the context of these highly sophisticated organisations. However, many supervisors apply the 1988 Accord to less complex organisations that may be active mainly or even only in domestic markets. Is Basel II appropriate for those banks as well? I think that the great level of diversity in markets and in financial systems worldwide makes it difficult – and perhaps even counterproductive – to try to specify a single rule that could be applied to all banks in all countries. Fortunately, Basel II is moving away from a “one-size-fits-all” rule. In fact, Basel II’s menu approach provides supervisors and banks with a range of options that make its basic standards more readily available to many kinds of organisations in countries that face different economic circumstances. It also makes greater supervisory cooperation essential, in order to ensure consistent implementation. One concern which has been expressed many times is that excessive reliance is placed on External Credit Agencies for those banks that do not have sufficiently robust internal rating systems. The Committee has been mindful of this concern and if supervisors are uncomfortable with external ratings in their countries, there is an option whereby all corporate claims are weighted at 100% and sovereigns and banks can be risk weighted according to the risk scores of export credit agencies, in which case there need not be any reliance on external credit agencies at all. Indeed, our discussions with colleagues and counterparts from countries outside the Committee have been instrumental in revising the capital framework. Thanks to our consultations, we have endeavoured to address several broad issues in the new framework, which I will set out now.  Complexity One inevitable by-product of designing a comprehensive three-pillar framework with built-in options to suit different circumstances is increased complexity. The members of the Basel Committee certainly recognise that complexity is not a virtue for supervisory guidelines. It is far easier to enforce a simple rule than a complicated one. However, achieving a balance between simplicity and comparability, and also between simplicity and risk sensitivity is particularly difficult in an industry like banking, where a culture of constant innovation makes it a tall order for regulators to develop simple rules that fit all banking products and services in all their permutations. Paraphrasing Einstein ‘a good framework should be as simple as possible, but not simpler’ Much of the complexity in Basel II actually stems from the diversity existing in real world and from the many options that the rules provide. Many of those options reflect banks’ own requests to address the rich variety of risks and practices in existence today; some banking organisations thought that a “blanket rule” would unfairly burden them. By providing a range of options, we are better able to fit the regulatory framework to each bank’s profile, rather than the other way around.  Similarly, some of the complexity in Basel II stems from the details we provide to clarify expectations for banks and supervisors and to promote a more level playing field. Many bankers and supervisors asked the Committee to provide greater details where they thought a danger existed for differences in interpretation to arise across jurisdictions.  We have worked hard over the past years to clarify the rules, to simplify those thought to be the most complex, and to provide options for those wishing to use a simpler approach. In fact, as the Basel Committee demonstrated in an annex to the third consultative paper, supervisors can select options that would result in a very simple set of rules that can be specified in just 12 pages of text. That is approximately equal in length to the original 1988 Accord.  6 BIS Review 33/2004 
The “simplified standardised approach”, as we call it, is intended to be useful for those countries that do not wish to adopt all of the options available under the new framework. The trade-off, however, reflects the fact that the policy balance at stake is between simplicity and risk-sensitivity; if one chooses simpler rules, the cost is less sensitivity to risk and hence greater conservatism in capital requirements.  3. Competition and consistency of application. Another broad concern that the Committee has worked to address is Basel II’s impact on global competition. In particular, some have asked whether banks that choose Basel II’s advanced approaches will enjoy benefits over those that choose simpler approaches. Others have wondered whether banks that remain on the 1988 Accord for some time will be disadvantaged.  To respond to these concerns, we should understand that adopting an advanced approach does not automatically reduce a bank’s capital requirements. In fact, a more risk sensitive capital framework is intended to align capital requirements more closely to risk. This could mean that capital requirements for an advanced bank may actually rise relative to the current rules if the bank’s exposures are actually riskier than the measures under the 1988 Accord would have suggested. Furthermore some national supervisors may set higher capital requirements than implied by Basel I, perhaps even higher than those implied by Basel II, depending on the risk environment. For those banks that do experience reductions in capital as a result of Basel II, some observers have questioned whether the lower requirements might provide certain advantages and make it easier for those banks to acquire other banks that do not share in the same benefits. History suggests that this particular concern may be unfounded. In a paper published this past February by the Federal Reserve, researchers reported that they did not find convincing evidence that past changes in capital requirements have had a substantial impact on mergers between banks.  The issue of competition between banks has also come up in the context of competition between countries. Here, we should remember that Basel II is intended to help ensure that international competition in banking markets is driven by the strengths of each bank, rather than by differences in each country’s rules. One way that the Committee has sought to promote a consistent application of the new framework is by providing banks and supervisors with detailed requirements where necessary. As I have already mentioned, these details may add to the appearance of length and complexity in Basel II, but that is a small price to pay for greater consistency and a more level playing field. However, given the need to have a framework which can be adapted to a wide range of circumstances, cooperation among supervisors is clearly the most important tool in achieving an appropriate level of consistency. The Committee has established a working group of supervisors, called the Accord Implementation Group, or “AIG,” that shares information on implementation efforts among Basel Committee member countries. The AIG works with other supervisors as well, including through the Core Principles Liaison Group, a group of supervisors from many other countries that shares views and exchanges information. By promoting the sharing of information on practical issues, the AIG’s discussions will help to foster greater consistency in the implementation and application of the new framework across countries. For example, thanks to the work of the AIG, the Committee has been able to publish its thinking on the implementation of the supervisory review process – Pillar 2 – and on home-host co-operation in implementation of the framework.  Let me just come back to this latter point. Given the internationalisation of banking groups and their increased reliance on group-wide risk management, it is clear that the cross-border implementation of the framework is more complex than it was in 1988. The AIG has been actively discussing this issue, and in August 2003 the Committee published a set of principles to promote closer practical co-operation and information exchange among supervisors. The principles re-emphasise the traditional responsibilities of home and host supervisors, but also how those responsibilities will continue under the new framework on the basis of enhanced co-operation. More recently, at the beginning of May, the Committee published an elaboration of the principles.  Of course, we recognise that the objectives we are seeking cannot be achieved overnight and that they are dependent on building good relations and trust between supervisors. As part of this effort, the AIG will be meeting again with the Core Principles Liaison Group’s working group on capital in the BIS Review 33/2004 7 
middle of this month. Among other things, the two groups will discuss cross-border issues and case studies and will exchange current thinking on implementation strategies. I believe that each and every effort and initiative to improve communications between supervisors around the world should be strongly encouraged. 4. Moving to the New Framework These are just a few examples of how Basel II has been improved to make it more suitable for national circumstances and domestic banking systems in many countries. The members of the Committee and I recognise, and we have consistently stressed, that only national authorities can decide when to adopt Basel II. Adopting Basel II on the same timetable as the member countries of the Basel Committee is not feasible for all countries. In fact, Basel II may be a lesser priority compared to other ongoing efforts to promote the fundamentals of safety and soundness in each country’s banking system. All of us must think long and hard about the state of our markets, our banking systems, and our supervisory structures to determine when we are ready to adopt the new approach to banking supervision that Basel II implies. Of course, the Committee hopes that, over time, more and more countries will adopt the framework. We do not want them to do so before they are ready. And, when they are ready, we want them to adopt the options and approaches that are most appropriate for their circumstances.  For a country that wishes to adopt Basel II but may not yet be ready, I would suggest a three-stage approach to the transition to Basel II. These stages could be categorised as (1) strengthening the supervisory infrastructure; (2) introducing or reinforcing the three pillars; and then (3) making the transition from the 1988 Accord to Basel II. This three-stage process recognises that Basel II is not intended simply to ensure compliance with a new set of capital rules. Rather, Basel II is intended to enhance the quality of risk management. To achieve this goal, Basel II must be built on the foundation of a sound supervisory system. Such a foundation includes having successfully implemented the Basel Committee’s “Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision,” including the provisions on operational autonomy of the supervisory authority, adequate supervisory resources, regulatory and remedial powers, and a sufficient legal framework. Likewise, sound accounting and provisioning standards are critical to ensuring that the capital ratios - however calculated - reflect meaningfully the bank’s ability to absorb losses. Establishing a solid foundation of sound supervisory, legal, and accounting systems constitute the essential first stage of the process of moving to the new supervisory framework. Secondly, I would encourage supervisors to consider how the three pillars of Basel II could already be enhanced in their jurisdiction. Supervisors do not need to await their formal adoption of Basel II to start introducing or using the principles of the three pillars. On the contrary, incorporating those principles is excellent preparation for adopting Basel II in the future. For example, supervisors might be encouraged to move towards a system of risk-based supervision, developing skills in assessing the quality of a bank’s risk management and its ability to assess risk exposures. At the same time, banks could be reminded of their responsibility to develop their own processes for evaluating their capital needs and a strategy for maintaining their capital levels, in line with the principles of Pillar 2. With regard to the principles of market discipline in Pillar 3, supervisors in some countries may wish to focus initially on ensuring a baseline level of disclosures across all banks. This might include discussing with banks, investors and other users of financial information their information needs and the tools available so that supervisors can tailor requirements accordingly.  In my view, these two preliminary stages will provide an excellent preparation for the “final” stage to move to Basel II.  The Basel Committee welcomes the efforts that so many countries have already undertaken to enhance the quality of bank supervision and to encourage prudent management in the banking sector. We support your work and would like to contribute to your efforts. The Basel Committee, its member agencies, and the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements have long participated in regional training initiatives that are intended to help promote supervisors’ understanding of international banking standards such as the new capital framework. The Committee’s Accord Implementation Group likewise engages in outreach to supervisors in non-member countries, including through the Core Principles Liaison Group. I chaired a special session of such a discussion earlier this year because I am personally committed to improving that dialogue.  8 BIS Review 33/2004 
We look forward to working with other institutions, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, to assist other supervisors in their journeys as they come to their own crossroads for banking supervision. Conclusion In my remarks this morning, my intention was to offer more insight into why the Basel Committee believes that Basel II is such an important step in embracing a new, incentives-based approach to supervision. I also wanted to discuss how it will keep our supervisory framework up-to-date with the latest advances in risk measurement techniques and risk management practices.  In my answers to the sensitive questions that I have heard from bankers and policymakers in other countries, I have sought to emphasise that the Basel Committee seeks the appropriate balance for Basel II between developing simple rules while maintaining their sensitivity to a bank’s actual underlying risks. We intend to align Basel II’s capital requirements more closely to banks’ actual economic capital needs. Consequently, we do not think that aligning the regulatory framework to banks’ contemporary risk measurement techniques will make lending patterns more volatile. Nor do we think that it will harm competition or dry up capital flows into emerging market countries.  The Committee has worked to ensure that the new framework contains sufficient options and simpler forms of rules so that its basic principles can be applied to many kinds of banking organisations in many countries. Basel II presents an excellent opportunity for emerging and developing markets. By stimulating banks to upgrade and improve their systems, business models, capital strategies, risk management systems and disclosure standards, Basel II should improve their overall efficiency and ability to compete globally. It will help to reduce the risk premiums of emerging and developing markets and will help to ensure the stability of the financial system. Still, it is clear that, to accomplish all of these intentions, the new capital framework will be a very different approach to supervision than what we have known so far. It will require hard work on all of our parts. Bankers must work to ensure that their risk management systems meet the standards to qualify to use the more sophisticated measures of risk.  For our part, supervisors must ensure that we are comfortable with banks’ progress. But we must also be ready to supervise a more comprehensive capital framework. We will need to share information on the issues we encounter in moving from the 1988 Accord to the three pillars of the new framework. We will need to compare notes on the advances our banks are achieving in measuring and managing risk and on what implications those advances may have, not just for the capital framework, but also for the safety and soundness of the banking system, and for the future health of our economies. Thanks to the cooperation of the Federal Reserve, the World Bank, and the IMF, we are all privileged to enjoy the rare opportunity to engage in a multilateral dialogue with fellow supervisors from 50 or more countries in the same room. I encourage you to make the best use of this unusual occasion to ask questions, to share views, and to pledge your cooperation – across agencies, across jurisdictions, and across markets. Together, we can better encourage our banking organisations to improve their risk management. Together, we can better secure the benefits of greater financial stability and more sustainable economic growth for all. BIS Review 33/2004 9 
Timothy F Geithner: Perspectives on the US financial system  Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Economic Club of New York, New York, 27 May 2004. *      *      * It is a pleasure to join you today at the Economic Club of New York. And it’s a pleasure to share the program with John Thain. Today I want to talk about the U.S. financial system at this point of transition in the U.S. economy.  The U.S. financial system is currently enjoying a period of considerable strength. Financial institutions are strong. Financial innovation has spurred advances in risk management. Market practices surrounding key products such as OTC derivatives have been strengthened. And the industry’s payments infrastructure has been improved by additional safeguards and new clearing and settlement arrangements. The system has been remarkably resilient in the face of a range of recent challenges. The recent record is reassuring, but no financial system is without vulnerability. Periods of relatively favorable economic and financial conditions, such as we are experiencing today, are good times to reflect on the capacity of the system to withstand future stress. I want to focus today not only on developments that have improved the overall stability of the system, but also on some continuing challenges, and on the implications of these for risk management and supervision.  The history of shocks to the U.S. financial system is highly varied. Even over just the past two decades, we have seen a range of systemic events with a wide diversity in source and characteristics. We’ve seen credit booms and credit concentrations that resulted in substantial losses in the banking industry, in areas as varied as commercial real estate, energy, agriculture, and emerging market sovereigns. We have seen shocks reflected in sharp and substantial movements in interest rates, exchange rates, and asset prices. Some of these events were associated with a deterioration in macroeconomic performance. Some occurred in periods of relatively strong economic growth. Some were driven by abrupt changes in expectations about inflation or about monetary policy and the associated changes in the level of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve. Often these events followed periods of accommodative financial conditions, rapid credit growth, sustained rises in asset prices, and low volatility in the prices of financial assets. Many of these events had a self-reinforcing element, with initial changes in interest rates or asset prices being amplified by the subsequent actions of market participants in the face of unanticipated losses. Financial leverage was also an amplifying factor in many of these events. In some instances, there were unexpected patterns of correlation in the movement of asset prices and in credit losses across borrowers. These experiences led to changes in risk management practices, in supervision, and in our capacity as a central bank to contain systemic risk. These responses have reduced the overall vulnerability of the system to the types of shocks we’ve experienced. Moreover, because we’ve experienced such a variety of different types of stress, overall risk may be lower. But this recent history also suggests that we need to maintain a degree of humility and caution about our capacity to anticipate the nature and dynamics of future stresses to the financial system. How strong and resilient is the U.S. financial system today? Our sense is that the system is quite strong and resilient relative to the recent past. The major financial institutions at the core of the system are profitable and well capitalized. The total risk-based capital ratio for the ten largest U.S.-owned bank holding companies has averaged more than 12 percent over the past two years, a slight increase relative to prevailing levels since the mid-1990s. At year-end 2003, nearly every bank in the country met the regulatory standards to be considered “well capitalized”, with fewer than 100 - representing less than 1 percent of banking industry assets - failing to meet these standards. While risk-based capital ratios do not always provide an accurate picture of true capital strength, especially for the larger and more complex institutions, these statistics are nonetheless broadly indicative of a very strong underlying capital position of the industry. BIS Review 33/2004 1 
Robust capitalization is important because capital, along with earnings, provides the first line of defense against losses. Counterparties and customers are less likely to lose confidence and pull back from a well-capitalized institution in the wake of a large loss or other negative event. Capital, in effect, helps protect firms against “runs,” both traditional “runs” where short-term funding and liquidity are at issue, and more gradual, but just as damaging “runs” on franchise value, where customers turn elsewhere for services because they question the long-term viability of a firm. Consolidation has resulted in larger and more diverse financial institutions at the core of the U.S. financial system. Deregulation has enabled firms to better optimize the scale, geographic spread, and scope of operations. The result has been the creation of some extremely large and diverse financial institutions with high earnings capacity. In 2003, 18 U.S. bank holding companies and six securities firms each earned more than $1 billion, with the five largest bank holding companies earning a combined total of nearly $46 billion, over 40 percent of the banking industry total. Along with capital, these earnings provide a substantial cushion to absorb losses, significantly moderating the consequences of an adverse event. The wider scope of activities and greater domestic and international geographic diversification of these firms also provide a more stable revenue base. Advances in risk management have also enabled firms to hedge risks more effectively and, in the aggregate, to disperse risk more efficiently across firms in the financial system. Given advances in data collection and risk modeling, banks and other financial firms are able to do better risk-based pricing. Firms now have the capacity to view credit and other key risks from a portfolio perspective rather than in isolation, leading to more efficient risk sharing and better capital allocation. In concert with better risk modeling, securitization and credit derivatives have facilitated the dispersion of credit risk across firms and across sectors of the financial system. These changes have led to significant risk transfers within the banking system, as well as a net transfer of credit risk from commercial banks to other financial intermediaries. As a result, we believe we are seeing a more efficient risk allocation within the financial system as a whole, since risks can be transferred to firms where they will diversify, rather than reinforce, risks arising from core businesses and to parts of the financial system that are significantly less leveraged than banks and securities firms, such as institutional investors and mutual funds. These risk management advances have been accompanied by the growth of key derivatives markets that have lowered the costs of hedging market-price-sensitive positions and activities. One important example of this is the growth of the market for long-dated swaps, which are now used by banks to hedge mortgage securities and whole loans. The notional value of long-dated interest rate derivatives (those with maturities of more than 5 years) has more than tripled since the end of 1998, considerably faster growth than for comparable shorter-dated instruments. The growth of these markets reflects a very substantial increase in hedging capacity, and this “wider pipeline” seems likely to facilitate the ease with which the market adjusts in conditions of stress. Growth in these OTC derivatives markets has been accompanied by welcome improvements in market practice. Since the turmoil of 1998, financial firms have made significant strides in the sophistication with which they assess and manage counterparty credit exposures arising from OTC derivative transactions. Rather than using the broad “rule of thumb” methods that were once the industry norm, OTC derivatives dealers now commonly assess counterparty exposures on a portfolio basis using more sophisticated approaches to capture both current mark-to-market exposures and the potential future exposure that could arise from changes in the contracts’ underlying rates and prices. These models make possible - but they cannot of course guarantee - an appropriately conservative assessment of the potential reduction in future exposure provided by netting agreements and collateral arrangements. Dealers have also made significant strides in developing and employing more sophisticated and exacting ways to stress test their exposures. Taken together, these approaches have resulted in more realistic measures of counterparty exposures and to better management of counterparty risk. Beyond these improved exposure assessments, the use of collateral is much more prevalent than in the past. For instance, surveys by ISDA suggest that the share of fixed income derivatives exposures covered by collateral has increased from 40 percent to 55 percent just since 2002. Collateral is almost universally posted by all counterparties except those with the very highest credit ratings. There have also been significant improvements in the legal certainty surrounding these collateral arrangements. Among the legal advances are greater clarity on the enforceability of rights of netting and closeout in the event of default of a counterparty, better clarity in master documentation regarding rights and remedies, and better harmonization domestically and internationally of key provisions in different 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
master netting agreements for different products that might hedge one another. These, combined with the wider prevalence of collateral arrangements overall, provide derivatives dealers greater protection in the event of counterparty default and expand their capacity to enter into transactions under normal market conditions. The development of new clearing arrangements has also strengthened the resiliency of the crucial payment and settlement systems that provide the backbone of the U.S. financial system. Existing payment and settlement systems also have implemented improved safeguards not only against the impact of the default of a system participant, but also against the potential impact of external events, such as those experienced on September 11. Overall, these changes suggest that, at a fundamental level, significant strides have been made in enhancing the resiliency of the U.S. financial system. High levels of overall capital, greater diversification of credit exposure, increased use of collateral, and the stronger payment and settlement system infrastructure make our financial system stronger today than it has been. With these favorable developments, however, come a range of challenges. I want to discuss a few of these and their implications. This is not meant to be, and is not, a comprehensive list. The first is the challenge of complexity. With financial growth and innovation, we have seen a dramatic increase in the complexity of the risk management challenge. The frontier of innovation inevitably advances somewhat ahead of the pace of improvements in the risk management and supervisory infrastructure. The models used to inform credit judgments, to measure exposure, and to price risk in the newest instruments and trading strategies are by definition less grounded in experience. The process of assigning fair or market value is much more subjective and less amenable to objective verification. Consensus on the appropriate accounting treatment is less well established. As the complexity of risks has grown, so have the demands on firms to understand how exposures might evolve, especially in times of market stress. As an example, basis risk - in which hedged positions only partially offset one another - is an increasingly important concern for many firms, especially those that deal in complex products such as options. Assessing and managing these more complex risks requires risk management tools with a commensurate level of sophistication. In particular, the further development of techniques for stress testing and scenario analysis and of methods for translating stress test results into concrete risk management outcomes are important areas for additional progress. The risk management challenge is complicated by the nature of the institutions at the core of the system. Large, diversified financial institutions comprise many separate, highly specialized business units, each of which can have its own approach to tracking and managing risk exposures. Integrating across these businesses to develop a firm-wide, portfolio risk perspective is an important challenge, one that has many guises within a large, complex firm. For example, managing the complex pattern of risk exposures that derive from membership in multiple payment and security settlement systems, each of which has loss-sharing arrangements that generate contingent exposures among and between their members, is just one small facet of the broader challenge facing such firms today. The difficulty of managing the conflicts in dealings with customers is also significantly enhanced for these large, diversified institutions, given the multiple roles that they play. More generally, it is increasingly challenging for many large, diverse financial institutions to get an accurate picture of their aggregate exposure to individual creditors when their business contacts can come through so many different sources within the firm. This difficulty is compounded when different types of exposures that are functionally equivalent are managed in different ways in different parts of the firm. Different units within a single firm frequently trade with and transfer risk to one another, adding a further layer of difficulty in assessing the aggregate exposure to a given creditor or counterparty. The increased scale and scope of operations of the institutions that are the core of our system and the rapid growth in complex transactions place an extraordinary burden on the internal control, compliance, and risk management infrastructure. This is the “arms race” in finance. It is the challenge of ensuring that the strength of the infrastructure of controls within financial institutions will stay abreast of the pace of change in the complexity of risks and the tools we have to manage them - a process that we as supervisors will actively reinforce. A second issue relates to the degree of concentration in some core financial intermediation functions. The two largest government-sponsored enterprises in the mortgage market now hold 36 percent of Agency mortgage-backed securities, as compared with less than 10 percent at the end of 1993. The BIS Review 33/2004 3 
exposure of banks to these GSE’s, primarily through holdings of the GSE debt funding these MBS positions, is as a consequence very large. Two institutions now account for essentially all of the market for the clearing function for government securities and agencies, as well as for tri-party repo activity. A relatively small number of institutions now account for a large share of activity in the over-the-counter derivatives business generally, as well as in certain categories of risk-transfer instruments. These developments have different sources. Some are the result of public policy choices. Some are the consequence of the economies of scale inherent in these businesses. Overall, we have a very competitive financial system, with a larger diversity of institutions, and therefore a stronger overall system of financial intermediation. As a general matter, however, the increase in the size of some institutions relative to some parts of our financial system necessarily magnifies the potential consequences of a mistake or an infrastructure failure in these institutions. They are sufficiently large that they have less room to maneuver in adjusting positions in response to changing risks without adversely affecting the markets as a whole. Increased concentration in some markets should reinforce the incentive the largest institutions and their counterparties have to manage risk with a greater degree of caution. Supervisors have a role here, too, providing additional reinforcement in those cases where private incentives do not seem to be generating appropriately judicious responses. A third challenge is the increased opportunity that exists today for risk and leverage to migrate to, and build up in, parts of the financial system that are not subject to direct supervision and regulation of their capital and leverage ratios. According to some estimates, assets under management at hedge funds have doubled, to $750 billion, since 1998, as has the number of funds, which now stands at 6,000. We have no reliable overall measures of the degree of leverage in these institutions, though it is interesting to note that the intermediaries serving as prime brokers to hedge funds believe that overall leverage in these funds is lower than in early 1998. Given the growth in this market, credit exposure by banks and securities firms to the overall hedge fund sector may be higher than in 1998, but is likely spread more widely across funds. While there may well be more diversity in the types of strategies hedge funds follow, there is also considerable clustering, which raises the prospect of larger moves in some markets if conditions lead to a general withdrawal from these “crowded” trades. Overall, hedge funds can play a beneficial role in the U.S. financial system. They contribute to one of the defining strengths of our financial markets: the ease with which we match capital to ideas and innovation. They represent one aspect of a broader, quite favorable, trend toward a greater diversity of participants in U.S. financial markets and in that respect, they contribute to a broader spreading of risk. But they also present risks to the financial system. The extent of the risk they present to the system as a whole depends significantly on the prudence of the institutions that enable them to increase leverage. The improvement in market practice in managing counterparty credit risk since 1998 is encouraging, but it is important that firms continue to strengthen those disciplines. At the most fundamental level, intermediaries providing credit to hedge funds need to ensure that the terms and conditions of their provision of credit - including the contingent credit that is an increasing feature of prime brokerage arrangements - appropriately reflects the risks involved. What are the implications of these challenges or qualifications to what is, overall, a favorable picture of the strength of the U.S. financial system? One of the more persistent features of financial history is that discipline tends to ebb and flow to some degree with changes in financial and economic conditions. Even though we have seen a broad-based, secular improvement in risk management practices over the past decade, competitive pressure and the search for return in a low interest rate environment can lead to a relaxation of internal disciplines even as potential risk in the balance sheet increases. There are a number of factors that suggest these forces have not led to the build up of major imbalances that would present a major source of strain as these incentives diminish in a changing financial environment. Net borrowing by the non-financial corporate sector has been quite moderate, especially as compared with the late 1990s. The financial position of this sector is very strong, with declining leverage, particularly for smaller firms, which tend to be more highly levered. Credit to the household sector has of course risen quite considerably, but debt service burdens still look relatively manageable. Net credit growth to emerging market sovereigns has been quite moderate relative to past periods. While growth in commercial bank assets has picked up in recent quarters, it also remains below the pace of the late 1990s. 4 BIS Review 33/2004 
As the financial markets have built in expectations of a gradual return to more normal monetary and financial conditions, we have seen some adjustment in a range of credit spreads. A range of surveys has been reporting for some time that dealers and other financial intermediaries have generally reduced their exposure to rising interest rates. These adjustments are healthy. That their impact has been relatively contained so far may suggest that borrowers and lenders were less overextended relative to past periods, despite the sustained period of accommodative financial conditions. The fact that this process of adjustment has been relatively modest in overall impact also reflects the fact that it has occurred in an environment of growing confidence in the sustainability of the expansion and a consensus forecast for quite moderate inflation. Even so, risk managers need to continue to be attentive to the implications of further evolution in monetary and financial conditions. This overall picture suggests the supervisory community should continue to focus on the following priorities:  • Ensuring that overall capital levels provide a sufficiently strong cushion against risk.  • Encouraging firms to continue to strengthen the internal management and control infrastructure as it relates to risk management, the compliance function, and systems and technology.  • Improving the quality and integrity of public disclosure.  • Continuing to work toward a more integrated framework for supervision across the functional lines of financial activities within our markets, and globally as well.  For the Federal Reserve, this means that we will devote even greater attention to the institutions that now constitute the center of our financial system, as well as to the clearance and settlement backbone. It means we need to make a greater investment in looking at risks in the financial system as a whole, not just those that have their origin in banks. And it means that we will have to continue to intensify our cooperation with other supervisory and regulatory authorities. The U.S. financial system is of course only as strong as our economy as a whole. Overall, the fundamentals of the U.S. economy look quite strong. But the size of our fiscal deficit, and the risks posed by our large external imbalance, place a greater burden than would otherwise be the case on the credibility of U.S. monetary policy. In this context, it is particularly important that we preserve the high degree of confidence that now seems to exist that U.S. monetary policy will respond appropriately to the evolving balance of risks in the overall economic outlook, and particularly that we will maintain price stability. This is critically important to sustaining the current expansion, and to sustaining confidence in U.S. financial markets over time. And getting monetary policy right is one of the most important things we can to do contribute to financial stability as well. BIS Review 33/2004 5 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Announcement of Basel II Opening remarks of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank and Chairman of the G10 Governors and Heads of Supervision, at the Press Conference announcing the publication of Basel II, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 26 June 2004. *      *      * On behalf of the G10 central bank governors and heads of bank supervisory agencies, I am pleased to announce that we endorsed the publication of the revised framework for capital adequacy known as “Basel II” at our meeting today. This work, which was conducted by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, represents a landmark achievement. In particular, its comprehensive approach to risk management and bank supervision ensures that capital regulation will remain a cornerstone of safety and soundness for banking in the twenty-first century. In the same vein, Basel II will enhance banks’ safety and soundness, thereby strengthening the stability of the financial system as a whole. That, in turn, will improve the ability of the financial sector to serve as a source of sustainable growth for the broader economy. I am pleased to offer this revised framework to the international community. Today marks the culmination of nearly six years of challenging work. During those years, the Basel Committee sought to develop significantly more risk-sensitive capital requirements that are conceptually sound. At the same time, the Committee wanted to be sensitive to the characteristics of markets and supervisory systems in numerous countries. For such an effort to be successful, the Committee undertook a careful review of the existing rules and of the recent advances achieved in the industry. It consulted widely and publicly with industry representatives, other public authorities, and outside observers. The governors and heads of supervision believe that the Committee’s efforts and dedication have been fruitful and invaluable, and we appreciate the dedication that all Committee members demonstrated. Basel II builds on the solid foundation set out by the 1988 Basel Capital Accord. Indeed, the new framework will preserve key elements of the existing capital rules. This includes retaining the definition of eligible capital components; maintaining the general requirement that banks should hold total capital equivalent to at least 8% of their risk-weighted assets; and continuing the basic structure of the capital requirements for market risk that are outlined in the Committee’s 1996 Market Risk Amendment. The new framework marks a substantial step forward in creating incentives for banks to improve the quality of their risk management. One of the most significant innovations of the new framework is that it will allow banks to make greater use of their own assessments of risk as inputs to capital calculations. In that vein, Basel II will provide banks with a range of options for determining their capital requirements for credit and operational risk. This will allow both banks and supervisors to select approaches that are most appropriate for banks’ operations and local financial markets. National authorities in the G10 countries will now continue their focus on adopting and implementing the new framework through domestic rule-making processes. Consistent implementation of the new framework across borders through enhanced supervisory co-operation will become a critical and challenging task in the years ahead. We are also circulating the Basel II Framework to supervisory authorities worldwide. We encourage them to consider adopting this revised framework at a time that they believe may be consistent with their broader supervisory priorities and readiness. Yet we recognise that adopting Basel II in the near future may not be the first priority for supervisors in these other jurisdictions. They may wish to take some steps first to strengthen the capitalisation and risk management capabilities of their banks and to enhance the quality of bank supervision. The text of Basel II will be released today on the website of the Bank for International Settlements. As the product of three global consultations and several quantitative impact studies, the Basel II Framework has evolved and strengthened considerably since it appeared first in 1999. On behalf of the G10 governors and supervisors, I would like to warmly thank all of those organisations and individuals who contributed to the process and supported the work of the Basel Committee by sharing their views over the years. I welcome now the remarks of my colleague, Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and the Chairman of the Basel Committee. Governor Caruana has devoted considerable energy and efforts to BIS Review 38/2004 1 
completing the work on the Basel II Framework that was launched so capably by Bill McDonough, the previous chairman of the Committee. 2 BIS Review 38/2004 
Joseph Yam: Banking sector risks and challenges Luncheon talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers, Hong Kong, 16 June 2004. *      *      * The turnaround Thank you for inviting me to talk to you today. It is a pleasure to be here and I am delighted to see such an enthusiastic attendance. I was recently looking over past speeches (not, let me assure you, with the aim of recycling them), and I noted that the last time I spoke at one of the Institute’s lunches was on 24 October 2001. This has prompted me to reflect on how much we have all been through over the past 32 months - both as a financial community and in the larger community. When I last spoke to you the world was just six weeks on from the 9-11 attacks. There was a strong sense that we were heading for difficult times, with a worsening global environment, and with deepening deflation, unemployment, a budget deficit, falling asset prices and a rising number of negative equity mortgages within Hong Kong. Conditions were likely to get worse before they got better, I concluded.  Well, after a period of great difficulty, in which things got considerably worse than I think any of us had imagined, conditions are now at last improving. Since around the middle of last year Hong Kong has been enjoying a strong and broadening recovery. The economy has now regained much of its dynamism. The key economic numbers are providing the confirmation. Economic growth has been impressive. The unemployment rate has been coming down, albeit slowly. Deflationary pressure has been easing. The external sector has been active and we are running a substantial current account surplus. The residential property market, on which the wealth of many in our community depends, has bottomed out from a falling trend that had lasted for over five years. Domestic consumption has been picking up. Of more direct interest to us in the HKMA, the risks to monetary and banking stability, which had been worrying us for some time, have receded. The very fast dissipation in the number of cases of personal bankruptcy and negative equity mortgages is very welcome indeed.  The turnaround in the Hong Kong economy and, consequently, the improvement in the asset quality of banks, were made possible by the more favourable global economic environment and by measures taken to strengthen economic ties between Hong Kong and the Mainland. Indeed, banks in Hong Kong have also benefited directly from two of these measures. The first is the granting of easier and greater access to the Mainland banking market under CEPA from 1 January 2004 and the second is the introduction of personal renminbi business in February. These will in time help to broaden meaningfully, I am sure, the scope of banking business for banks in Hong Kong. I should add that there are other initiatives being developed, with the aim of positioning the banking system of Hong Kong to take advantage of further financial liberalisation in the Mainland. I hope they can be agreed, announced and introduced soon.  Short-term risks However, the generally good news in recent months should not blind us to the problems that remain in our economy or to the risks that face us. While the economy has been recovering strongly, it has not been creating as many jobs as we all would like to see. It is also uncertain to what extent the budget deficit will be reduced, as government revenues recover along with the economy. To be sure, the difficult investment environment is not helping us in our attempt to meet the budgeted investment income for the fiscal reserves. Disappointments on these fronts may affect market sentiment in the short term, although the determination and ability on the part HKSAR government in tackling the remaining, structural components of these problems should not be in doubt. Furthermore, there is a risk that our financial markets could over-react to external developments, notably stronger than expected monetary tightening in the US, macro-economic adjustments in the Mainland and sharp increases in oil prices. Although it is unlikely that these external factors would derail our economy, and so this risk seems small, under extreme market conditions, short-term volatility in financial markets could have a bearing on monetary and financial stability in Hong Kong.  In contrast, there are also concerns about the effects of continuing easy monetary conditions within Hong Kong. During the past few months, economic recovery has resulted in inflows of funds into the Hong Kong dollar to the extent that the Aggregate Balance of the banking system has become BIS Review 37/2004 1 
extraordinarily high (despite some outflows recently associated with the corrections in the financial markets). As you know, under the Currency Board system there is not much that we can do to dampen easy monetary conditions: this is a question that the Sub-Committee on Currency Board Operations of the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee has given a great deal of thought to. If there continue to be capital inflows on the back of sustained growth and confidence in Hong Kong’s prospects, the current account surplus and continuing talks about a possible revaluation of the renminbi, the risk of overheating in the economy and in asset markets will increase. I am not suggesting that this will happen soon, or making a warning. But banks in particular will need to keep the situation under close watch and adopt appropriate risk mitigation measures if the market situation warrants it. Overheating is, after all, something of an unfamiliar risk after such a long period of economic difficulty, and we do not wish to be caught off our guard.  Longer-term risks So much for the more immediate risks and potential risks, which both you as banks and we as supervisor must pay attention to. What about the longer-term risks facing the banks in Hong Kong? Or, to put the question in a larger context, what are the longer-term processes shaping the banking sector that carry risks as well as opportunities? We in the HKMA have identified a few of these in an internal exercise that is still ongoing but I would like to share with you today our preliminary views on five of them. They are: • structural shift in the banking sector  • China risk  • technology risk  • diversification risk  • changing international standards.  In the remainder of this talk, I shall deal with each of these areas in turn, focusing more on how we think banks in Hong Kong should tackle these processes and risks, and less on our corresponding supervisory responses or strategies, which in any case are still being developed. My main message is that, while banks need to focus clearly on the short-term risks I have already outlined, we should not lose sight of the more fundamental forces that will shape the landscape of the banking sector in the years to come. If they do not take these forces into account, individual banks not only face growing risks, but they could be in danger of losing their competitiveness. Structural shift in the banking sector First, the structural shift in the banking sector. Over the past few years the HKMA has been encouraging banks to consider consolidation as a way of improving competitiveness - technology, among other factors, has obviously moved the optimum size of a retail bank towards the larger end. The banking industry has responded positively: the number of locally incorporated banks has fallen from 31 three years ago to 24 at present, the result, I am happy to say, of consolidation and not of abandonment of Hong Kong. As expected, the various consolidation exercises have produced the economies of scale intended and, in some cases, immediate financial benefits for the institutions concerned.  As consolidation continues, and with the subsidiarisation of the local operations of a few major foreign retail banks, the structure of the banking sector will become increasingly polarised. At one end will be several large banks; at the other end will be a number of much smaller players. The smaller players will increasingly face two disadvantages: on the one hand they will find it difficult to compete; on the other hand, they will find that the opportunities for consolidation will dwindle over time, as the number of possible targets for consolidation declines.  It may not be quite right to classify this structural shift as purely a long-term risk. In fact, the trend is already there and the effects of consolidation on the industry as a whole will begin to be seen very soon. Smaller banks, if they wish to continue to thrive, should, as a matter of priority, carefully review their strategic direction. They should, for example, consider whether it is desirable to grow in size or develop into niche players. Neither option is an easy one. The opportunities for organic growth in the local market are limited, while competition for niche operations is intense.  2 BIS Review 37/2004 
China risk The second important process is the continuing and accelerating integration of the economies of Hong Kong and Mainland China, which will be hastened in the years to come by further financial liberalisation. I have already mentioned the arrangements under CEPA, in which more medium-sized Hong Kong banks will be able to access the Mainland market. Let us not overlook movement in the opposite direction, in which more Mainland banks will seek to enter the Hong Kong market. On the macro level, as the renminbi moves at a measured pace towards full convertibility, it seems inevitable that an increasing proportion of the balance sheet of banks in Hong Kong would be denominated in that currency. The opportunities arising from the developments are promising, but they carry risks as well.  The growing banking relationship between the Mainland and Hong Kong will provide important business opportunities for banks in both places. The question for Hong Kong banks seeking to take advantage of this process is whether they have the requisite expertise to properly analyse the business and compliance risks. Failure in this task will additionally give rise to substantial operational and reputation risk, particularly for the banks that have only recently become eligible under CEPA to set up branches on the Mainland. So far, the medium-sized banks seeking to benefit under CEPA are doing so primarily to follow their customers into Mainland China. This simple business model should not pose too much risk for the banks concerned. But banks that are contemplating more aggressive expansion plans, such as tapping the local consumer market, will need at least to be aware of the risks involved and be in a position to manage them prudently.  There is a more general and important aspect about this process of growing banking relationship between the Mainland and Hong Kong. This process is likely to be characterised by policy shifts that are more frequent than any other banking environment that we are familiar with. These policy shifts - mostly in the Mainland rather than in Hong Kong, and in monetary as well as regulatory policies - are an inevitable feature of a monetary and financial system that is going through reform and liberalisation. And in the absence of deep and sophisticated financial markets in the Mainland to provide the signals and instruments, the task of risk identification and management associated with the more frequent than normal policy shifts is, to put it mildly, a difficult one. An ability to understand, closely monitor and anticipate monetary and financial market developments in the Mainland is therefore crucial, for banks and for us as supervisor. I urge banks to put in the necessary efforts. Insofar as we are concerned, I think we have developed, in a limited way, such ability and will, as in the past, share with the banking community our analyses so that banks can continually adjust their operations to meet changing market and regulatory needs.  Technology risk The third set of forces arises out of banks’ increasing use of, or rather reliance on, technology. We have seen a spate of fake bank websites and attempted email scams over the past year: indeed, the rate of discovery of such cases relevant to Hong Kong has averaged about 1.4 per month over the past 13 months. It should be pointed out that we have no report of any customer in Hong Kong having been taken in by these attempts at fraud. Nevertheless, the proliferation of fake websites indicates that careful precautions and constant vigilance are necessary. And a further area of technology-related crime - ATM skimming fraud - has had its victims, both in Hong Kong and overseas. Increased security and heightened customer awareness, we believe, have helped defeat this form of crime: there have been no new cases in Hong Kong for seven months. Even so, the elementary, “low-tech” nature of these frauds demonstrates also that there are many dimensions of the banks’ vulnerability to technology.  In addition to protection against technology-related crime, the IT framework of banks also requires business continuity planning (or BCP). Banks in Hong Kong made great strides in BCP during the preparations for the onslaught of the Y2K bug. Although the onslaught never came, we were soon reminded of the importance of BCP by the 9-11 attack, which alerted us to the need for robustness in payment, clearing and settlement systems, among other things. Then the outbreak of SARS last year put the BCP capability of banks in Hong Kong to a real test. I am pleased to say that the contingency arrangements of banks - whether of a technical or personnel nature - performed very well during that difficult time. Nevertheless, the recurrence of disasters and their unpredictable nature should always be a feature of BCP and its continuous review. Indeed, the probability of occurrence of these events seems to have increased, along with heightened geo-political tension and the trend of globalisation, not just of trade and markets but also of terrorism and disease.  BIS Review 37/2004 3 
A further area that falls broadly under technology risk comes from outsourcing. Continuing pressure on profitability will no doubt result in more banks seeking to outsource their operations to lower-cost centres outside of Hong Kong. This will in turn give rise to additional operational risks for banks, including the risks of service outage and leakage of confidential customer data.  My main observation from recent experience with handling technology risk is that bank management should adopt a more proactive approach towards increasing the overall robustness of the IT environment, from both the crime prevention and BCP perspectives. In dealing with these IT-related incidents, we noticed the concerns sometimes expressed by bank management about the likelihood of causing unnecessary public panic if these matters were given publicity. Many preferred to deal with the problems quietly. The desire to be cautious and to avoid negative publicity is quite understandable. However, we have found that, far from causing panic, our insistence on publicity has been helpful in alerting members of the public of the nature of risks that they are exposed to as bank customers and how they can protect themselves. It enhances public education on the issues at hand and promotes the exercise of a degree of care by bank customers that the situation demands, not just to protect themselves but also to help in protecting the integrity of the system. Interestingly, nowadays, we sometimes receive reports of fake web-sites from members of the public even before the banks affected become aware of them.  Diversification risk The fourth major force shaping the industry is the continued effort of banks to diversify their income source. This is an ongoing and inevitable trend given the increasing competition in the banking market, but it has gathered pace in recent years in response to the increasing pressure on interest income. The net interest margin of the retail banks in Hong Kong as a whole has substantially declined from over 2.19% in 1997 to an annualised level of 1.67% for the first quarter of 2004. The new sources of income include most notably the sale of investment and insurance products.  The key challenge for banks is simply whether they are capable of managing the risk arising from these new intermediary activities. This is particularly so when, encouraged by advanced technology, the range of products being offered to customers expands from plain vanilla types to more complex structured instruments. Furthermore, the awareness of customers about their consumer rights has increased, thus exposing banks to greater compliance, legal and reputation risks when venturing into these new areas of activities. We have seen in recent years an abundance of cases against the mis-selling of products by banks even in jurisdictions with more developed financial markets. Banks will need to properly equip themselves, including substantially upgrading their compliance and internal audit processes, in order to rise to this challenge.  International standards The fifth set of influences affecting the banking industry is the number of key international standards that will be introduced over the next few years. These include regulatory and accounting standards, and Basle II is the standard most prominent in our minds. Another example is the implementation of IAS 39. The adoption of these standards will have profound implications for the operation of banks in Hong Kong.  Time is limited, and this is, after all, a luncheon speech, so I shall not go into detail about these standards. The point to make here is that, as an international financial centre, we have no alternative but to implement these standards as fully as we possibly can and as soon as international agreements have been reached on them. Many of these standards will be, to put it mildly, quite onerous. In this connection, I wish to ensure you all that the HKMA has been adopting a proactive approach in participating in the relevant international standard setting forums and in influencing the standard setting processes in the best interests of Hong Kong. We have also consulted widely in Hong Kong. Insofar as the banks are concerned, there is a clear need for bank management to allocate adequate resources to the process of implementation, which will involve substantial changes to IT systems and compliance arrangements. For Basle II, for example, banks should not be acting under the misapprehension that they can simply sub-contract the implementation processes to third party service vendors, such as their external auditors. Active involvement of bank management is crucial in ensuring that most, if not all of these international standards are properly incorporated into the daily operations of banks, especially since each bank may face different focuses and challenges in the process.  4 BIS Review 37/2004 
Conclusion I have drawn attention to five processes that are likely to have an impact on the banking industry in the future, if they are not already having an impact. Each of these will, of course, have a different degree of impact depending on the nature of the operations of each bank - though I think it is fair to say that no bank can ignore them. To be sure, facing up to them has important implications for the limited resources that banks have. In formulating business strategies for the coming five years, it is essential for bank management to take into account these processes in planning their affairs. This goes for the HKMA as well, since there are important implications for the manner in which we could perform our supervisory functions effectively. As I mentioned earlier, we are currently carrying out an internal review on this subject. As a result of this internal review, there may be a need for us to make adjustments to our supervisory policies; but there will be, as usual and as necessary, full consultation with the industry before we proceed.  BIS Review 37/2004 5 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The international financial architecture - where do we stand? Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference “Dollars, Debt and Deficits - 60 Years after Bretton Woods”, Madrid, 14 June 2004. *      *      * It is a great pleasure to be here in Madrid at the invitation of the Banco de España and the International Monetary Fund. The 60th anniversary of the Bretton Woods institutions is indeed an important opportunity to take stock of key events, developments and issues that have shaped and are shaping the international financial system. Let me thank the organisers, and especially our host Jaime Caruana, for setting up a very interesting programme for this conference that encompasses all these key topics. Tonight, I would like to offer some thoughts on the question “the international financial architecture - where do we stand?” In my remarks, I will first have a short look back at the changes to the international architecture over time, before concentrating on reform efforts that have been undertaken in four areas, namely the institutional setup, transparency and best practices, regulation of financial markets and crisis prevention and resolution.  Let me briefly look at the changes to the international financial architecture over time. The key aim of today’s policy makers has not changed compared to those at the Bretton Woods times - it has been, and still is, global prosperity and stability - but the environment in which we are acting has changed profoundly. The founders of the IMF and the World Bank wanted to create institutions that prevent countries from falling back into autarky and protectionism and that help them to raise growth and increase stability in a world of fixed exchange rates with still a large degree of capital controls. Today we are striving for stability of the international financial system in a world of free capital flows with a growing importance of private flows and increasing trade and financial integration. Among the major factors that we have to take into account, I would like to mention in particular:  • The financial globalisation phenomenon: capital market liberalisation, both domestically and internationally, technological advances and buoyant financial innovations have contributed to set up a totally unknown degree of financial globalisation - with great benefits, but also new risks.  • The policy responsibility which still lies mainly with sovereign states; thus, the challenge is to promote global financial stability very largely through national actions enlightened and co-ordinated through a larger degree of intimate international co-operation.  • A very large consensus on giving the private sector and markets a central role on the one hand, and relying upon sound public institutions to provide market participants with the appropriate environment on the other hand. This shift from direct public involvement to private activities is particular striking when looking at financial flows to emerging markets: in the 1980s, official flows were dominant, reaching on average over 60% of total flows to emerging markets. By contrast, the 1990s saw a dramatic increase in private flows, which on average accounted for around 85% (in the period from 1990 until 2003). Equally striking is the shift from bank loans to negotiable securities as the major financing tool for the developing countries. • The integration of the European Union, reinforced with the introduction of the euro, has increased the economic, monetary and financial stability of a region that constitutes today the world’s largest trading partner and the second largest economy. The EU has also been crucial in anchoring the transition process in central and eastern Europe, and in fostering stability and prosperity in this region.  The dynamics of today’s world call for continued adjustment at a global level. New challenges have been added to existing ones, such as poverty reduction. New actors gained prominence on the international scene, with developing and emerging markets becoming progressively full participants in the globalised economy. The financial crises of the 1980s and the 1990s, characterised by large and sudden private financial flow reversals, marked by a very powerful contagion phenomenon and demonstrating some of the potential and actual vulnerabilities of the newly globalised financial system, led to an ambitious reform agenda to strengthen the international financial architecture.  BIS Review 37/2004 1 
Let me focus on the lessons from the crises in the 1990s and the ensuing work on the international financial architecture.  On the basis of the experience with the Mexican crisis in 1994/95, the G7 summit in Halifax in June 1995 initiated work on improved crisis prevention and management. It called for improved transparency, both at the level of individual countries and at the IMF, and for strengthened IMF surveillance. The Halifax summit also pointed to the importance of effective financial regulation, market-reinforced prudential supervision and enhanced international co-operation among regulators and supervisors. As for crisis management, concrete proposals were presented in the Rey report to G10 Ministers and Governors in May 1996.  Work was stepped up in the aftermath of the Asian crises, which revealed further vulnerabilities in national and international financial systems. But most importantly, the crises in the later 1990s showed that the systemic changes in the world’s financial markets required systematic changes in the policy framework that underlies the international financial system. Almost a decade later, we can say that many of these proposals have been implemented. Let me now focus on four different areas, which I consider most important: The first area concerns the international institutional set-up, which, in my view, has been strengthened significantly since the 1990s. The existing international financial institutions, in particular the IMF, the World Bank and the BIS maintained their central role in the system. But they were subject to several changes to sharpen their respective focus, to reinforce their policy advice and financial support, to enhance their transparency and accountability and to strengthen their governance. The Bretton Woods institutions, and particularly the IMF, underwent profound changes to adapt to the new environment. In addition, new fora have been created in response to the widening of the number of actors in the global economy and the growing importance of international financial markets. The creation of the G20 in 1999 constituted in my view a decisive and highly welcomed step to reflect adequately the newly globalised economy. The G20 has turned into the international forum for appropriate dialogue and consensus building between all economies that have a systemic influence, whether industrialised, emerging, or in transition. Equally important is the Financial Stability Forum, which is the first informal grouping to fully recognise the existence of a global integrated economic and financial system. It is also the first forum to set the goal of systemic optimisation of each of the subcomponents of the system, whether it is banking surveillance, insurance surveillance, securities market control, accounting rules, good practices of public and private sectors, functioning of the major market places, governance of the IFIs etc. At the regional level, the European Union has established a whole universe of arrangements for co-operation that is constantly being adjusted to its changing needs and European institutions are becoming increasingly involved at the international scene, for instance with the EU-US regulatory dialogue.  Overall, improving the governance of the international institutions and optimising the work of the informal groupings will always remain a moving target given that these entities permanently will have to adapt to a changing environment. However, with the changes introduced in the recent years, the foundations of the international financial system have been strengthened considerably.  The second area I would like to highlight regards the work to enhance transparency and promote best practices, where significant progress has been achieved in a number of fields. Indeed, a wide-spread consensus has developed, which considers reliable and timely information on economic and financial data as a precondition for well-functioning markets, since it facilitates better risk assessment and management and hence strengthened market discipline. The IMF’s special standard for dissemination of economic and financial data has become a widely recognised benchmark to which a large and increasing number of countries have subscribed. There is now a presumption that IMF papers on Article IV consultations and on Fund programmes are published. International codes of good practices have been agreed upon, such as the ones on transparency in fiscal policy and on transparency in monetary and financial polices. Moreover, countries’ compliance with the 12 most important standards and codes are regularly examined by the IMF and the World Bank in so-called ROSCs (Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes), many of which are made publicly available and have a positive impact on the market’s assessments of the countries concerned.1 I consider that the progress made in the field of transparency after the Asian Crisis is one                                                       1  The IMF and the World Bank have recognised 12 standards as useful for their operational work. These comprise accounting; auditing; anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT); banking supervision; 2 BIS Review 37/2004 
of the main explanations for the absence of contagion in the emerging world when the Argentine crisis erupted. Transparency in the private sector is also crucial for well-functioning international financial markets. Reliable and timely company information are one key element to transparency, which is provided mainly through financial statements. Recent corporate scandals have again brought to our minds the crucial role that accounting standards play in this respect. In this context, I attach great importance to the reform of the International Accounting Standards (IAS) and the key role of these standards in advancing the European single market. The IAS, which will apply to all listed companies in the EU, are expected to have a major impact on the European banking system. The banking sector will particularly be affected through the proposed valuation rules for financial instruments and through the rules on disclosure.  The ECB has a strong interest in this debate mainly from its focus on contributing to the maintenance of financial stability. Thus, the primary objective of this reform has our full support as it aims to minimise the gap between the reported information and the true risk profile of a company. I am also fully aware of the complexities stemming from the interrelation of accounting standards with other reporting schemes for supervisory and statistical purposes. However, some proposals have given rise to concerns also within the ECB. In particular, those proposals relating to an extensive use of fair values raised concerns about the possible adverse implications on the volatility of bank income and, eventually, on bank behaviour and on financial stability. As a consequence, the ECB contributed to this debate, highlighting the concerns and showing their relevance. The more recent proposals from the IASB moved into the direction of limiting the use of fair values for those items that can be reliably measured. The revised proposals should help to avoid undesirable consequences such as an artificial increase in income volatility. At the current juncture, the ECB is carrying out an exercise to check the likely impact of the new standard.  While these issues apply to all financial markets, the EU faces a particular challenge relating to the advancement of the single market. The introduction of harmonised EU rules regarding the setting-up of financial statements are considered to be a crucial step towards the further integration of the financial markets in the euro area and the European Union. Indeed, improved comparability of disclosed information would facilitate cross-border investment and further market integration. Thus, in 2002 the European Parliament and Council adopted a Regulation requiring listed companies to prepare consolidated financial statements in accordance with IAS from 1st January 2005. A specific endorsement process is in place to ensure legal certainty and consistency with EU public policy concerns. This process already allowed to endorse all IAS with the exception of the two standards concerning recognition, measurement and disclosure of financial instruments. Recently, in order to deal with the remaining controversial issues, the Commission took the initiative to establish a high-level dialogue between all the constituencies interested in high quality accounting principles. I remain confident about the positive impact of prudently implemented International Accounting Standards on the stability and efficiency of financial markets in the EU. The third area relates to the strengthening of financial regulation in industrialised countries. Here, let me recall that recent crises exposed weaknesses in the risk management practices on the part of creditors and investors in industrial countries, pointing to the importance of financial market regulation and supervision.  We all are aware of the importance of effective financial regulation and supervision to maintain financial stability and protect consumers, also in light of the increased complexity of financial services and products. Let me say one word on one important aspect of financial regulation, which is the reform of the Basel Capital Accord, coined Basel II. I am convinced that our host, Mr. Caruana, who is the chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, could off hand fill the evening by elaborating over the main features of this reform. From what I gather, your efforts are bearing fruits and we may expect a final text to be hopefully endorsed by the G10 Governors and the Heads of banking supervisory authorities in the forthcoming weeks.  The Basel II reform is of key importance. New and bold developments in the banking industry are the ultimate reason for engaging in this reform.                                                                                                                                                                        corporate governance; data dissemination; fiscal transparency; insolvency and creditor rights; insurance supervision; monetary and financial policy transparency; payments systems; and securities regulation. BIS Review 37/2004 3 
The ECB has expressed on various occasions its supportive stance to the new framework. The ECB was also among the first to point out the possible macro-financial implications of any banking prudential scheme, highlighting the potential procyclical effects that might be induced by any framework relying on a comprehensive real time risk analysis. These concerns have been taken into account in the final version of the new framework which aims at being neutral over the cycle. Looking ahead, we have to recognise that we stand at the beginning of the road. The success of this reform will crucially hinge on a sound implementation of the new framework requiring strong co-ordinating efforts among the supervisory authorities on a global basis. With regard to the EU context, the new institutional setting based on the Lamfalussy framework comprising a two-tier structure of regulatory and supervisory committees is expected to play an important role in ensuring a more uniform and flexible EU regulation and consistent implementation resulting from convergence in supervisory practices.  As fourth and last area, I would like to mention crisis prevention and management. Of course, the various efforts I mentioned so far should be conducive to prevent crises from happening. However, crisis prevention primarily rests with every single country with strengthened macroeconomic policies and financial systems. In that context, the experience of the past decade has highlighted the crucial importance of well-functioning domestic rules, regulations and institutions namely the legal framework, the regulatory system, the enforcement mechanisms, and authorities that shape and permit the optimal functioning of a market economy with its financial markets. This includes, in particular, central bank independence, rules for monetary policy and for fiscal policies, appropriate supervisory frameworks and authorities. There is strong evidence linking well-functioning institutions and good governance to positive economic and social outcomes. Institutional factors appear to be as important as productive factor endowments or any other explanations in determining cross-country differences in the overall level of development.  I am confident that these lessons feed into improving domestic policy-making in emerging market economies, making them more resilient to withstand shocks. The continued efforts to strengthen IMF surveillance play also a crucial role in that respect.  It is clear that crisis prevention must remain the key area of all our efforts. Crises are costly for the countries concerned and also for the international system. Given the increasing economic and financial importance of emerging markets, major events in these countries are bound to have spill-over effects to the rest of the world. Let me underpin this argument with some figures: In the last four years, major emerging markets contributed to about half of global real GDP growth (in PPP terms), accounted for roughly 30% of world exports and received about 20% of global FDI.  Turning to crisis management, important lessons have been learnt. There has been a growing recognition that more predictability is required on the side of the official sector in order to set the right incentives for all the actors involved. Moral hazard concerns and the limited availability of official funds also led to increasing discussions about the appropriate involvement of the private sector in crisis management. Of course, every single crisis is different and hence there is in each case the need to find the appropriate balance in the triangle of domestic adjustment, private sector involvement and official support. Therefore, crisis management in practice still has to struggle with the inherent tension between rules and clarity on the one hand and discretion and flexibility on the other.  However, considerable progress has been achieved. First, specific criteria and procedures have been set up last year to make exceptional access to Fund resources subject to rules and hence more predictable. We in Europe have been very much in favour of setting such clear rules and clear limits to Fund financing in view of the very large financing packages provided to countries in the 1990s. The IMF’s debt sustainability analysis will play an important role in that context, since clear limits to official financing must be respected especially when a country faces an unsustainable debt burden and hence requires a debt restructuring. All IMF shareholders now need to stick by these rules, not least in order to provide the right signals to the markets and to avoid the impression that the official sector suffers from time inconsistency between the approval of policy principles and their actual implementation.  Second, following Mexico’s bond issue with Collective Action Clauses (CACs) in February 2003, several emerging markets included CACs in bonds issued under New York law. More than 70% of new bond issues since early 2004 include CACs. As you probably know, no discernible impact on borrowing costs could be detected. In order to help making CACs a standard feature in sovereign bond contracts, the EU Member States committed themselves to include CACs when issuing new bonds under foreign jurisdiction. All this progress is very remarkable, especially when comparing it to the rather sceptical stance many countries and many private sector representatives had taken in the 4 BIS Review 37/2004 
past vis-à-vis the recommendations in the Rey report after the Mexican crises. Of course, so far these clauses have not been tested in practice and it will take some time until CACs are included in the entire stock of debt. Finally, work is proceeding on a so-called Code of Good Conduct, which I suggested myself at the IMF Annual Meetings in September 2002. Such a Code would define best practices and guidelines for the behaviour of debtor countries and creditors regarding information-sharing, dialogue and close co-operation in times of financial distress. While the IMF and the G7 encouraged further work and the G20 is closely following the process, at present the official sector confines itself to a catalysing role and leaves the floor to the true stakeholders in the process, i.e. emerging market issuers and private sector representatives. I understand that currently intensive discussions are taking place on the main elements of such a Code. I would like to encourage all parties to be as active and constructive as possible in working out what could be a significant new tool to prevent and help solving potential crises.  Closing remarks  We have the unique chance of living in a world which is full of opportunities, very inspiring and very complex, very rewarding and very demanding, full of chances and of risks. We have all been the witness of two incredible transformations of the global economy over the last twenty five years. The technological surge which has permitted to compute and to transfer information at practically no cost. The globalisation process which aims at connecting all economies and finances of the world within the same market-economy based framework. So that goods, services, capital, technologies, concepts, ideas are moving very rapidly or even instantaneously all over the globe, expanding considerably, in quality and in quantity, the domain of the Ricardian comparative advantage. The significant surge of labour productivity in a number of industrialised economies, the taking off of India, China and a very large number of emerging countries, the rapid race of global growth. These are great successes of today’s economic world of which global finance, mirror-image of a global economy, is both the emblem and the very powerful tool. But there is no economic success without risks. We have been living permanently in a risky environment over the last twenty-five years. Amongst many risks, we might mention: the debt crisis during the 1980s, starting with Poland and Mexico and spreading to Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and the Soviet Union; the stock exchange fall in 1987; the Mexican crisis in 1994; the bond market crash in 1994; the Asian crisis starting in 1997; the LTCM and Russian crises in 1998; the recent stock exchange fall and the collapse of the technology bubble in 2000. We have surmounted all these crisis episodes. We have learned a lot and we have improved a lot in these occasions. One of my friends used to say: “Good management comes out from experience and experience comes out from bad management!” I think we are pretty experienced now and I take it that thanks to the lessons drawn we have now achieved a level of crisis prevention which is much better. But we should never forget that the risks are still there because they are intimately associated with the structural transformation of the global economy. This is not, in any respect, a time for complacency. If I had to sum up what should be our today’s mottos, I would make the following five recommendations: • Let us not forget the crucial role of the IFIs, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, in the management of the present global economy. The constant improvement of their management and instruments is key; • Let us tirelessly improve transparency in all fields: it is the best recipe for avoiding both misallocation of capital and global crisis contagion; • Let us continuously improve the flexibility of our economies through bold structural reforms. Not only because it improves efficiency but also, all the more, because it improves resilience in a world where shocks are to be expected; • Let us reinforce our methodology to ensure that we do not amplify “pro-cyclical” phenomena: the best envisaged at a local or sectoral level can be the enemy of the good at a global systemic level. In this respect such informal groupings like the G20 and the Financial Stability Forum are of the essence;  • Let us join efforts to improve our scientific knowledge of the new world economy. Still today, academics and practitioners are observers and actors within the environment of largely uncharted territories. The more profoundly we understand the functioning of today’s global BIS Review 37/2004 5 
economy, the more efficient we will be to weather stocks, to prevent crisis, and to pave the way for continental and global job creation, steady growth and overall stability. 6 BIS Review 37/2004 
Alan Greenspan: Nomination hearing  Testimony by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 15 June 2004. *      *      * I want to express my gratitude to President Bush for his confidence in me and to you, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, for expeditiously holding this hearing on my renomination for a fifth term as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve has had a close and productive relationship with this committee over the years. If you and your Senate colleagues afford me the opportunity, I look forward to working with you in advancing our shared goal of strengthening the firm foundation upon which the American people have built a prosperous economy and a sound and efficient financial system.  The performance of the U.S. economy has been most impressive in recent years in the face of staggering shocks that in years past would almost surely have been destabilizing. Economic policies directed at increasing market flexibility have played a major role in that solid performance. Those policies, aided by major technological advances, fostered a globalization, which unleashed powerful new forces of competition, and an acceleration of productivity, which at least for a time has held down cost pressures.  We at the Federal Reserve gradually came to recognize these structural changes and accordingly altered our understanding of the key parameters of the economic system and our policy stance. But while we lived through them, there was much uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy and about the influence of monetary policy.  The Federal Reserve’s experiences over the past two decades make it clear that such uncertainty is not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape. As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the United States has come to involve, at its core, crucial elements of risk management. This conceptual framework emphasizes understanding the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face, quantifying those risks when possible, and assessing the costs associated with each of the risks.  This framework entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the probabilities of achieving over time our goals of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic growth that we associate with it. In designing strategies to meet our policy objectives, we have drawn on the work of analysts, both inside and outside the Fed, who over the past half century have devoted much effort to improving our understanding of the economy and its monetary transmission mechanism. A critical result has been the identification of key relationships that, taken together, provide a useful approximation of our economy's dynamics. Such an approximation underlies the statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy decisions.  However, despite extensive efforts to capture and quantify what we perceive as the key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many of the important linkages is far from complete and, in all likelihood, will always remain so. Every economic model, no matter how detailed or how well designed, conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis. Policymakers have needed to reach beyond models to broader - though less mathematically precise - hypotheses about how the world works.  A central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes around that path. The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy.  As the transcripts of Federal Open Market Committee meetings attest, faced with these abundant challenges, we find the making of monetary policy to be an especially humbling activity. In hindsight, the paths of inflation, real output, employment, productivity, stock prices, and exchange rates may seem to have been preordained, but no such insight existed as we experienced these developments at the time.  BIS Review 37/2004 1 
Yet, during the past quarter-century, policymakers managed to defuse dangerous inflationary forces and to deal with the consequences of a stock market crash, a large asset price bubble, and a series of liquidity crises. These developments did not divert us from the pursuit and eventual achievement of price stability and the greater economic stability that goes with it.  Going forward, we must remain prepared to deal with a wide range of events. Particularly notable in this regard is the fortunately low, but still deeply disturbing, possibility of another significant terrorist attack in the United States. Our economy was able to absorb the shock of the attacks of September 11 and to recover, though remnants of the effects remain. We at the Federal Reserve learned a good deal from that tragic episode with respect to the impact of policy and, of no less importance, the functioning under stress of the sophisticated payments system that supports our economy. Our efforts to further bolster the operational effectiveness of the Federal Reserve and the strength of the financial infrastructure continue today.  Each generation of policymakers has had to grapple with a changing portfolio of problems. So while we importantly draw on the experiences of our predecessors, we can be sure that we will confront different problems in the future.  The Federal Reserve has been fortunate to have worked in a particularly favorable structural and political environment over the past quarter-century. But we trust that monetary policy has contributed meaningfully to the impressive performance of our economy in those years. I have been extraordinarily privileged to serve my country at the Federal Reserve during most of these years and would be honored if the Senate saw fit to enable me to continue this service.  2 BIS Review 37/2004 
Catherine Kumar: Setting the agenda for hemispheric progress - developments in the Caribbean region Presentation by Ms Catherine Kumar, Inspector of Financial Institutions, Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the VII Annual Assembly of the Assocation of Supervisors of the Banks of the Americas (ASBA), Atlanta, 2-5 June 2004. *      *      * Introduction Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, let me first thank ASBA for their kind invitation to address you on behalf of the Caribbean Region at this very important Conference. It is indeed a pleasure to be here at my first meeting with ASBA as a group since I only recently joined this prestigious group of Regulators. As I prepare to present to you on the issues and challenges that are currently facing us in the Caribbean region, I would like to first update you on some important supervisory changes that have occurred in Trinidad and Tobago over the last few days. As many of you are aware, our Government had been working assiduously to have the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago assume the role of the Supervisor and Regulator of the insurance industry and registered pension plans. This has become a reality as an amendment to the current Insurance Act was enacted May 25th, 2004. The challenges resulting from this Amendment as you would imagine are many for me and I look forward to your support. The Insurance Industry has been expanding borders within the region and doing this without proper supervision or regulation. It is the Central Bank’s mandate to correct this and to do it with urgency. Ladies and gentlemen, the supervisory bodies in our region are facing many challenges as a result of globalization. The CGBS therefore chose the theme “Towards Effective Regional Financial Sector Supervision within a Globalized Context” for this year’s Conference to deal with some of the issues. The presentations were very thought provoking and in most cases solutions/recommendations were offered, that the CGBS will be seriously considering and implementing as considered necessary. Let me thank Jamaica and Deputy Governor Audrey Anderson for their leadership of the Caribbean Group of Bank Supervisors. It is not possible for me to discuss with you today all the issues raised at the Conference but I would like to focus on two major areas and the supervisory response. These are (1) the imminent establishment of the Caricom Single Market and Economy (CSME) and, (2) the ongoing challenges of consolidated supervision. I will conclude my address with an update on the developments in Trinidad and Tobago. The CSME There is no doubt that this meeting today is taking place at a time when global growth prospects are strengthening, but unfortunately this is happening with significant downside risks such as massive payments imbalances and an impending transition to a higher interest rate environment. In fact, the ramifications of globalization are clear when we analyze the effects on many of our smaller and vulnerable economies of a likely hike in interest rates in the United States and generally the shifting global interest rate environment. The continued volatility in world petroleum prices is also another factor which impacts most if not all of our economies. We therefore have to agree that the global liberalization of trade and finance is now well established and we have to accept that there is no turning back for any of us in the region. It is against this background that the Caribbean is rapidly forging ahead towards its goal of a single market and economy (CSME) by December 2004. Caricom member states have agreed to remove restrictions on capital mobility, on the establishment of businesses and on the movement of prescribed skills among our countries. As Ambassador Narace who heads the Trinidad and Tobago CSME Unit said recently: “If we are to succeed from the new hemispheric arrangement offered by the Free Trade of the Americas it would be important for the Caribbean to develop strong Caribbean brands and the CSME does exactly that by providing the environment that would create that”. The Caricom Secretariat has already produced a Caribbean Single Market and Economy Bill and the CGBS has received BIS Review 36/2004 1 
information of work begun by the Caricom Secretariat on a model Caribbean Banking Statute. In fact, members have been asked to submit their comments on the document that has recently been circulated. Some immediate and obvious concerns that the CGBS has with the Bill include:- • the reconciliation of CSME provisions with international supervision standards and requirements, for example, the need for differential credit ratings in securities originating from other member states based on international capital adequacy standards; • difficulties with the harmonization of the different legislative frameworks before the dismantling of entry barriers; and • the role and status of MOUs under the new proposed arrangements. Some of these issues were discussed at length at our recent CGBS Conference in the paper presented by the representative of Barbados in respect of the Harmonization of Regional Legislative and Regulation Framework within the Context of Globalization, a copy of which is available at your request. I will share a joke with you which I find meaningful. “A group of executives got together for a high-powered meeting. At the round table discussions they each put their cell phone down; you know we cannot go anywhere without this which has become part of us. There was much heated discussion and juggling of papers back and forth. Sometime after, the cell phone rang and the executive answered: (cid:190) “Hello”. (cid:190) “Hi sweetheart. I am so glad I got you. The real estate agent came around and said they can let us have the house for $5 million. I know it is a bit expensive but I really loved that house. Can I please commit?” (cid:190) “Sure darling, for you nothing is too expensive. You can commit to $5 million. (cid:190) “And you know that luxury boat we saw - I think it would be so romantic, we can sail up the islands. Oh how I would love to own it. It only costs $2 million.” (cid:190) “Alright it is my gift to you. $2 million is fine. You are my greatest love.” (cid:190) “And of course I want to sport that 5 carat ring on my finger when we go out and I hold your hand. I can see the other ladies admiring us. The jeweler said he can make me a special offer of $1 million for it. Can I tell him yes?” (cid:190) “My sweetheart sure you can, take the $1 million ring. Bye.” At the end of the conversation, much to the surprise of the others at the ease with which he made such major decisions without proper study and analyses, the executive said: “Excuse me gentlemen, but whose cell phone is this?” The moral of this joke - while the CGBS is working on its commentary, we have to ensure the Caricom Secretariat is not making quick decisions on our behalf which could have a long and consequential impact on effective supervision. I wish to emphasize however that the CGBS supports any arrangement that results in the strengthening of the region’s legislation and supervisory framework but we must ensure that proper measures are in place to manage transitioning and in respect of the CSME, address concerns of jurisdictional independence. Colleagues, the effects of globalization are forcing us to come together as a region to try to buffer our smaller economies from the downside effects. The CSME is one of the ways but it is not perfect and so we need the combined efforts including our Latin American colleagues to make it work. At a recent seminar in Barbados, (The Advocate May 22, 2004) the Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados had indicated the need for the formation of credit rating agencies in the region to be of assistance to investors who do not have the time or the training to conduct their own credit analyses. She was at the time discussing regional capital market developments and the fact that there must be a credit culture in which investors in general should be able to accurately evaluate risks and returns and determine investment and financing trends, based on the results derived from such evaluation 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
exercises. I am pleased to inform you that the Caribbean Community has finally established its own rating agency, the Caribbean Information & Credit Rating Agency Limited. The Agency has a capital base of three million dollars and is the world’s first regional credit rating agency offering rating products in 19 countries. Crisil Limited, India’s leading ratings, financial news, risk and policy advisory company, provided the technical assistance and has acquired a 9% stake in the agency and its Managing Director and CEO is on the Board of the rating agency. Crisil will continue to provide the assistance to the Agency to ensure the stability of the operations. This establishment of a regional credit rating agency is indeed a positive step towards a regional approach to critical issues. The agency will commence operations in October 2004. As our region continues its move to the CSME we must also be prepared for increased competition especially in the area of jobs as the marketplace becomes more unified. It is very important that our professional resources must become multi-tasked and multi-disciplined in order to be flexible enough to adapt to the new challenges. This is an area that member states must be able to manage efficiently through cooperation. I now turn to the issue of consolidated supervision The concept of consolidated supervision has been around for a while. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has been promoting this concept by developing a series of best practices for banking supervisors including the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (1997) that has become the world standard for effective banking supervision. Those countries in our region which have experienced FSAPs by the multilateral agencies such as the IMF and World Bank, would know the importance of adhering to these Core Principles. Furthermore, the imminent introduction of the new Capital Accord (Basel II) has renewed focus on this area as there is an assumption in the Basel II methodology that consolidated supervision is practised. The implications of the foregoing in terms of supervisory oversight are serious as the banking organizations in our region continue to be in an expansionary mode external to their home environment. To quote from ASBA’s planning document - “The Banking Industry continues to evolve, leading to a greater concentration, complexity, technological advancements and cross-functional integration within the industry across banks and non-bank operations.” When this is coupled with the development of new markets and new products through technological innovations, the possibility of supervisory arbitrage and the blurring of lines between financial products, we must admit that as Supervisors our plates are full and possibly overflowing. More emphasis must therefore be placed on the fundamental elements of risk management practices of both financial and non-financial firms and we have to be up to the challenging task of supervising financial conglomerates with cross-border operations, all of which are critical elements of consolidated supervision. The CGBS in recognizing the challenges ahead sought to build on the sturdy foundations already in place by exploring fresh approaches to meet the needs of members, fostering and enhancing collaboration within the group and integrating the supervisory practices in response to the emerging issues in the regional and international landscape. This included the following:- • The need for accurate and timely data and information to inform the development and enhancement of financial legislation to facilitate the practice of consolidated supervision. • A refinement of supervisory approaches to address evolution in regional financial markets, e.g., growth in cross border establishments, e-banking and other developments. • Training of staff at different skill levels and for differing skill sets to better supervise the rapidly evolving institutions in our regional markets. • Technical assistance in the practical applications of new and/or emerging international supervisory standards and supervisory frameworks, e.g., anti-money laundering measures, Basel II. In addition, the Technical Working Group of the CGBS as part of their mandate and with participation from 9 member countries formulated a regional response to the Basel Committee with respect to the Third Consultative Paper (CP3) issued by the Basel Committee. A copy was forwarded to ASBA. This response together with responses from individual jurisdictions can be found on the BIS website. BIS Review 36/2004 3 
The Working Group has developed a template for the Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) to be used by each member state to assess the potential impact of Basel II on supervised institutions. In Trinidad and Tobago, we have begun the process with one of our large institutions and we have been receiving their full cooperation in acquiring the relevant information. At this time, I would like to acknowledge the role of the Bank of Jamaica in providing the resources and the infrastructure without which the Working Group would not have been able to meet its mandate. We therefore congratulate this sub-committee on the progress made and we in the region sincerely thank the Bank of Jamaica for their efforts. There is no doubt that consolidated supervision with the attendant impact on our ability as a region to adhere to the New Accord is indeed a challenge. In the meantime our institutions continue to become more complex raising the issues of potential contagion and the effective management of systemic and liquidity risks. The need for specialists in our supervision departments to deal with these and other emerging complexities such as financial modeling, is a matter that we must address as a region. As I conclude my address, I would like to leave you with an update on the developments that are currently taking place in Trinidad and Tobago and which will certainly have an impact on the region as a whole. The financial sector of Trinidad and Tobago is considered robust as it has been experiencing an uninterrupted period of positive economic growth over the last decade due primarily to the increased activity in the energy sector. However, there is an element of caution being expressed by both the private and public sectors that this is the time to put in place updated regulatory and preventative measures to ensure that potential risk exposures in the financial system are significantly minimized. It is clear that the Government is adopting a proactive approach to ensure that we do not have a repeat of what took place in the 1980’s when we experienced the collapse of several financial institutions in Trinidad and Tobago. As a result of the foregoing, legislative reform is a critical aspect of a White Paper being developed to ensure that Trinidad and Tobago attains first world status by 2020. As I mentioned previously, the Central Bank has assumed the role of Regulator of the Insurance industry. The vision is for a single regulator. In the interim a regulatory council is being established which will provide for cooperation amongst the various regulators. Whilst legislative reform is critical to address the complexities of the financial sector, other aspects such as the strengthening of corporate governance, promoting market discipline and transparency are critical. It is with this in mind that the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago has developed several Guidelines which include Corporate Governance and Fit and Proper Assessment for both banks and insurance companies. Finally, I would like to say that globalization is affecting us all and as we live in the same hemispheric region I am sure that our Latin American supervisory colleagues present here today are experiencing similar situations as I have expressed today. We therefore need to work together by sharing our experiences and knowledge at Conferences such as this one to ensure that critical issues are addressed for the maintenance of the safety and soundness of our financial systems. Once again, I thank you for allowing me the opportunity to share with you some of the supervisory issues facing our Caribbean Group as we set the agenda for hemispheric progress. 4 BIS Review 36/2004 
Toshiro Muto: What lies beyond this cyclical recovery? Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society, London, 7 June 2004. *      *      * Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Today, after touching on a short-term outlook for the Japanese economy, I will talk about further challenges Japan faces. I. Short-term outlook for the Japanese economy The outlook for the Japanese economy is reasonably good for the foreseeable future. As you see in Chart 1, economic growth, after showing 3.2% for fiscal 2003, will be 3.1% for fiscal 2004 according to the median forecast by the Bank of Japan’s Policy Board at the end of April. The ongoing economic recovery is the third of its kind since the bursting of the bubble in the early 1990s. During the so-called “lost decade,” we had two economic recoveries: one with 3.6% growth for fiscal 1996, and the other with 3.0% growth for fiscal 2000. The first recovery was immediately followed by a sharp slowdown and the second by negative growth. Compared to these two cases, now the chances are better that the recovery will be sustained. Behind that are three factors. The first factor is an encouraging outlook for the world economy in spite of some risks associated with persistently high oil prices. Many economists believe that the United States will grow at a faster pace than its potential growth rate. While the economic growth of China is expected to decelerate somewhat from the overheated pace, it is still likely to be fairly rapid. The second factor is great demand for digital consumer electronics at home and abroad. This provides favorable business conditions for Japanese manufacturers, whose competitive edge lies in high-end electronic devices including flat-screen panels. This is an important reason for the recovery in business fixed investment. The Bank’s corporate survey Tankan shows that nominal capital spending by large manufacturers will increase by more than 7% for fiscal 2004 after a 9% increase for fiscal 2003. Third and the most important factor behind the good economic outlook is progress in the structural adjustments. Chart 2 illustrates that the ratio of corporate debt to cash flow has been declining steadily. The improvement is observed even in the small and medium-sized nonmanufacturing firms, the sector which was once under a particularly heavy debt burden. As for the adjustment in labor, Chart 3 shows that the share of labor costs in the nominal GDP declined to the lowest level since the early 1990s. In connection with the structural adjustments, as Chart 4 shows, progress has also been made in reducing nonperforming loans. As far as major banks are concerned, they as a whole seem to be hitting the March 2005 target, namely, lowering the share of nonperforming loans in total credits to half of that in March 2002. Of course, Japan’s financial institutions are still facing quite a few problems. In this regard, they should step up their efforts to reduce nonperforming loans and contribute to corporate restructuring. And they should be well prepared for the removal of the blanket deposit insurance, which is scheduled for April 2005. As the structural adjustments have progressed, an opportunity for sustained growth is finally arising. In order to turn this nascent opportunity into full-scale revitalization of the economy, both the private sector and the government should work harder. II. Conduct of monetary policy On the part of the Bank of Japan, we continue to maintain the monetary conditions which should help deflation come to an end. Chart 5 shows that deflation has been easing but the year-on-year change in the consumer price index (CPI) has not yet reached positive territory even with the help of upward one-off factors including a rise in rice prices. Based on the assessment that the underlying trend of the CPI is still moderately negative, the Bank is conducting an extremely accommodative policy with three features. BIS Review 36/2004 1 
First, the Bank is providing unusually ample liquidity to financial markets. The so-called “quantitative monetary easing” keeps short-term interest rates at almost zero, thereby ensuring the stability of financial markets, which in turn supports economic activity. Second, the Bank is conducting its policy with the commitment to continue quantitative easing until deflation ends. The resultant “policy duration effect,” by working on expectations about future monetary policy, contributes to further stabilizing financial markets. Third, the Bank is making efforts to enhance the transmission mechanism of monetary easing. For instance, the Bank has already been expanding the types of money market operations. Moreover, the Bank is eagerly communicating with market participants and other authorities as to how to expand the securitization market. Of the three features of the current monetary policy, let me elaborate on the second one: the Bank’s policy commitment. In this commitment, the Bank will maintain quantitative easing until the core CPI registers stably zero percent or an increase year-on-year. More specifically, before the Bank considers terminating quantitative easing, certain conditions must be met: the core CPI inflation has been positive over a few months and it is forecast to remain positive in the future. As for the inflation forecast, the semiannual Outlook Report at the end of April shows that the Board members’ median outlook for the core CPI for fiscal 2004 is –0.2%. Although the narrowing output gap and the lagged effects of a rise in commodity prices will contribute to moderating CPI deflation, they will not be strong enough to make year-on-year CPI firmly positive for fiscal 2004. I believe that sustained reforms in both the private and the government sectors, together with the Bank’s commitment to keep monetary easing, will help the economy gather momentum, which in turn will lead to a better possibility that deflation comes to an end. III. Longer-term issues for the Japanese economy Despite the encouraging short-term outlook, the aging and declining population is a source of concern for economic growth in the long run. Any attempt to address this concern would cause a conflict of interests with regard to income transfer and risk sharing. How to deal with this type of conflict is a particularly daunting challenge. Challenges arising from population aging Let me explain how serious the demographic change is in Japan. As is shown in Chart 6, Japan’s population is expected to start declining in 2007. Moreover, the share of elderly people of 65 and older has been increasing since around 1990 and is now approaching 20%. In 2050, the share is expected to reach 36%, the second highest in the world after Spain. Not only is the share among the highest, but the rising pace of the share is unparalleled. There are calculations by the United Nations as to how many years it takes for the elderly people’s share of each country to double from 10% to 20%: 42 years for Spain, 70 years for Germany, 75 years for the United Kingdom, but only 21 years for Japan. The rapid population aging will certainly have significant impacts on the economy. First, the labor force will decrease. According to the Bank’s research staff, assuming that the labor participation rate at any given age stays constant, the decline in the labor force caused by the demographic change will pull down the economic growth rate by 0.5% in the 2010s. The second impact of population aging is on the savings rate. Chart 7 illustrates that the household savings rate in Japan has already been declining in line with population aging. It declined from about 15% in the early 1990s to merely 6.4% in 2002. Assuming that the declining savings rate restrains capital formation, the Bank’s research staff estimated that the economic growth rate in the 2010s would be reduced by 0.5%. Together with another 0.5% decline coming from the labor factor that I mentioned, the economic growth rate overall will decline by as much as 1%. The third problem caused by the population aging is increasing doubt about the sustainability of the pension system. Chart 8 shows that the Japanese birthrate has been steadily declining, with the most recent figure being as low as 1.32. If it continues for the next hundred years, a rough estimate suggests that Japan’s population will become only one-third of the current population. While a much higher birthrate is required to maintain the current pension system, raising the birthrate in a short 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
period of time is not realistic. Therefore, there is an imminent need for massive pension reform, notwithstanding the difficulty in allocating the huge losses carried over from the past system. Inevitable rise in the cost of the social safety net As the population ages, not only pension benefits but also demand for medical services and elderly care will increase. However, younger generations are unsure as to whether the increasing demand will be met. According to a survey conducted by the Bank’s affiliate, the Central Council for Financial Services Information, among the households headed by those under 60, 19% were “very worried” about retirement in 1995, and the share more than doubled to 45% in 2003. Changes in the social structure and lifestyle may also be sources of uncertainty about the future. Traditionally, family members cared for their aged parents and neighbors helped each other, while businesses, under the so-called “lifetime employment system,” provided employees with education, welfare, and job security. However, as lifestyles have been changing and companies have been involved in increasingly fierce global competition, those traditional safety nets have become less dependable. This puts the public sector in a position where it has to play a greater role in providing social safety nets. As for the national burden, there appears to be some room for enhanced safety nets. Chart 9 shows that the “national burden,” defined as the sum of taxes and social security contributions, currently stands at 36% of national income. The ratio is much smaller than those for some European countries. If we use the “potential national burden,” which includes the fiscal deficit, the same conclusion still holds. Although this suggests that shouldering a somewhat heavier burden for somewhat better safety nets is a reasonable option for Japan, the question of how much remains. All in all, it is not easy to achieve a national consensus on how much higher benefits and burdens will be appropriate. It may take some time before Japanese people make a choice. IV. To the second stage of structural reforms The worst scenario is that Japan will fall into a “heavy burden but insufficient benefit” society, which might actually take place without a gain in productivity. It is exactly in this context that the structural reforms should be propelled further. Among many reform agenda, I will focus on the importance of facilitating further integration of Japan into the global economy. Further integration into the global economy Although at home resources are constrained by the declining population, there is a great source of usable technology, labor, and management skills abroad. I believe that what determines a nation’s long-term economic growth is not its population but its flexibility in taking advantage of globally available resources. Let me discuss two aspects of globalization: use of the foreign management resources and use of foreign labor force. The first aspect is to introduce more foreign management resources. As Chart 10 shows, although foreign direct investment into Japan has been increasing considerably, the stock of direct inward investment as a ratio to nominal GDP is still much lower than the same ratio for other countries. One good example is the United Kingdom in the 1980s. Tax incentives, infrastructure improvements, and other measures were taken to promote foreign inward investment. Japanese manufacturers, encouraged by the U.K. government, decided to build their factories here; Nissan was an early good example and many others, particularly automobile companies and electrical appliances companies, followed suit. The core of the reform in the United Kingdom was perhaps its willingness to be open to the world. Many years later in the late 1990s, it was again Nissan that became a model, this time, of demonstrating the merits of learning from foreign management. Mr. Carlos Ghosn came to Nissan as a new president, transforming the company at a crisis into one with years of record performance. The revival of Nissan, by creating a more competitive environment, contributed to invigorating the entire automobile industry and triggered a large-scale restructuring of suppliers. The second aspect of global integration is more extensive use of foreign labor. Some people express their concern that if the introduction of foreign workers is too rapid, unbearable friction will arise, BIS Review 36/2004 3 
particularly for a homogeneous country like Japan. However, in certain areas of the economy, for example the service industry, the growth potential hinges on the availability of the labor force. There must be a balance between expanding foreign employment, directly or through outsourcing, and avoiding excessive socioeconomic changes. After all, many countries are getting more active in the global allocation of resources, and Japan has to compete with them. Under these circumstances, a key to economic prosperity lies in a continuous trial and error process of combining globally available technology, management, and human resources with the merits our economy has on its own. Concluding remarks As I have discussed, Japan’s economy is still facing many challenges, particularly in the long run. On the other hand, prospects of a continued economic recovery are good at least for the time being. The Bank of Japan, for its part, will continue making every effort to bring deflation to an end, thereby creating a better environment for further progress in structural reforms. Thank you for listening. 4 BIS Review 36/2004 
Svein Gjedrem: Inflation targeting - some theory with main focus on practice Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), given at the Centre for Monetary Economics/Norwegian School of Management, Oslo, 8 June 2004. The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. *      *      * Norway has had an inflation target for monetary policy since March 2001. In my speech today, I will attempt to explain why and how an inflation targeting regime was introduced. In a number of countries, including Norway, short-term interest rates are now the lowest for generations. Let us look back to the views on monetary policy in Norway the last time interest rates were very low, in the postwar period up to the mid-1950s. As part of the measures taken in February 1955, Norges Bank increased the discount rate, which had remained unchanged since the war, from 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent. In his annual address, central bank governor Erik Brofoss discussed this change:1“In the longer run, the aim must be to bring interest rates down again. The outlook for achieving this is promising. Saving is high and can be supplemented by foreign capital. This provides the basis for a low interest rate if moderation is shown in relation to an expansionary urge.” In retrospect, we can safely say that the expansionary urge proved to be too strong. It took 50 years before the interest rate returned to this level, which we now regard as abnormally low. However, prevailing views on monetary policy at that time is probably of more interest. Brofoss said the following: “Increasing the discount rate will probably be widely regarded as the most important monetary policy measure. The interest rate is, however, a controversial instrument, both in Norway and in other countries. Nonetheless, an increasing number of countries use it. Whether the purported good results can be ascribed solely to interest rate policy is another question. The effects in Norway may differ somewhat from the effects in other countries. Countries with major currencies can influence short-term capital movements via the interest rate. This is only possible to a limited extent in Norway. A substantial share of business investment is self-financed and is not affected by the interest rate. The same applies to shipowners that finance new ships built in other countries with their foreign exchange earnings. As a cost factor, the interest rate will probably curb debt-financed investment. The question is whether this will eliminate the lowest priority investments. In the long run, we are dependent on long-term investment. Interest rate changes may therefore have adverse effects in Norway that do not occur in other countries.” This stands in contrast to the current view, as expressed by Norges Bank’s delegating authority, the Ministry of Finance:2“The new guidelines for economic policy also imply that monetary policy has been given a clear role in stabilising economic developments. This means that the scope for manoeuvre in monetary policy should be used if the outlook for the economy changes.” In the 1950s and 1960s, a strong belief evolved that the economy could be controlled and steered in the desired direction. This optimistic view gradually lost favour in the face of developments. The way in which economic policy is oriented today reflects the experience gained and the lessons learned in the 1970s and 1980s.3 Economic policy at that time was marked by coordination, control and regulation. Important elements were: • fiscal policy oriented towards full employment                                                       1 See Jahn, Gunnar, Alf Eriksen and Preben Munthe (1966): Norges Bank gjennom 150 år (A history of Norges Bank). In Norwegian only. Norges Bank’s Printing Works, Oslo. 2 Cf. Report No. 1 (2003-2004) to the Storting, National Budget for 2004. Ministry of Finance, Oslo. 3 Hermod Skånland is in the process of completing “Doktriner og økonomisk politikk” (Doctrines and economic policy), which provides a very interesting discussion of post-war economic policy. BIS Review 36/2004 1 
• credit regulation within limits specified in a separate credit budget • channelling of loans through the state banks • regulation of capital movements • low nominal interest rates stipulated by the government authorities • a fixed, though adjustable, krone exchange rate • use of price regulation • an active business policy through state ownership and state grants and subsidies The use of price regulation was particular to Norway. The following description is by Petter Jakob Bjerve:4“A characteristic of postwar Norwegian economic policy, compared with policies in other countries in the west, is that prices have largely been directly set by the authorities, while wages and other income have been determined by the market and by market organisations. With the high level of employment that the government sought to achieve in the 1970s, inflation was probably lower with price regulation than it would have been without it. Nonetheless, there was repeated evidence that freezing prices without freezing wages could not prevent a fairly sharp rise in prices. In 1978-1979, we witnessed a demonstration of the extent to which the rise in prices can be slowed, at least temporarily, when a price freeze is combined with a wage freeze. But even this combination, which can only be temporary, cannot in the long run prevent a sharp rise in prices if the gap between demand and supply is too wide - as demonstrated by the rise in prices after 1980.” In Norway, the efforts to develop an economy under strong centralised coordination and control culminated in the 1973 proposal to establish an incomes policy council.5 According to the proposal, the social partners would undertake a commitment through the council to keep negotiated wage increases within specific limits. It was also stipulated that demand management policy should be included as part of incomes policy. The proposal to establish an incomes policy council did not receive support. There was ultimately too much control and coordination. Now, only 30 years later, virtually nothing of this system remains. The structure was not solid enough. We know from experience that fiscal policy alone cannot ensure a high level of employment. The structure of the labour market and wage formation are probably of greater importance. The direct regulation of credit, interest rates and capital movements collapsed and was phased out in the 1980s. The krone is floating. Price regulation no longer plays a role as a macroeconomic instrument. The scope of business policy has become more general. State ownership in the Norwegian business sector remains extensive, but ownership management has been reorganised following the negative experience of companies in Kongsberg, Mo i Rana and Syd-Varanger. The economic policy of the 1970s and 1980s contributed to wide fluctuations in the Norwegian economy. Economic developments were marked by high and variable inflation. Inflation rose gradually and it took a long time before it fell. The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind the pronounced swings in the Norwegian economy. With a policy of low interest rates and devaluations, inflation took root. Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation and the value of tax-deductible interest expenses rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 were unable in the long term to prevent a decline in the manufacturing sector. On the contrary, they proved to be self-reinforcing. The wide fluctuations culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s. A pronounced downturn and high unemployment followed at the end of the 1980s. I would like to highlight three factors that have taken on particular importance for economic policy in general, and monetary policy in particular. – First, economic agents look to the future when they make decisions about consumption and investments, wages and prices, and take account of not only current economic policy, but also their                                                       4 Bjerve, Petter Jakob (1981): “Kva hendte i Norge i 1970-åra - konjunkturpolitisk?” (What happened in Norway in the 1970s - in terms of counter-cyclical policy?), Sosialøkonomen No. 5, 1981. 5 Official Norwegian Report (NOU) 1973:36 Om prisproblemene (price problems). 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
expecations of future economic policy. This is particularly evident in foreign exchange and financial markets, where exchange rates and interest rates are influenced when participants shift large amounts partly on the basis of their expectations concerning economic policy and economic developments. Financial market expectations concerning economic policy are entirely different today from what they were 20-30 years ago. Behaviour can change from being very rational to herd behaviour. The issues that receive attention, and that govern movements in exchange rates and interest rates, change. It is thus important that the authorities do not sow doubt, but on the contrary act in a predictable manner within a long-term framework. The authorities must be credible and inspire confidence. There must be consistency between the stated objectives of economic policy and what is actually done to achieve them. This is the most important reason why the implementation of monetary policy has been delegated to the central bank in Norway, as has been the case in other comparable countries. In Norway, the responsibility for interest rate decisions was delegated to Norges Bank through the 1985 Norges Bank Act and through the application of the Act in 1986. Developments in economic theory have also had considerable influence in this context. Seminal studies on economic policy guidelines were conducted by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott at the end of the 1970s.6 These studies are based on the assumption that economic agents do not make systematic errors in their assessments of what the authorities are planning for the future. The insights gained from these studies provide arguments in favour of ensuring the independence of the central bank vis-à-vis the political authorities, and of defining binding monetary policy objectives. Former governor of Norges Bank Hermod Skånland was particularly interested in this issue. Skånland stated the following as early as 1979:7“What the central bank can do, on the other hand, is to use its professional judgment to conduct a policy for demand management, which is in line with the more long-term objectives and guiding principles that have been drawn up by the political authorities. This presupposes, however, that the central bank also has the possibility of objecting to requests from the same authorities when their efforts to solve more short-term problems bring them into conflict with more long-term objectives.” – The other lesson drawn from the experience of the 1970s and 1980s was that it was not possible to reduce unemployment in the medium and long term by merely accepting somwhat higher inflation. Faced with the question of whether an increase in inflation from say 10 to 12 per cent was acceptable if stimulating the economy could at the same time reduce unemployment from say 2 to 1½ per cent, the decision-making authorities would most likely have been inclined to answer yes. But experience showed that this was not an available option. An attempt to increase output beyond the level that is consistent with stable inflation will over time lead to steadily rising inflation. Economic agents will eventually incorporate higher inflation into their inflation expectations. In the long run, the result will only be higher inflation, not higher employment. Output and employment will return to their potential level. – The third factor is the special challenges to stabilisation policy posed by petroleum revenues. Norway’s export revenues and government revenues can be expected to be very high as long as production remains high and as long as the global market allows producing countries to extract substantial economic rent. At the same time, we know from experience that revenues may vary sharply from year to year. As a result of the high level of earnings and fluctuations in these revenues, the most important contribution fiscal policy can make to stabilising the Norwegian economy is to provide a sound, long-term strategy for the use of petroleum revenues. Attempts to use the central government budget to fine-tune economic activity may have a destabilising effect if these attempts are perceived as a breach in the long-term strategy for the phasing in of petroleum revenues. It is necessary to show that fiscal policy is applied symmetrically in periods of economic expansion and contraction. From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble, it was recognised that a substantial revision of economic policy would be necessary and that the problems created by inflation had to be taken seriously. The exchange rate was chosen as the nominal anchor. Deteriorating competitiveness due to high wage growth would no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. Substantial emphasis was                                                       6 Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott (1977): “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85, 473-91, June 1977. 7 Skånland, Hermod (1979): “Strategier for 1980-årenes politikk” (Policy strategies for the 1980s), Sosialøkonomen No. 10, 1979. BIS Review 36/2004 3 
placed on the importance of wage formation for developments in employment. Only when wage growth dropped below the level of our trading partners did unemployment begin to fall and the manufacturing sector began to pick up. Thus, the fixed exchange rate policy was not introduced in order to strengthen the internationally exposed business sector in the short term. On the contrary, it was a breach in the approach whereby monetary policy and “exchange rate policy” had been oriented towards safeguarding these sectors. A fixed exchange rate was an intermediate target for achieving low and stable inflation. The alternative of inflation targeting was not developed in 1986, and adhering to the fixed exchange rate regime was probably the best available option. The report from the publicly appointed Steigum Commission, submitted in 1988, contains a very thorough discussion of the need for a credible long-term policy, but also of the challenges involved in providing the economy with a nominal anchor after such a long period of high inflation:8“Such a consistent exchange rate policy can yield better results in the long run than a strategy that is based on frequent devaluations or downward adjustments of the krone. This applies even if a devaluation, in isolation, has a favourable short-term impact on the real economy. The disadvantage is that devaluations tend to fuel expectations of further devaluations, which makes it difficult to break with this form of policy. As a result, inflation will be higher than in other countries while neither employment nor economic growth will be systematically higher. On the contrary, higher inflation will most likely have considerable negative effects on the real economy, partly because this will amplify the adverse effects of the tax regime. However, there may be considerable real economic costs associated with the transition to a consistent fixed exchange rate regime. It may take time for devaluation expectations to fade and for wage, price and interest rate developments to adapt fully to the exchange rate regime. The less credible a fixed exchange rate policy is at the outset, the longer it takes for devaluation expectations to fade, and the greater the transitional costs will be in connection with a regime change to a consistent fixed exchange rate policy.” This analysis shows that at the time there was a realistic understanding of the transitional costs associated with bringing down inflation. Inflation fell gradually, down to 2-3 per cent in 1991-1992. If inflation targeting had been an available option in 1986, we might indeed have chosen to aim for just such a gradual fall in inflation. Economic policy had to be anchored more firmly after 15 years of short-term fine-tuning. We had not established a sufficiently clear institutional framework for a more discretionary monetary policy. We could not then assume that a floating krone exchange rate regime and the exercise of our professional judgment when setting interest rates would inspire confidence. We had to abandon the fixed exchange rate policy in 1992. An important reason was the weakness inherent in the fixed exchange rate regime in a world with free capital flows and deep financial markets.9 When the fixed exchange rate policy was formally abolished, the Norwegian economy again risked losing its nominal anchor. But the krone exchange rate showed little change to begin with and rapidly found a new range.                                                       8 Official Norwegian Report (NOU) 1988:21: Norsk økonomi i forandring (A changing Norwegian economy). Ministry of Finance, Oslo. 9 For important academic contributions on inherent weaknesses in fixed rate systems, see Krugman, P. (1979) “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 11, 311-325, Krugman, P. (1988) “Exchange rate instability”. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA and Obstfeld, M. (1986) “Rational and Self-fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises”, American Economic Review 76, 72-81. For a simplified presentation of Krugman og Obstfeld’s works, see De Grauwe, P. (1996) “International Money”, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 4 BIS Review 36/2004 
Norges Bank2SG CME 08.06..2004Consumerpriceinflationin NorwayPercentagerise onpreviousyear. 1987-200302468101987198919911993199519971999200120030246810Source: StatisticsNorway The exchange rate remained stable up to autumn 1996, partly because wage growth was low and overall demand did not generate pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show wider fluctuations. The experience of the last half of the 1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments in international financial markets led to more pronounced fluctuations. And more fundamentally, exchange rate developments no longer provided signals to wage formation and fiscal policy when labour market pressures mounted and incomes policy failed. High petroleum revenues, fiscal slippage and expectations of increased use of petroleum revenues contributed to this. Hence, the exchange rate was no longer appropriate as a nominal anchor. Norges Bank therefore placed increasing emphasis on low and stable inflation. A formal inflation target for monetary policy was introduced in the spring of 2001. The mandate for the conduct of monetary policy is provided for in the Regulation on Monetary Policy, issued by the Ministry of Finance on 29 March 2001. The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The idea of an inflation target for monetary policy was not new. This alternative for Norway was discussed in 1997 at the initiative of Norges Bank.10 Many countries had already gained many years’ experience in operating such a system. New Zealand was the first in line towards the end of the 1980s. Canada followed shortly thereafter. In New Zealand, the switch to inflation targeting was one component of a comprehensive public sector reform aimed at addressing incentive problems associated with economic policy. Canada, which is one of the industrial countries with the most experience of floating exchange rates, had been seeking a nominal anchor for some time. Towards the end of the 1980s, the central bank’s communication increasingly emphasised price stability as a monetary policy objective. An inflation target was officially introduced at the initiative of the finance ministry and in a joint statement issued by the central bank and the finance ministry.11Sweden introduced an inflation target in December 1992, inspired to some extent by the experience of Canada and New Zealand. After the deep economic crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, reverting to a fixed exchange rate policy was no longer deemed realistic. In this context, it must be added that the central bank of Sweden, when it was seeking to motivate and firmly establish inflation targeting during the 1990s, was able to draw on its own experience from the 1930s. Admittedly, Sweden did not have an inflation target but a price target for monetary policy in the period 1931-1937. At that time, the                                                       10 See Christiansen, Anne Berit and Jan F. Qvigstad (ed.) (1997): Choosing a Monetary Policy Target. Scandinavian University Press, Oslo. 11 See Crow, John (2002): Making Money. An Insider’s Perspective on Finance, Politics, and Canada’s Central Bank. Wiley, Canada. BIS Review 36/2004 5 
concept was inspired by the work of Knut Wicksell 30 years earlier. As early as in 1898, Wicksell argued that price stability should be the central bank’s objective.12After the collapse of the ERM in 1992, a gradual shift towards today’s system began in the UK, which translated into Chancellor Gordon Brown’s decision to transfer the authority to set interest rates from the Chancellor to a monetary policy committee at the Bank of England in 1997. Inflation targeting is now the norm in small and medium-sized open economies. Denmark is an important exception. Since the mid-1980s, Denmark has conducted a very disciplined fiscal and wage policy. Combined with ERM II membership, this has enabled Denmark to maintain a credible and successful fixed exchange rate regime. The new monetary policy system that has gained international support has essentially been developed in concert by finance ministries and central banks, and through experience and practical application. Inflation targeting is not a static system, but a system that is challenged by both reality and academia. Subsequent economic literature has followed up where Knut Wicksell left off, and partly supports and partly questions central bank policy. More recent monetary policy theory is frequently based on a loss function, or a preference function, which includes explicit targets for both inflation and output. Stabilising output is taken into account, thus recognising that monetary policy has an impact on the real economy in the short to medium term. It is the central bank’s task to choose an interest rate path that strikes the best possible balance between low and stable inflation and stable developments in the real economy over time. Ragnar Frisch was pursuing a similar line of thinking. Frisch wanted to construct a quantitative form of a preference function that could be applied in practical policy. Frisch delved into the matter. For example, he devoted considerable time to interviewing politicians to identify the “true” welfare function. His approach involved three phases. As to the first phase, Frisch stated:13“...the econometrician uses his general knowledge of the political atmosphere in the country ... He will then be able to form a temporary perception of the quantitative form of the preference function”. In the next phase, the preferences are identified by means of a system for interviewing politicians: “This interview system must be designed so that the results, without the politicians necessarily having to understand this, can draw certain conclusions as to the numerical nature of the preference function.” In the third and last phase, the information derived from the interviews is combined with the data on the structure of the economy and the formulated preference function. “This will yield a solution in the form of an optimal path for economic and social development.” Professor Lars Svensson, one of the most prominent contemporary academics in the field of monetary policy, expresses thoughts similar to those of Frisch. Svensson recommends the following:14“...inflation targeting central banks should announce (an) explicit loss function with numerical weights on output-gap stabilization... Simple voting procedures for forming the Monetary Policy Committee’s aggregate loss function... are suggested.” A practical approach, which is probably pursued by most central banks, is to produce projections for the economy based on different, possible interest rate paths. Decision-makers can then strike a balance between the various considerations and make decisions based on these projections.15                                                      12 See Berg, Clas and Lars Jonung (1998): “Pioneering Price Level Targeting: the Swedish Experience 1931-37”. Conference on Monetary Policy Rules, Stockholm, 12-13 June 1998. 13 Frisch, Ragnar (1971): “Samarbeid mellom politikere og økonometrikere om formuleringen av politiske preferanser” (Cooperation between politicians and econometricians on the formulation of policy preferences). Sosialøkonomen No. 6, 1971. 14 Cf. Svensson, Lars (2003): “The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function” in Paul Mizen (ed.), Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart, Edward Elgar. 15 For a description of principles for inflation targeting, see Lars Svensson’s presentation “What is inflation targeting?” on Norges Bank’s website: www.norges-bank.no/english/monetary_policy/workshops/2004/program-03.html. 6 BIS Review 36/2004 
Both the formulation of a precise inflation target and the aim of striking a balance between the objectives of stable output and inflation could invite a repeat of earlier attempts at fine-tuning. But here it is important to adhere to the lessons drawn from the 1970s and 1980s. The uncertainty underlying the decisions taken must not be underestimated. There is uncertainty as to the current state of the economy, the underlying driving forces and the economy’s functioning, including expectations formation and the impact of monetary policy. Economic models are tools that help us address some of this uncertainty. Inflation targeting places new demands on our models and our use of models. In an uncertain world, risk analysis is a very important part of the work. The aim is as much to understand the economics of the forecast as to produce quantitative estimates. In central banks, dramatic developments in macroeconomic modelling have taken place over the past 10 years. At Norges Bank, we have started work on developing modelling tools for inflation targeting. We are inspired by and work closely with other central banks and the IMF and draw on our long experience of model building in Norway. We are working on several different models and we are assessing other building blocks that we need to support our work in setting interest rates under an inflation targeting regime. Part of the work involves developing a fairly small model that can serve as a reference and a basis for discussions and deliberations within the Bank and the Executive Board. The thinking behind this is that this model will contribute to disciplining and structuring discussions and to consistent argumentation across issues and over time. Moreover, this model could serve as an aid in our external communication on monetary policy and our view of the functioning of the economy. The model must satisfy the following requirements: 1. The model must have a well defined equilibrium The model must be predicated on the experience gained in the 1970s and 1980s, which showed that we cannot increase employment in the long run by accepting higher inflation. In the long run, inflation is a monetary phenomenon. 2. Inflation expectations must be modelled explicitly We must have a line of reasoning and a model that takes account of the forward-looking behaviour of economic agents when making decisions. Agents take account not only of today’s economy policy, but their expectations as to future economic policy. As mentioned, it may be difficult to form a perception of how expectations are formed. An advantage of modelling expectations explicitly is that we can analyse the effects of different views on how they are formed. 3. Monetary policy must have a defined role in the model The model must address monetary policy’s main task: providing a nominal anchor. 4. The model must be transparent and manageable Norges Bank’s administration, management and Executive Board must be able to interpret and understand the model. It must not be perceived as a black box. It must have a theoretical structure so that we can easily examine the effects of alternative views of the economy’s functioning. 5. The model must reflect the Bank’s view As a result of the modelling work, the Bank’s views on relationships in the economy will evolve. At the same time, we are developing a model with relationships that we have confidence in. Models will never provide us with a definitive answer. A model will always represent a simplification of reality. We must be pragmatic and exercise a good measure of judgement in addition. In my view, the most important role of models is to provide a framework and structure for the decision-making process, and to ensure that we do not change our views on the functioning of the economy without thorough reflection. BIS Review 36/2004 7 
The use of models must also be seen in connection with the uncertainty associated with the actual state of the economy and the driving forces that dominate at a given point in time. It can be a demanding task in itself to find the balance between incorporating new information on the one hand and making abstraction of pure noise on the other. Allow me to illustrate. Norges Bank3SG CME 08.06..2004MainlandGDPPercentagerise onpreviousquarterSeasonallyadjusted-3-2-101234199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004-3-2-101234Source: StatisticsNorway The chart shows quarterly changes in mainland GDP, adjusted for seasonal variations. The figures show wide quarterly variations. It is uncertain whether this reflects fundamental conditions or statistical noise. Norway is a small economy, and extraordinary events can have a substantial impact on aggregate figures. Norges Bank4SG CME 08.06..2004-3-2-101234199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004-3-2-101234Sources: StatisticsNorwayand EcoWinGDP mainlandNorway, Swedenand theUK Percentagerise onpreviousquarter. SeasonallyadjustedNorwaySwedenUK 8 BIS Review 36/2004 
These figures nonetheless fluctuate considerably less for Sweden and the UK. I will not comment on whether the differences are real or merely statistical. Let us now contrast these quarterly figures with our output-gap estimates using annualised figures.16 This estimation may provide a basis for assessing the contours of cyclical developments. Norges Bank5SG CME 08.06..2004Output gap for mainlandNorway, basedonannualfigures-4-3-2-1012345198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002-4-3-2-1012345Source: Norges Bank The following chart shows a similar estimation using the quarterly figures that I just showed you. Norges Bank6SG CME 08.06..2004-4-3-2-1012345198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002-4-3-2-1012345AnnualfiguresQuarterlyfiguresOutput gap for mainlandNorway, basedonannualfiguresand quarterlyfiguresSource: Norges Bank We must not and cannot fine-tune economic developments. We must therefore exercise caution in our use of short-term statistics and quarterly figures. Changes in these figures may represent more noise than news. The challenge facing us is to identify the contours of cyclical developments.                                                       16 See Inflation Report 1/2003 for further discussion on the method of calculation. BIS Review 36/2004 9 
Allow me to conclude. Today’s monetary policy is based on the experience gained by Norway and other countries, over the past 30 years in particular, and on the results of extensive macroeconomic research. Important lessons are: – Inflation is a monetary phenomenon. A country with a national currency can choose the level of its own inflation. Inflation in a country is not something that drifts in with the wind from abroad. – If monetary policy is to function effectively, an institutional framework is required to reinforce confidence that overriding weight is assigned to long-term objectives. The institutional framework and guidelines for monetary policy in Norway reflect developments in other countries. This is of particular importance for a small country because of the considerable influence international operators have on developments in our country. Rules can anchor expectations, but they must be credible and robust to disturbances to international and domestic economic developments. Inflation targeting is in practice a flexible rule that can stabilise expectations and at the same time provide room for adapting to the abrupt shifts our economy is exposed to. Thank you for your attention. 10 BIS Review 36/2004 
Alan Greenspan: Central Bank panel discussion - economic developments Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the International Monetary Conference, London (via satellite), 8 June 2004. *      *      * One of the defining characteristics of the recent business expansion in the United States has been the evident reluctance of corporate managers to expand spending and hiring aggressively in response to and in anticipation of continued cyclical growth. A substantial rebound in business spending had been a hallmark of most past economic expansions. Judging by the pickup in capital spending in recent quarters, businesses are becoming more confident in the strength and durability of the cyclical upturn. Still, over the four quarters ending in March, corporate investment in capital and inventories likely fell short of rapidly rising cash flow for the first time, over a comparable period, since the mid-1970s. Corporate debt expansion has accordingly been tepid. Indeed, corporate net bond issuance was negative in May. The exceptional reluctance to expand payrolls also appears to have waned this year, and businesses are once again hiring with some vigor. But for nearly three years prior, managers sought every avenue to forestall new hiring despite rising business sales. Their ability to boost output without adding appreciably to their workforces, appears to have reflected a backlog of unexploited capabilities to enhance productivity with minimal capital investment, a delayed effect of the capital goods boom of the 1990s. Even now, the proportion of increases in temporary workers relative to total employment gains has been unusually large, suggesting that business caution remains a feature of the economic landscape. This hesitancy on the part of businesses to expand risk-taking, as I have noted in the past, is an apparent consequence of scandals surrounding corporate accounting and governance, an aftermath of the stock market surge. Although there is no compelling evidence that corporate governance risk has fully subsided, with time, it should. An increased willingness to borrow, and ample liquid assets, should provide a further lift to capital investment and, with it, economic activity. * * * With concerns of deflation now presumably safely behind us, developments ahead are likely to be dominated by the paths of productivity growth and profit margins - assuming, of course, the always latent danger of terrorism in the United States remains in check. Profits of nonfinancial corporations as a share of sector output, after falling to 7 percent in the third quarter of 2001, rebounded to 12 percent in the first quarter of 2004, a pace of advance not experienced since 1983. This sharp recovery in profits reflects, at least in part, the dramatic swing over the past couple of years from relatively heavy business price discounting to the restoration of a significant degree of pricing power. The most visible manifestation of the return to pricing power can be seen in the recent acceleration of core consumer prices. The twelve-month percent change in the core PCE price index, which stood at just above 0.8 percent in December of last year, was at 1.4 percent in May. To better understand recent developments, it is helpful to view prices from the perspective of consolidated costs and profit margins. From the first quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of 2004, consolidated unit costs for the nonfinancial corporate business sector declined. Hence, at least from an accounting perspective, all of the 1.1 percent increase in the prices of final goods and services produced in that sector during that period was the consequence of a rise in profit margins. The 6.4 percent increase in nonfinancial corporate business productivity over those four quarters accounts for much of the decline in unit costs. The remainder of the decline is accounted for by the effects of accelerating output in reducing nonlabor fixed costs per unit of output. Productivity in the nonfinancial corporate sector evidently decelerated somewhat this year. Moreover, as best we can judge, the growth of compensation per hour has stepped up in recent months. With gains in hourly compensation now apparently outstripping advances in productivity, unit labor costs have moved up. Moreover, the increase in overall operating expenses over the last couple of months has also reflected higher energy costs and rising prices of imported non-oil inputs. It seems unlikely, however, that a further rise in profit margins will contribute to significantly higher prices of final goods and services. In an endeavor to exploit current high margins, businesses are being driven to expand BIS Review 36/2004 1 
their use of capital and labor resources. If history is any guide, this will tend to increase both real wages and interest rates. Fears of losing market share should dissuade businesses from passing these high costs fully through to prices. Accordingly, the forces of competition should cap the rise in profit margins and ultimately return them to more normal levels. To date, the aforementioned cost pressures have been relatively subdued. Nonetheless, the persistence of the rise in energy prices is a worrisome element in the cost picture. Fears for the long-term security of oil production in the Middle East, along with increased concerns about prospects in other oil-producing countries, are doubtless key factors behind the nearly $9 per barrel rise in distant crude oil futures since 2000. This run-up presumably reflects a broadening of demand for claims on oil inventories beyond traditional commercial buyers and sellers of crude oil and petroleum products. The marked rise in the net long positions of non-commercial investors in oil futures and options since May 2003 has increased net claims on an already diminished global level of commercial crude and product inventories. Oil prices accordingly have surged. At some point, however, investors will have achieved the level of claims on oil that they seek. When that occurs, their demand will presumably stop rising, thus removing some of the current upward pressure on prices. Nonetheless, the increased value of oil imports has been a net drain on purchasing power, spending, and production in the United States. Moreover, higher oil prices, if they persist, are likely to boost core consumer prices, as well as the total price level, in this country. The recent modest declines in oil and natural gas prices may or may not signal a trend but are nonetheless welcome. * * * The end of deflationary fears and the onset of modest upward pressure on costs, coupled with a strengthening economic outlook in the United States, have driven long-term interest rates higher, which has spurred a marked shift in credit flows and has prompted many firms to focus on the possibility of further interest rate increases in developing their hedging strategies. The rise in rates, for example, has induced a dramatic fall in mortgage refinancing and, hence, has produced a pronounced rise in the duration of mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Owing to the volume of the earlier wave of mortgage refinancing, there is now a paucity of existing mortgages at rates appreciably above current levels, implying that the extent of further duration hedging is likely to be quite modest. As a consequence of record levels of refinancing in the second half of 2002 and the first half of 2003 - which, by our estimates, encompassed roughly 45 percent of the total value of home mortgages outstanding - MBS duration fell to exceptionally low levels. As mortgage and other long-term rates rebounded last summer, a consequence of rapidly improving economic conditions and the fading of deflationary concerns, refinancing fell sharply, removing most downward pressure on duration. Holders of MBS endeavoring to hedge developing interest rate gaps rapidly shed receive-fixed swaps and Treasuries, and these actions markedly aggravated last summer’s long-term interest rate upturn. In recent months, mortgage rates have risen further, suppressing much of what is left of incentives to refinance, thereby increasing mortgage duration to its current elevated level. This suggests that the vast secondary market for home mortgages has largely adjusted to the recent increases in mortgage rates. Moreover, the expectation of Federal Reserve tightening has apparently already induced other significant balance sheet adjustments as well. An unwinding of carry trades is notably under way at least judging from the shift in the trading portfolios of primary dealers. In addition, a swing toward a net short position on ten-year Treasury note futures among investors has been the largest since the inception of the contract in the 1980s. * * * Economic developments going forward will determine the level and term structure of interest rates. Federal funds futures prices already reflect expectations of a substantial firming of policy by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Unlike 1994, there has been an appreciable increase of market rates in anticipation of policy tightening, though history cautions that investors’ anticipations of the cumulative magnitude of policy actions and their timing under such circumstances are far from perfect. Lastly, let me emphasize that recent financial indicators, including rapid growth of the money supply, underscore that the FOMC has provided ample liquidity to the financial system that will become 2 BIS Review 36/2004 
increasingly unnecessary over time. The Committee is of the view, as you know, that monetary policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be measured. That conclusion is based on our current best judgment of how economic and financial forces will evolve in the months and quarters ahead. Should that judgment prove misplaced, however, the FOMC is prepared to do what is required to fulfill our obligations to achieve the maintenance of price stability so as to ensure maximum sustainable economic growth. BIS Review 36/2004 3 
Kishori J Udeshi: Implementation of Basel II - an Indian perspective Address by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the World Bank/IMF/US Federal Reserve Board 4th Annual International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector: Basel II, Washington DC, 2 June 2004. *      *      * Yesterday we had very absorbing discussions on macro issues, regulatory perspectives and risk management challenges relating to Basel II. We are now not debating whether to go forward with Basel II but how to implement Basel II. In fact, understanding Basel II concepts is one step away from agreeing to it in principle. Implementing Basel II is another long step away from understanding it. Let me briefly detail some implementation issues with specific reference to India.  Features of Indian financial system  A feature, somewhat unique to the Indian financial system is the diversity of its composition. We have the dominance of Government ownership coupled with significant private shareholding in the public sector banks which in turn continue to have a dominant share in the total banking system. These public sector banks are listed on the stock exchange and their performance is reflected in their P/E ratios. The private sector banks especially the new ones are world class. We also have cooperative banks, whose numbers are large and pose a challenge because of the multiplicity of regulatory and supervisory authorities. There are also Regional Rural Banks with links to their parent commercial banks. Foreign bank branches operate profitably in India and by and large the regulatory standards for all these banks are uniform. The process of providing financial services is changing rapidly from traditional banking to a one stop shop of varied financial services and the old institutional demarcations are getting increasingly blurred.  Approach to prudential norms: a review  The Reserve Bank’s approach to the institution of prudential norms has been one of gradual convergence with international standards and best practices with suitable country specific adaptations. Our aim has been to reach global best standards in a deliberately phased manner through a consultative process evolved within the country. This has also been the guiding principle in the approach to the New Basel Accord e.g. while the minimum capital adequacy requirement under the Basel standard is 8% in India, we have stipulated and achieved a minimum capital of 9%. On the other hand, banks in India are still in the process of implementing capital charge for market risk prescribed in the Basel document although since 1998 we have in place several surrogates such as an Investment Fluctuation Reserve of 5% of the investment portfolio, both in the AFS and HFT categories plus a 2.5% risk weight on the entire investment portfolio - whereas Basel norms take into account only the trading portfolio. RBI’s involvement in Basel II RBI’s association with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision dates back to 1997 as India was among the 16 non-member countries that were consulted in the drafting of the Basel Core Principles. Reserve Bank of India became a member of the Core Principles Liaison Group in 1998 and subsequently became a member of the Core Principles Working Group on Capital. Within the CPWG, RBI has been actively participating in the deliberations on the Accord and had the privilege to lead a group of 6 major non G - 10 supervisors which presented a proposal on a simplified approach for Basel II to the Committee. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is yet to issue the final Basel II document. The Reserve Bank’s comments on the 3rd consultative document on the New Capital Accord on the basis of the quantitative impact studies (QIS 3) undertaken in co-ordination with select banks has brought out the need for more simplicity and greater flexibility on account of the different levels of preparedness of the banking system in India.  BIS Review 35/2004 1 
Policy approach In general, keeping in view the RBI’s goal to have consistency and harmony with international standards and our approach to adopt the pace as may be appropriate in the context of our country specific needs, the RBI had in April 2003 itself accepted in principle to adopt the new capital accord Basel II. The RBI has announced, in its Annual Policy statement in May 2004 that banks in India should examine in depth the options available under Basel II and draw a road-map by end December 2004 for migration to Basel II and review the progress made thereof at quarterly intervals. The Reserve Bank will be closely monitoring the progress made by banks in this direction. Hence, at a minimum all banks in India, to begin with, will adopt Standardized Approach for credit risk and Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed, both in banks and at supervisory levels, some banks may be allowed to migrate to IRB Approach. Regulatory initiatives  The regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India include: • Ensuring that the banks have suitable risk management framework oriented towards their requirements dictated by the size and complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expected level of capital. The framework adopted by banks would need to be adaptable to changes in business size, market dynamics and introduction of innovative products by banks in future. • Introduction of Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks on a pilot basis. • Encouraging banks to formalize their Capital Adequacy Assessment Programme (CAAP) in alignment with business plan and performance budgeting system. This, together with adoption of Risk Based Supervision would aid in factoring the Pillar II requirements under Basel II. • Enhancing the area of disclosures (Pillar III), so as to have greater  transparency of the financial position and risk profile of banks.  • Improving the level of corporate governance standards in banks. • Building capacity for ensuring the regulator’s ability for identifying and permitting eligible banks to adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches. Challenges envisaged  Against the above background and the complexities involved as also the areas of “constructive ambiguity” in concepts and their application we envisage the following regulatory and supervisory challenges ahead:  • India has three established rating agencies in which leading international credit rating agencies are stakeholders and also extend technical support. However, the level of rating penetration is not very significant as, so far, ratings are restricted to issues and not issuers. While Basel II gives some scope to extend the rating of issues to issuers, this would only be an approximation and it would be necessary for the system to move to ratings of issuers. Encouraging ratings of issuers would be a challenge. • Basel II provides scope for the supervisor to prescribe higher than the minimum capital levels for banks for, among others, interest rate risk in the banking book and concentration of risks / risk exposures. As already stated, we in India have initiated supervisory capacity building to identify slackness and to assess / quantify the extent of additional capital which may be required to be maintained by such banks. The magnitude of this task to be completed by December 2006, when we in India have as many as 100 banks, is daunting.  • Cross border issues have been dealt with by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recently. But, in India, foreign banks are statutorily required to maintain local capital and the following issues would therefore, require to be resolved by us : – Whether the internal models approved by their head offices and home country supervisor adopted by the Indian branches of foreign banks need to be validated 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
again by the Reserve Bank or whether the validation by the home country supervisor would be considered adequate? – Whether the data history maintained and used by the bank should be distinct for the Indian branches compared to the global data maintained and used by the head office? – Whether capital for operational risk should be maintained separately for the Indian branches in India or whether it may be maintained abroad at head office? – Whether these banks can be mandated to maintain capital as per SA / BIA approaches in India irrespective of the approaches adopted by the head office? • Basel II could actually imply that the minimum requirements could become pro-cyclical. No doubt prudent risk management policies and Pillars II and III would help in overall stability. We feel that it would be preferable to have consistent prudential norms in good and bad times rather than calibrate prudential norms to counter pro-cyclicality.  • The existence of large and complex financial conglomerates could potentially pose a systemic risk and it would be necessary to put in place supervisory policies to address this. • In the event of some banks adopting IRB Approach, while other banks adopt Standardised Approach, the following profiles may emerge:  – Banks adopting IRB Approach will be much more risk sensitive than the banks on Standardised Approach, since even a small change in degree of risk might translate into a large impact on additional capital requirement for the IRB banks. Hence IRB banks could avoid assuming high risk exposures. Since banks adopting Standardised Approach are not equally risk sensitive and since the relative capital requirement would be less for the same exposure, the banks on Standardised Approach could be inclined to assume exposures to high risk clients, which were not financed by IRB banks. As a result, high risk assets could flow towards banks on Standardised Approach which need to maintain lower capital on these assets than the banks on IRB Approach.Similarly, low risk assets would tend to get concentrated with IRB banks which need to maintain lower capital on these assets than the Standardised Approach banks. – Hence, system as a whole may maintain lower capital than warranted. – Due to concentration of higher risks, Standardised Approach banks can become vulnerable at times of economic downturns.  These issues would need to be addressed satisfactorily. Conclusion In conclusion, I would say that keeping in view the cost of compliance for both banks and supervisors, the regulatory challenge would be to migrate to Basel II in a non-disruptive manner. We would like to continue the process of interaction with other countries to learn from their experiences through various international fora. I may mention that India is one of the early countries which subjected itself voluntarily to the FSAP of the IMF and our system was assessed to be in high compliance with the relevant principles. With the gradual and purposeful implementation of the banking sector reforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system has shown significant improvement on various parameters, has become robust and displayed ample resilience to shocks in the economy. There is therefore, ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migrate smoothly to Basel II.  BIS Review 35/2004 3 
I J Macfarlane: Recent financial and economic developments in Australia  Opening statement by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Finance and Public Administration, Sydney, 4 June 2004.  *      *      * It is a pleasure for me to be here in front of the Committee once again. As usual, I will start by reviewing the forecasts I gave to the Committee six months ago in Brisbane, then provide you with an update of our current forecasts. I will then move on to discussing the risks to these forecasts, both in the upward and the downward direction. Last December we thought that GDP growth in calendar 2003 would be about 3½ per cent. We now know that it came in at 3.9 per cent, with the second half of the year being a lot stronger than the first half, but with growth slipping to 3.2 per cent in the four quarters to March 2004. Our forecast for growth through calendar 2004 is now 3¾ per cent. We began to lower our forecast because of weaker-than-expected exports and retail trade and stronger imports. We then raised the forecast following the Budget, but have lowered it again to take on board the March quarter national accounts released two days ago. I must say, however, that I think the market has over-reacted to the March quarter GDP figure. It only lowered our forecast in the mechanical sense that one of the four quarters is now lower than in our previous forecast. It did not materially change our view about the trajectory over the rest of the year, if anything it raised it. On inflation, we had forecast 2¼ per cent for the CPI increase over calendar 2003 and it came in a bit higher at 2.4 per cent, but has since receded to 2 per cent in the four quarters to March 2004. For calendar 2004, headline inflation will be heavily influenced by movements in oil prices, so it is best to look at underlying inflation. We are still forecasting that underlying measures will be running at about 2 per cent, as we did last time we met. By end 2005, both headline and underlying measures are likely to have moved up to about 2½ per cent. So we still have a shallow saucer-shaped profile for underlying inflation over the next year. Given the recent rise in petrol prices, the headline increase is likely to be higher than the underlying in the short run. This is a pretty good outlook for growth and inflation, both in absolute terms and, more particularly, relative to how things might have turned out. I would like to illustrate this latter point by referring back to a framework I put before the Committee a year ago when we met in Melbourne. This contained four possible scenarios, which I will recap. The first was: “a weakening world outlook and an abating of domestic credit and asset market pressures. This would provide a reasonably clear prognosis for monetary policy. In other words, if it were weak internationally, and weak domestically, that would be easy. In the other direction, so too would a combination of a clear strengthening of the world economy and continued domestic buoyancy. That would be easy. A third possible combination, and the most favourable one for Australia, would be a firming world economy and an easing in domestic pressures, resulting in more balanced growth for the Australian economy. But the combination that would be most damaging to the Australian economy would be if the household sector were to continue putting itself into a more exposed position at the rate it has over the past few years while, at the same time, a further weakening of the world economy was starting to feed through to Australian activity and incomes.” The last-mentioned of these possible outcomes, and the most unfavourable, was a distinct possibility in the middle of last year, but fortunately it did not come to pass. What occurred instead in the second half of last year was the second-mentioned possibility - a strengthening world economy and a continuation of domestic credit and asset market pressures centred on housing. This was the environment in which we decided twice to raise the cash rate. What has happened so far this year - although it took some time to clearly identify it - was the third-mentioned possibility - a transition to a set of conditions in line with a firming in the world economy and an easing in domestic pressures. This was the most favourable outcome and the one most likely to result in a more balanced growth for the Australian economy. I outlined this in a speech I BIS Review 35/2004 1 
gave to Macquarie University in April and we spelled it out more fully in our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy published last month. The fact that conditions began to develop along these lines is also the reason why, after two rate rises in late 2003, we have not seen the need for action on monetary policy in any of our Board Meetings this year. In short, we have been comfortable with developments - a lot more so than we were for most of last year. But, as always, there are risks to the outlook, so I will spend the rest of my presentation discussing them. On the external side, consensus forecasts for the growth of the world economy in 2004 put it well above 4 per cent, with a similar figure for 2005. Certainly, the bulk of the economic data supports this relatively optimistic outlook. We are in the third year of an international expansion, and unless something unforeseen comes along, we should expect the expansion to last for a good few years longer. This is not the impression you would get by following press reports of financial market developments, where downside risks to the outlook always seem to be easier to identify than upside ones. The risk of a further rise in the oil price is a constant concern, and there is some substance to these apprehensions, but I will say no more on the subject at present as Mr Stevens has already delivered a piece covering it a couple of days ago. A number of others in the market worry that policy tightening in China will be overdone, leading to a collapse of the Chinese economy. I have more confidence in China than that, and welcome the news that the Chinese authorities have been taking steps to rein in excessive investment. More generally, financial markets have had difficulty coming to grips with the fact that the long period of very low world interest rates must come to an end, and that they will have to adjust to an international environment of rising world interest rates over the next few years. Overall, we think these concerns are overdone and we are comfortable working on the assumption that the consensus forecast for a good world recovery is a reasonable one. We should also note that higher oil prices and higher interest rates are a symptom of global strength, not global weakness. We should also not rule out the risks on the upside. It may turn out to be the case that very low world interest rates were kept in place for too long a period. In this case, we could see greater inflationary pressure than we currently expect. In this scenario, I believe the main result would be a faster rise in world interest rates, as markets reacted to the prospect, and the reality of central banks acting to keep inflation under control. Turning now to the Australian economy, I want to start by re-emphasising that monetary policy is determined by developments in the economy as a whole, not by developments in any one component. For example, for much of 2002/03, domestic demand was increasing at an exceptionally strong pace, but the external sector was subtracting from growth. Inflation at this time was also above 3 per cent. Even so, we did not use monetary policy to rein in the rapid growth of domestic demand because, for the economy as a whole, growth was not excessive and was not threatening our inflation objective over the medium term, despite being above it in the short run. While monetary policy is directed at the economy as a whole, it does not mean that we have to direct an equal amount of attention to each of its components. Those parts that are obviously exhibiting a serious imbalance will attract more of our attention than those that are relatively well behaved. This explains why we have spent so much time talking about, and researching, the excessively rapid growth in housing credit and, until recently, house prices. While other economic variables were more important for the overall macro-economic outlook, for example consumption and wage growth, their behaviour was not as clearly aberrant and therefore not in need of such intensive study. The forecast for GDP growth in 2004 that I presented before is based on the view that domestic demand will slow from its former rapid pace, but at the same time the subtraction from growth due to the external sector will gradually diminish. Consumption has recently slowed a bit, although it continues to be supported by strong employment growth and will benefit from the tax cuts later in the year. Business fixed investment, particularly in building and structures, will add to growth but not to the same extent as in recent years. Residential investment is expected to subtract from growth and government spending will add to it. Overall, expected GDP growth of 3¾ per cent would be a good outcome. At this stage, we are not assuming a significant drought effect over the coming twelve months, but this remains a downward risk, given the dry conditions prevailing in some parts of the country so far this year. On the inflation front, we do not see a problem over the next twelve months. Beyond that, the picture is of necessity more difficult to quantify. Last time we met we were slightly troubled by the fact that 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
inflation in the non-traded sector was over 4 per cent, and that if this continued it might imply a medium-term outlook for inflation somewhat above 3 per cent. This is still a risk, but we have taken some comfort from the fact that some of the sectors that were pushing it up - such as house-building and property services - should slow as the pressure comes off the house-building sector. The continued modest growth in average wages to date also gives us some confidence. To the extent that there is an upward risk on inflation in the medium term, it is more likely to come from international developments as the world recovery gathers momentum. I will conclude by saying a few words about housing credit and house prices. As we said in our quarterly Statement on Monetary Policy, “The run-up in credit growth and the associated boom in house prices in recent years presented two implications for the economy: they tended to boost growth in the short term, but carried the risk of a damaging correction if they continued too long.” In fact, they represented the one internal imbalance that could have put at risk the continuation of the long economic expansion that has been so beneficial to the Australian community. It is not surprising, therefore, that we experienced a feeling of relief when data started to emerge this year which suggested the worst of the excesses may be past. First, we saw three monthly reductions in loan approvals starting in November 2003 which amounted to a cumulative fall of 20 per cent. Approvals are now running at about $12 billion per month instead of $15 billion at their peak last year. It is still far too early to know whether lending is returning to a sustainable pace - certainly $12 billion per month is still far too high - but at least some progress has been made. Certainly, the prospect of a return to sustainable rates of growth of credit seems brighter than for several years, and with it the increased likelihood that the run of good economic outcomes of the last decade will continue. More recently, we received very strong evidence that housing prices have not only slowed their rate of increase, but have fallen in level terms so far this year. This has occurred in most state capital cities, including the two largest, for Australia on average, and for both houses and apartments. As the fall in prices becomes widely known, it should allow potential house purchasers to take their time and not be afraid, as so many were, that they had to rush in and buy for fear of missing their last opportunity. It should enable them to resist the blandishments of the banks, brokers and other commission agents plying them with offers of seemingly generous quantities of credit. It should also reinforce the recent tendency of investors to question their assumptions about easy capital gains. As such, we expect that the housing market will continue to go through a much-needed cooling phase for some time yet. That is all I wish to say about the economy at this stage, but I will be happy to answer any questions you wish to put to me. I am also conscious that I have been talking on the economy for quite a while and have not left any time to cover the various other areas of the Bank’s responsibilities, such as contributing to the soundness of the financial system, ensuring the efficiency of the payments system and issuing Australia’s currency. But I am sure these can all be covered during the question and answer session. BIS Review 35/2004 3 
Jean-Pierre Roth: The creation of the euro and the new international monetary order - a view from Switzerland Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 2nd Conference of the “Geld und Währung” Foundation on Financial Stability and Globalisation, Frankfurt, 3-4 June, 2004. *      *      * 1. Introduction It is widely acknowledged that the birth of the euro on January 1, 1999 was a milestone in the process of European integration. Giving up national sovereignty in monetary matters was a very bold move of truly historical proportions. It will have long-lasting economic and political consequences. It should promote efficiency, transparency, and growth. The creation of a single currency should also act as catalyst towards further European integration. Moreover, and this is really what I would like to focus on today, the creation of the euro has changed the world’s monetary landscape. I believe that one can say without fear of exaggeration that it has led to a new international monetary order. And for most of it, this is very good news indeed. 2. Our pre-euro fears To be honest, I must admit that prior to the introduction of the euro we were somewhat worried at the Swiss National Bank. Although we fully appreciated the benefits that Switzerland would draw from the creation of the euro in terms of increased transparency and lower transaction costs, we were also quite concerned about possible risks. We had three main fears. First, we were concerned that the Swiss franc might be in for a roller-coaster ride. In the past, whenever the dollar was under attack, international investors turned their attention to the German mark and the Swiss franc. Their status as safe-haven currencies meant that at times of turbulences on foreign exchange markets they would move well beyond what economic fundamentals could justify. In fact, the Swiss franc often exhibited a tendency to appreciate even more than the German mark, a phenomenon that was often attributed to the relative narrowness of the Swiss financial markets. Now with the German mark gone, wouldn’t all attention focus on the Swiss franc? Would it not mean that in any dollar crisis the franc would have to bear even more of the adjustment than in the past? Even worse, what would happen if the euro itself were under attack? The last thing we needed was for the franc to become the first currency in the line of fire, or something like the lightening rod of the international monetary system. A second fear that we had was that it would become very difficult in the future to conduct an independent monetary policy. Switzerland, together with Liechtenstein, would now be totally surrounded by a single monetary zone. As you know, Switzerland is a small open economy, and I emphasize both the words small and open. Indeed, we are widely open. Nearly half of our national income is generated abroad, and the European Union is by far our largest foreign partner. About two thirds of our exports head in that direction, and we are one of the best customers of the EU. We are also very small, meaning that although we have no significant impact on the rest of Europe, we are very exposed to foreign shocks, whether they are real or monetary in nature. Our activity is highly correlated with that of the eurozone. Under these conditions, would the SNB still be in a position to conduct an independent monetary policy? Would it be realistic to expect the SNB to follow a course that deviated from the one set by the European Central Bank, or would the SNB be obliged to shadow the actions of the ECB? The question of an independent monetary policy is not just a matter of safeguarding the interest and the prestige of our job as Swiss central bankers. The stakes are much higher. For one thing, even if Swiss activity and economic conditions more generally are highly correlated with Europe, the correlation is not perfect. Our economy, although offering many similarities to the German and French economies, also has its specificities. Thus, Switzerland is very well supplied with physical and human capital. As a consequence, the return on capital is relatively low and wages are relatively high, particularly so for unskilled workers. We thus tend to specialize in capital-intensive and high-value-added activities. External shocks tend to impact on us in a way that is not exactly the same BIS Review 35/2004 1 
as for the rest of Europe. Moreover, we have to cope with home-brewed shocks as well. It is for these reasons that we are eager to keep an independent monetary policy. Furthermore, if markets became convinced that in the future the SNB’s actions would merely be a Xerox copy of the ECB’s monetary policy, they would rapidly force a convergence of our nominal interest rates with those of the eurozone. Our real interest rates might remain lower for a while, given our relatively large endowment of physical capital, but a tendency towards equalization would nonetheless set in. What this might mean for us is a higher inflation rate for some time, together with a collapse in asset prices and in domestic gross capital formation. A cocktail of higher interest rates and our high wage structure would be highly detrimental to our competitiveness in export markets. The third fear that was sometimes expressed, although here I must say I was rather sceptical myself, was that the euro could eventually make the Swiss franc obsolete. With many of our trading firms billing and paying their suppliers in euros, there might be a tendency for them to adopt the euro more generally for their accounting as well as for their domestic transactions. Some people even went as far as predicting that before long wages would be paid in euros. Shops, hotels and restaurants would rapidly be forced to accept euros, so that visitors from abroad would no longer see the need to convert their euros into francs. Eventually Swiss consumers themselves would follow suit, so that Switzerland would be de facto integrated into the eurozone. More than national pride would be hurt by such an “euroization” of the Swiss economy. For one thing, such a development would entail the loss of seigniorage income. With a monetary base of about 40 billion francs (25 billion euros), that is about 5,700 francs (3,500 euros) per person, seigniorage in our case is far from trivial. But much more seriously, the loss of monetary autonomy caused by a displacement of the Swiss franc by the euro would prevent the central bank from creating liquidity in case of need. To a large extent, the fears that we had reflect the more fundamental debate about fixed versus flexible exchange rates. Which foreign exchange regime is appropriate for a given country at a particular time? Although this view is not universally shared, many economists argue for a polar solution: either purely flexible exchange rates, or rigidly fixed ones. Intellectually, I tend to share this view, except that I would like to take it one step further: either purely flexible exchange rates, or monetary union. Rigidly fixed exchange rates do not constitute a polar case. In fact, they accumulate many shortcomings. Thus, fixed exchange rates have never been known to be fixed for very long. Fixed exchange rates are fixed until the day they change, and when they do change, they often do so brutally in an atmosphere of crisis, of pain, and of tears. No, I believe that if one really aims at exchange rates that are irrevocably fixed, then one should move all the way, that is go for monetary union. As long as two currencies are distinguishable, their relative price might change. So the choice is between flexible exchange rates and monetary union. Needless to say, since Switzerland is not a member of the European Union, joining the eurozone is not an option worth discussing at this stage. Fixing the franc against the euro would not even be a second best. It would rather be the worst of all worlds by suppressing our monetary independence, and, at the same time, exposing us to all the dangers of speculative attacks by setting us up, the back against the wall, alone against the market. 3. Our post-euro experience What has happened since January 1, 1999, all in all, has proven very reassuring. Our worst fears have not materialized, and indeed, in some ways, the outcome has been even much more favourable than we could have hoped for. First, let me briefly sum up our experience with regard to the fears of “euroization” and of the loss of our monetary degree of freedom. As expected, the Swiss franc was not crowded out by the euro. Sure, the euro circulates in Switzerland, just like the Swiss franc circulates in neighbouring France and Germany, but the phenomenon remains marginal, and it does not exceed the use of the French francs, German marks and Italian liras in the pre-euro world. This is not surprising, for even though the euros (and dollars for that matter) are happily accepted in Swiss shops, cafés, and hotels, the exchange rate is usually unattractive and the change is given in Swiss francs. Shopkeepers and restaurant owners are not in the business of providing financial services, and foreign tourists are still better off changing their euros at banks or using their credit cards. True, Swiss firms use the euro extensively, some do much of their billing in the European currency, and some have even switched their accounting to euros. Some natural hedging takes place as well, although it is not clear how efficient this is. It is noteworthy, however, that some of the largest firms do much of their billing and 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
their accounting in dollars, while others quite happily continue to use the Swiss franc. The fact that “euroization” has not taken place should not really surprise us. There have been other examples of small independent currencies surviving in the neighbourhood of much larger monetary zones. The example of the Canadian dollar comes to mind. The loonie has been floating for the past several decades, and it has served Canada rather well. More generally, there is nothing to be gained in having more than one currency for transaction purposes. Much of the double coincidence of wants gets lost if several currencies circulate simultaneously. “Dollarization” only occurs in those countries where hyperinflation threatens. This is not about to happen in Switzerland, which has the best record of price stability in Europe! The fear of losing our monetary independence was misplaced as well. Over the past five years the SNB has demonstrated that it can act decisively and independently, often well before the ECB. Given its openness, Switzerland was badly affected by the world slowdown. The situation was made worse by the fact that our main trading partner, Germany, was itself severely hit, and to compound our difficulties, the worldwide capital overhang had a very adverse effect on our exporters, many of whom are specialized in the production of capital goods. Special circumstances require special action. From March 2001 to April 2003, the SNB cut interest rates aggressively, lowering the target range for our reference rate, the three-month Libor, by 325 basis points, from 3.5% to just 0.25%. If anything, the differential between Swiss and euro interest rates has slightly widened, putting all fears of a rapid loss of our interest rate advantage to a rest. What about the stability of the external value of the Swiss franc? Here, I must say, our fears proved not just to be unfounded, but the reality turned out to be even more favourable than we could have hoped for. The exchange rate of the Swiss franc against the euro ended up being much steadier than expected, in fact even steadier than it used to be against the German mark, not to mention the French franc and the Italian lira. Over the past five years, the real exchange rate has moved within a relatively narrow band little more than five percentage points wide. Except for the post-September 11 period, when the Swiss franc appreciated markedly, the external value of the franc has largely reflected economic fundamentals. In fact, even the post-9/11 safe-haven effect was relatively mild compared to what we experienced in the past, during the seventies and the eighties, for instance. 4.  A new international monetary order I believe that one could make the case that the introduction of the euro has brought about a new international monetary order, that it has produced an element of stability that benefits many countries, not just Europe’s immediate neighbours, but nations around the globe. As we have seen, movements in the dollar/mark exchange rate were magnified as far as the Swiss franc is concerned in the past, but are much dampened today. When the euro depreciated against the dollar, the Swiss franc did so too, but by a much lesser degree. And later, when the euro appreciated against the dollar, the franc appreciated as well, but again to a lesser extent. In other words, our effective exchange rate has been less affected, the movement of the dollar being offset, at least to some extent, by a movement of the euro in the opposite direction. It seems to me that this phenomenon has benefited not just Switzerland, but also many other countries with their own independent currencies, such as the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, and Norway. This evolution might not last. Perhaps it is the outcome of chance, but it has been persistent enough over the past few years to be noticeable. Maybe one day some smart graduate student will write a thesis on this topic, and confirm or falsify my hypothesis, but in the meantime let me outline why I believe that there are some good reasons for the assumption that the stability of the international monetary system has been enhanced by the creation of the euro. I do not think that anybody would argue that the world as a whole makes up an optimal currency area. Our planet is not yet ready for a single currency. We are therefore bound to live in a world with n, n greater than one, currencies. For the second half of the 20th century, we lived with one dominating currency, the U.S. dollar, and many less important currencies, such as the British pound, the Japanese yen, the German mark, the Swiss franc, and so on. Moreover, the United States is a largely closed economy, so it could regard fluctuations in the external value of the dollar with benign neglect. Of course, most other countries, being rather small and quite open, were fully exposed to turbulences in foreign exchange markets, but there was not much they could do about it. There were several episodes when the internal stability of the dollar was threatened as well, with U.S. inflation rates in the double digits. The flight into more stable currencies put considerable pressure on these. BIS Review 35/2004 3 
Today, the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape in some important respects. First, as the new kid on the block, the euro commands attention and respect. In economic size, the eurozone nearly rivals the United States. There is now an obvious alternative to the dollar as an instrument of portfolio diversification. If investors have doubts about the dollar, there is no longer any need to rush into the Swiss franc, the euro will do just fine. Second, the eurozone, although not quite to the extent of the United States, is a largely closed economy. Movements in the euro are far less devastating than movements of similar magnitude in the Swiss franc or in the German mark. The euro is much more capable than any other currency to take on the role of shock absorber against the U.S. dollar. The eurozone, in some ways, is the large closed economy that the world needed as the counterweight to the U.S. economy. All small open economies, like Switzerland, should benefit from this new international monetary order. There is a third reason why the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape and should fundamentally prove beneficial to the stability of the international monetary system, and that is competition. Even though the U.S. monetary authorities do not have a mandate that is as specifically directed at price stability as the ECB does, investors now have a choice and can vote with their feet. Thus the pressure is on the United States to deliver price stability as well. I find it very unlikely that we should again experience any time soon double digit inflation rates in the U.S., and this is very good news indeed for the good health of the international monetary system. 5.  Conclusion All in all, the introduction of the euro has been a very positive development for the international monetary system and for Switzerland as an economy strongly dependent on world trade.  We benefit from the greater transparency offered by the euro and the lower transaction costs made possible by its creation. Perhaps for the first time in history, we are surrounded by an area that shares the same monetary policy objectives as we do, namely that of price stability. This explains to a large extent why the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate has been relatively stable over the past five years. But the presence of a single European currency has per se also shielded third currencies - like the Swiss franc - from too much volatility in the case of dollar turbulences.  At the same time, we keep the trump card of an independent monetary policy that enables us to respond very rapidly to the specific needs of the Swiss economy. Since 2001, we have thus lowered interest rates more quickly and more decisively than the ECB. With inflation less than 1 percent, we enjoy price stability and our interest rates lie clearly below corresponding rates in the eurozone.  A more homogeneous monetary system in Europe and a more stable international monetary order will help Switzerland to fully benefit from the present recovery of the world economy. 4 BIS Review 35/2004 
Axel A Weber: Financial stability and globalisation Opening address by Professor Dr Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Second Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation on “Financial Stability and Globalisation”, Frankfurt am Main, 3 June 2004. *      *      * It is an exceptional pleasure and an honour for me to welcome you to the Second Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. I would like to extend a special welcome to the distinguished members of the diplomatic corps present this afternoon, Peter W Bodde, US Consul General in Frankfurt and Leonidas Contovounesios, Consul General of the Hellenic Republic in Frankfurt. It is a great pleasure to be able to welcome governors of central banks from all over Europe: Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Banco d’España, Ljubisa Krgovic, Governor of the Central Bank of Montenegro, and Dr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank. I am exceptionally pleased to be able to welcome Professor Helmut Schlesinger, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank from 1991 to 1993. I am glad to have with us today Jürgen Hettinger, President of the Frankfurt Regional Office of the Deutsche Bundesbank. Thank you for hosting this conference. And, last but not least, I would like welcome the distinguished speakers who will make this conference an inspiring event: Professor Giancarlo Corsetti, Professor Gerhard Illing, Professor Philip Lane, Professor Andrew K Rose, Professor Karlhans Sauernheimer, Associate Professor Philip E Strahan. Ladies and gentlemen! I came into office as President of the Deutsche Bundesbank only five weeks ago. I have my roots in academia, and in this line of work I have participated frequently in conferences on monetary issues, not least various conferences hosted by the institution I am now entrusted with. Therefore, my introduction “it is an exceptional pleasure and an honour” is meant literally. 1. The importance of monetary stability The overarching purpose of the Monetary Stability Foundation is to strengthen public awareness of the great importance of monetary stability. This objective is to be pursued mainly by means of financing research on monetary issues, thereby broadening the intellectual foundation of stability policy. In December 2002, the Monetary Stability Foundation held a first conference. Since then, developments - and debates - have underlined just how important the nonstop emphasis on stability is. I would like to briefly comment on three issues that stand out in this respect. They also link the Stability Foundation’s academic approach to central banking in practice. 1. Over the decades, inflation was occasionally declared dead. The latest events in this strand took place in the wake of the New Economy. At the time, it was widely hoped that globalisation and new technologies would put an end to inflation.  The recession following the bursting of the New Economy bubble then even brought about a serious debate on whether deflation had replaced inflation as the main threat to monetary stability. As the world economy regained strength, this perception reversed itself. In the current environment of substantial global economic growth, high energy prices and ample liquidity, the focus has shifted back to inflation.  The hopes for an end to inflation did not materialise. 2. The second development underlining the importance of the Monetary Stability Foundation is being observed in the institutional environment. The institutional framework for monetary stability featured as the topic of the first conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation.  Since then, the institutional foundations of the euro area have repeatedly been faced with the danger of being undermined. The European Convention presented a draft for an EU BIS Review 35/2004 1 
Constitutional Treaty that might considerably weaken the institutional framework of the single currency agreed in the Maastricht Treaty. European Monetary Union is characterised by two key features designed to guarantee monetary stability: a primary objective of maintaining price stability and central bank independence.  The euro is still a very young currency with only a short - albeit encouraging - track record. The sound institutional framework lends credibility to the euro. One of the objections presented by European central bankers has recently been sustained: price stability will remain one of the EU’s goals. I fully appreciate this response to our repeated intervention.  European central bankers’ remaining key concerns in the field of the Constitutional Treaty pertain to the independence of national central banks, an abridged procedure for future changes to the monetary framework, and the ECB being listed among the “other European institutions”. Politicians must not jeopardise the foundations of a stable currency.  This holds also true for the Stability and Growth Pact. This second pillar of the European monetary framework has also come under stress. Governments that hesitated to consolidate their budgets in times of plenty have recently faced the headwind of a weak economy. However, a regulation should not be classified as being inadequate just because it is causing the regulated parties to feel some discomfort.  The objective laid down in the pact, namely achieving a budgetary position which is at least close to balance in the medium term, is an important feature of a stable environment conducive to economic growth. The debate on changing the pact is the wrong debate. The pact is fine. Its enforcement, however, must be improved.  The third development, an intensification of the international debate on financial stability, also links the first and second conferences on monetary stability. In the context of the institutional framework for monetary stability, issues such as crisis prevention and crisis resolution, transparency and how to best organise prudential supervision have already been discussed in this forum.  At this year’s conference we will focus on financial stability issues arising in the context of globalisation. 2. Globalisation and financial stability Globalisation entails considerable benefits for the world economy. They come in the form of higher standards of living not only for the residents of advanced countries, but also for the people in the less and least developed countries, which have increasingly been integrated into the world economy. The liberalisation of international capital flows started in the early 1980s. Since then, the volume of international financial transactions has risen both substantially and rapidly. The opportunities for international portfolio diversification and risk reallocation have broadened markedly. However, the deregulation of international capital flows seems to have come at the cost of an increasing number of international financial crises. In terms of output and welfare losses they tend to be costly. To gain, to maintain and - if necessary - to regain financial stability is a major challenge in a globalised world. In order to properly design appropriate institutions, tools and procedures, we need to understand how globalisation impacts on financial stability. With this conference, the Monetary Stability Foundation seeks to contribute to the understanding of financial stability in the context of globalisation. 3. Tour d’horizon of this conference The conference will start with a stock-taking exercise. The first panel will provide an empirical assessment of how far the “International integration of financial systems” has advanced. The level and composition of gross and net holdings of foreign assets and liabilities are surely a good starting point for quantifying the state of financial globalisation. Their evolution over time may provide useful help in identifying the driving forces behind the growth of international holdings. What is behind what looks 2 BIS Review 35/2004 
like a widespread shift from debt to equity and FDI instruments? What implications should we expect from the ensuing changes in cross-border flows of investment income? The quantitative picture of the web of international financial linkages will be amplified later this afternoon by three contributions highlighting “International contagion in financial markets”. Contagion has become an issue after the Asian financial crisis. To define contagion is not a trivial issue. Did countries suffer from crises in other economies because they were fundamentally in a similar position? Or were economies infected despite sound fundamentals? How and when does contagion happen? Can a country effectively “immunise” itself from contagion? Tomorrow’s session will start with a panel on “Exchange rate regimes and worldwide stability”. Exchange rate regimes are among the main suspects in creating financial instability - if domestic macroeconomic policies are not in line with the chosen exchange rate regime. In choosing an exchange rate regime, it has to be decided which is more important: the advantages afforded by flexibility for domestic policy or the monetary policy credibility that may be gained by an external anchor. Contrary to the widely held bipolar view, intermediate exchange rate regimes have shown some durability. How can the choice of exchange rate systems contribute to worldwide stability? A panel on “Internationalisation of banks and the risk implications” will attempt to shed light on the impact of banks’ international assets on financial stability. It will strive to enquire into the net effect of financial institutions’ international portfolio diversification on financial stability. The stabilising effects of international portfolio diversification contrast with potentially destabilising effects resulting from faulty risk assessment due to information asymmetries. The fifth and last panel of this conference will explore financial stability issues of “Financial systems in emerging markets”. As regards investing financial institutions, the question is which specific risks they incur when “setting up shop” in emerging markets. As regards emerging markets, the internationalisation of the financial system has been deemed as both a blessing and a curse. Host countries sometimes fear that an internationalisation of their banking systems, eg via foreign direct investment, will entail more volatility and more vulnerability. However, the east European has shown that internationalisation has had very positive effects on the efficiency of their financial systems and the economy in general. 4. Concluding remarks This conference is academic in nature; the majority of speakers therefore come from academia. Thank you all for contributing to the Second Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. I am glad that the Bundesbank has again been successful in talking several distinguished policy makers into speaking at this conference. Thank you for enhancing theoretical approaches with the view from the business of policy making. I am especially delighted that Jean-Claude Trichet will join us tonight and will speak at our conference dinner. As I approach the end of my remarks, I would like to thank Professor Hermann Remsperger, Chairman of the Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, and Dr Reiner König, Chairman of the Executive Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, for conceiving and preparing this conference. It is my wish that this conference will ultimately help to improve our understanding of financial stability in a world experiencing rapid globalisation. I now officially declare this conference open and shall give the floor to Professor Remsperger, who will chair today’s session of the Second Conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation. BIS Review 35/2004 3 
Glenn Stevens: Economic conditions and prospects - June 2004 Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia (Queensland Branch), Brisbane, 2 June 2004. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. I plan to cover the evolving economic picture both abroad and at home. As some of you may know, the Bank released a month ago our latest comprehensive treatment of the economy and financial markets. The Governor is also due to appear in front of a Parliamentary Committee on Friday of this week, to speak on the economy. My remarks today, therefore, fit into a rather small window in the unfolding narrative. Accordingly, I will not begin any major new lines of inquiry, but mainly give a brief update on a few of the themes which have been running for some time. The world economy It is still the case that the world economy is gaining strength, and forecasts for economic growth have generally been moving upwards. According to the main official international bodies (the IMF and the OECD), growth in the world economy will be about 4½ per cent in both 2004 and 2005. If that sequence occurs, it will be the strongest two-year growth performance since the late 1970s.  Of course, these figures are just forecasts, not guarantees of performance. But by this stage of the year, it would take something pretty dramatic to change the estimated outcome for 2004 by much. The strong number for next year - which is a fairly recent feature of most people’s forecasts - basically reflects growing confidence that the recovery is well entrenched. It embodies further solid US growth, recognises a marked improvement in economic performance in Japan and ongoing strong growth in Asia. Continental Europe is the main area of softness, though even there things seem to be improving a bit.  As usual, perceptions about the global cycle have been heavily affected by the ebbs and flows of confidence in the American economy. Following a somewhat hesitant early phase of recovery from early 2002 until mid 2003, the more robust performance of the US through the second half of last year and into early 2004 has been characterised by strongly rising corporate profits and an upturn in business investment spending. Over recent months, it has also driven rises in employment levels. This was the key sign for which most observers had been waiting, to indicate that the recovery had reached the self-sustaining stage, where initial demand expansion has produced enough output growth to push up incomes, which in turn feed back into renewed growth in demand. Confirmation of these trends in the US has greatly enhanced confidence about the global upswing.  World GDP GrowthYear-average percentage change024024%%2005200019951990198530-year average1980(cid:132) Forecasts – May 2004Sources: Data – IMF; forecasts – Consensus Economics BIS Review 34/2004 1 
0246810121402468101214%1950US Corporate Profits after Tax and InvestmentPer cent of GDP%196219741986200419561968198019921998Source: Bureau of Economic AnalysisBusiness investmentCorporate profits Once that occurred, it was perhaps inevitable that talk would turn to the question of how much longer official interest rates in the US would remain so low. A point that we have made repeatedly is that, in thinking about interest rates, it is the level of rates which matters and that level has been extremely low in America (and, for that matter, in other major regions or countries like the euro area and Japan). A setting such as this, designed to ward off the risks of deflation and chronic weakness in aggregate demand, has to give way to more normal settings once it is clear that those dangers are abating. The debate the US is going through at present is over when that process of normalisation will start and how quickly it will proceed. Market participants are currently betting that it will begin quite soon - within the next month - but will proceed fairly gradually. In due course, the Japanese and the Europeans will also presumably have such a discussion, though there seems no particular urgency to have it at the moment. Such an adjustment by the US Fed is unlikely to kill the recovery in US aggregate demand - it is more an indication that the Fed thinks the recovery is in solid shape. It would be more worrying if the return to normal interest rates in the US were not in prospect.  0246810121416180246810121416181955US Federal Funds Rate1965197519851995%%2005Sources: Bloomberg; US Federal ReserveExpectations(based on market yields) That said, there is obviously a period of adjustment in financial markets under way as the anticipated changes to the cost of US funds are absorbed. Risk is being re-priced in a wide range of markets. Emerging market bond spreads have moved out a little, though US domestic spreads are little changed. Share prices have softened recently in a number of countries, and especially in Asia. The US dollar has firmed against most currencies.  To a large extent, these movements reflect the unwinding of positions which were prompted by the very low US short-term rates and the resulting search for more yield - and more risk - in various other 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
asset classes. Such adjustments are to be expected once the period of very low US rates looks like it is coming to an end. In fact we should, for the most part, welcome them. On most measures, spreads are still quite low relative to historical norms. Arguably, risk was being underpriced until recently anyway, which is hardly a recipe for longer-run stability. So all in all, a gradual return to a more normal constellation of US interest rates should be seen as a good thing.  lllllllll 020040060080010001200020040060080010001200Emerging Market SpreadsRelative to 10-year US Government bonds19962000BpsLatinAmerica*Asia199820022004* Break in series due to removal of restructured Argentine debt.BpsSource: Bloomberglllllll 02004006008000200400600800US Corporate SpreadsBps BBBAAA 'Junk'  bonds(B-rated)ASource: Bloomberg1997Relative to 7 to10-year US Government bondsBps1998199920002001200220032004All of this attention given to the US economy and the changes to global financial markets as a result of likely changes in US monetary policy is par for the course. More noteworthy of late, however, is the prominence given to the growing role of China in the world economy. China is making a tangible difference to global economic output - and was a key reason, for example, why global output did not slow as much as the output of the advanced country group in 2001 and 2002.  In some quarters, the rise of China as a source of supply of manufactured products on world markets has been seen as a cause for concern - since China has such a large supply of low-cost labour, much of which has not yet been tapped. No doubt, the rise of China is changing the economics of global manufacturing - though it is hardly the first time in history that this kind of thing has occurred. But it is also changing the economics of production of other things. China is not just a source of supply for goods, it is a source of demand for goods and services as well. Indeed, China’s trade surplus with the rest of the world is quite small, and relatively stable, suggesting that China has been putting as much additional demand as supply into the world economy. A number of countries have been affected by the demand side of China’s expansion, not least Australia, where we now see China accounting for about 10 per cent of our foreign trade, up from 5 per cent as recently as 1998. China’s demand for resources to supply its industrial expansion has put upward pressure on prices for steel and its raw materials (iron ore, coking coal), and on the costs of shipping. These effects have amplified the normal cyclical pick-up caused by general recovery in the industrial economies around the world. The Australian resource sector might have been able to supply even more of this demand had more capacity been available, but constraints seem to have been binding in some areas (which, of course, is one reason the effect on prices has been so strong). Presumably there are good prospects for expanding investment in various parts of the resources sector in the years ahead.  The rapid growth of China’s demand for energy has also surely had a tangible impact on oil prices. While there are apparently some short-term special factors at work in the most recent very high oil prices, the trend increase in the global demand for oil is now strongly influenced by China (and other rapidly growing countries in Asia), as shown in the chart below. The figures which put this trend at its most stark are as follows. Over the two years to March this year, global demand for oil rose by about 4 million barrels a day. About 1.5 million barrels of this came from the OECD countries as a group - BIS Review 34/2004 3 
who use over 60 per cent of supply. About 2.1 million barrels a day in additional demand came from Asia including India, with 1.5 million barrels of that from China alone.1  -20246-20246Cumulative Global Oil Demand GrowthSince 1997, million barrels per daySource: International Energy Agency2004OECDmillionbpd200220001998millionbpdOtherChinaAsia(excl. China)Projection Now it is important to keep the recent rise in oil prices in perspective: it is nothing like as large in proportionate terms as occurred in the “OPEC” shocks of 1973 and 1979. The level of real oil prices remains much lower than in either of those episodes and the share of oil in total production costs for advanced economies is much lower than it was in those days.  010203040010203040Oil PriceReal base = January 19702004RealUS$Nominal19991994198919791974US$1984 However, given the extent of Chinese and Asian demand generally, and their likely trend growth in the future, it seems entirely possible that the level of real oil prices of the 1990s will turn out to have been on the low side of what could be the norm in the future.  More generally, we can see a quite important change in relative prices occurring associated with the rise of China: prices for many manufactured goods are declining relative to those of resources. As a supplier of resources and a consumer of manufactures, Australia benefits from this relative price change. No-one can say for sure, of course, whether it will continue for a long time, but it does appear to be in distinct contrast to the previous long-term downward trend in Australia’s terms of trade.                                                       1 Source of these figures is the International Energy Agency (IEA), an inter-governmental body within the OECD.  4 BIS Review 34/2004 
Certainly, it is beyond serious dispute now that the weight of China in the world economy - both in its secular growth rate, and the dynamic of its business cycle - is something which has to be carefully considered.  China has problems, of course - as with any country trying to industrialise rapidly, balancing the rapid growth in demand and supply, and avoiding other problems, is no easy task. Right now the Chinese authorities are attempting to moderate the economy’s growth rate, given clear signs of overheating. Some of those pessimistic about global prospects in 2005 worry that the slowdown will turn out to be abrupt. The fact that China has had a very large build-up in credit, and that its banks carry the legacy of decades of lending to state enterprises on non-commercial criteria, make the job harder. Equally, the authorities have for the past decade shown an impressive capacity to manage the economy quite successfully through some difficult times. Hence, while there is some risk of a slump in China, we should not assume it. Even if an unexpectedly large slowdown did occur, it would be very unlikely to change the long-run outlook for China of strong growth and continuing emergence as one of the world’s largest economies.  I haven’t even mentioned India yet but one should mention it, as an economy with a very large population, and turning out quite strong growth rates over the past few years. We will be hearing a lot more about India’s impact on the global scene during this decade.  The Australian economy The Australian economy has continued grow. In the second half of 2003, real GDP expanded at an annualised pace of over 5 per cent, as the farm sector gained ground on the back of better climatic conditions, and the non-farm economy continued to expand, helped by strong domestic spending and the early stage of a recovery in exports.  It was unlikely that growth at that pace would persist, and according to figures released earlier today, the speed of growth early in 2004 was noticeably more moderate. A range of business surveys suggest that conditions experienced in the first four or five months of 2004, while as strong as those of late 2003, were nonetheless better than average.  Consumer demand is not advancing at the same pace this year as it did in the second half of 2003, though tax reductions in the coming year will presumably offer support to consumer spending. Employment has continued to rise, and the rate of unemployment is at its lowest for over 20 years. While employment growth last year owed a good deal to the effects of high levels of residential construction and the associated demand for materials, of late it looks as though employment in some of the professional services sectors has begun to increase again, after a slower period since mid 2001. Hence, as the anticipated decline in dwelling construction takes shape this year, overall employment levels should continue to increase, even if at a reduced pace from that seen over recent months.  Growth in the state of Queensland, in particular, has been very strong indeed over the past year, and much faster than for the nation as a whole. Consumer spending is recorded as having grown by over 8 per cent through 2003, compared with 5 per cent for the rest of Australia. Dwelling investment spending surged to an all-time high in Queensland at the end of last year, while for the rest of the country it was high, but no higher than the pre-GST peak in 2000. Employment growth has also been faster in the sunshine State than in virtually all the other states. BIS Review 34/2004 5 
Household Consumption Expenditure-20246810-2024681020042002200019981996199419921990Year-ended percentage change%Rest of AustraliaQueenslandSource: ABS%Dwelling Investment40608010012014040608010012014020042002200019981996199419921990June 2000 = 100IndexIndexRest of AustraliaQueenslandSource: ABSQueensland has, of course, the highest rate of population growth of any of the states, with net migration from Victoria and NSW in particular. So we would expect most aggregates to be rising faster than elsewhere, but in 2003 growth in spending per head still outstripped the rest of Australia, and the employment growth sufficiently exceeded growth in the labour force that Queensland’s unemployment rate - which is routinely higher than the national average - closed quite a bit of the gap to the other States. In short, Queensland had a pretty good year. Employment Growth-4-20246-4-20246%%Source:  ABSRest of AustraliaQueensland200420022000199819961992Year to latest three months1994 Unemployment Rate4681046810%%Source:  ABSRest of AustraliaQueensland200420001996199219881984Three-month-ended average The housing market has been a key issue for the economy over the past couple of years and, as you would know, the RBA has had quite a bit to say about it. A misconception that we still see from time to time is that some people seem to think we have been concerned mainly about excessive rates of construction. Construction has been very strong, and there may be over-supply in some areas. But our main concern has not been about the addition of 130,000 to 150,000 new dwellings each year. Rather we have been worried by the market for the existing 7½ million dwellings and the way in which they were changing hands for higher and higher prices, with an associated build-up in debt levels. That is, we have been worried about the housing market as an asset market, and about the borrowing behaviour of participants in that market. The concern was not out of a desire to target house prices, but more over the potential risks to macroeconomic stability from a major boom - and possible bust - in the household sector’s main asset class.  On the most recent readings, there has been a distinct softening in most of the major housing markets, with more than one data series showing an outright fall in prices in the March quarter in several cities. This was associated with a decline in the demand for credit, though on the most recent data that demand still seems very strong. House prices in Brisbane and the Gold Coast declined a little on these measures, though not by as much as those further south.  6 BIS Review 34/2004 
050100150200250300350400450500050100150200250300350400450500Median House PricesSource: Australian Property Monitors2004Sydney$'000$'00020022000199819961994GoldCoastBrisbaneMelbourne In our judgement, this is a welcome development. While various fundamental reasons can be advanced for dwelling prices to have risen noticeably in the 1990s, it was hard to avoid the conclusion that strong speculative forces were at work over the past couple of years. That was not a healthy state of affairs and the sooner it passed, the better.  It is just about impossible, of course, to predict with any precision how all of this will unfold from here. Much will depend on what else is occurring in the economy. In individual cases, the extent of leverage will be very important. My own view is that the palpable sense of disappointment being felt by many leveraged investors in residential property is likely to grow further for the next year or so, possibly longer. For many owner-occupiers, on the other hand, a moderate decline in prices should not create major discomfort, in an environment of ongoing growth in employment and wages, as well as reduced taxes. In fact, it is hard to imagine a much more benign backdrop for the aftermath of an asset and credit boom than one where growth in employment and income is continuing, the world economy is picking up and the Australian economy is relatively free of other domestic imbalances.  Even so, we anticipate that housing market developments will be a factor at work in reducing the rapid pace of growth in domestic spending to something more moderate. Rising house prices and the capacity to collateralise the higher wealth has accommodated a rise in consumption which has consistently outpaced the rise in income over several years. In a world where dwelling prices have stopped rising and even declined somewhat, perceptions of ongoing rapid increases in wealth are presumably now in the process of dissipating. This will weaken positive wealth effects, and could possibly lead to a partial reversal in time. On the other hand, the earlier increases in dwelling prices were very large, and even with the latest data showing declines, a big cumulative rise in wealth has occurred over the past decade, most of which has not been tapped. So there may yet be some expansionary impetus in the pipeline from those earlier gains.  BIS Review 34/2004 7 
03690369550650750550650750Consumption, Wealth and Income*Current pricesSources: ABS; RBA200320011999199719951993*Disposable income net of depreciationIncomeConsumptionRatio of wealth to income Year-ended percentage change%%%% The net effect is therefore hard to judge, but on balance, we are inclined to think that consumer demand will grow more in line with income over the next year or two - that is, by something less than last year’s cracking pace. That, together with some decline in dwelling construction activity, will result in slower growth in overall domestic spending. With the world economy doing quite well, on the other hand, external demand is expected to be stronger - the international environment will be boosting Australia, rather than restraining it. It is encouraging that this picture seems, slowly, to be emerging in the available data. Risks to this outlook stemming from a rising Australian dollar have abated somewhat of late. The result then is expected to be good growth overall, and more balanced growth (as between external and domestic demand) than seen for some time.  Inflation will be affected over the period ahead by the fluctuations in the exchange rate and oil prices, but most likely will be consistent with our 2-3 per cent medium-term target. Internationally, the scene has turned (in the space of only twelve months) from one of concern about deflation to one of inflation going higher. Fears of widespread deflation were, in my view, always a little overdone, and the swing in some quarters to fear of inflation might also be unduly pessimistic. Nonetheless, it seems we are in a new phase of the international cycle and these developments will bear close watching. At this stage for Australia, though, prospects seem to be for acceptable inflation performance over the coming year or so. I will leave further elaboration of the Bank’s view of the outlook, since the Governor will do this on Friday. Conclusion Overall, this is a pretty positive picture for the Australian economy. “Beautiful one day, perfect the next” would perhaps be an overstatement. But generally good economic conditions offer, I trust, ample opportunity for profitable enterprise on the part of CEDA members and others here in Queensland. I wish you every success. 8 BIS Review 34/2004 
Svein Gjedrem: On monetary policy and the krone Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to Industrinettverket Sunnhordland, Stord, 7 June 2004.  The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 26 May, Inflation Report 1/04 and on previous speeches. The charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * The primary objective of monetary policy is to ensure nominal stability.  There were wide fluctuations in the Norwegian economy in the 1970s and 1980s. Economic developments were marked by high and variable inflation. Inflation rose gradually and it took a long time before it fell.  The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind these pronounced swings in the Norwegian economy. With a policy of low interest rates and devaluations, inflation took root. Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation and the value of tax- deductible interest expenses rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 were unable in the long term to prevent a decline in the manufacturing sector. On the contrary, they proved to be self-reinforcing. The wide fluctuations culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s, and a rise in costs as a consequence of the spring 1986 wage settlement. A pronounced downturn and high unemployment followed at the end of the 1980s.  In order to achieve nominal stability, monetary policy must provide a nominal anchor. Since the Second World War, there have been several monetary policy reforms in Norway. In the period between 1972 and 1986, monetary policy was to a limited extent focused on stabilising the rise in prices.  During this period, inflation was high and variable. Consumer prices in Norway rose almost twice as much as in Germany. At the same time, the value of the Norwegian krone against the German mark was almost halved, contributing to high imported inflation.  From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble and the cost shock, it was recognised that a substantial revision of economic policy would be necessary and that the problems created by inflation had to be taken seriously. From 1986 to 1992, Norway operated a fixed exchange rate regime. The fixed exchange rate was the anchor for inflation in Norway. The difference between inflation in Norway and Germany narrowed substantially. Deteriorating competitiveness due to high wage growth would no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. Substantial emphasis was placed on the importance of wage formation for developments in employment. Only when wage growth dropped below the level of our trading partners did unemployment begin to fall and the manufacturing sector began to pick up. Thus, the fixed exchange rate policy was not introduced in order to strengthen the internationally exposed business sector. On the contrary, it was a breach in the approach whereby monetary policy and frequent devaluations had been used to shelter these sectors. The fixed exchange rate was an intermediate target for achieving low and stable inflation.  The exchange rate remained stable up to autumn 1996, partly because wage growth was low and overall demand did not generate pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show wider fluctuations. The experience of the last half of the 1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments in international financial markets led to more pronounced fluctuations. And more fundamentally, when labour market pressures rose and incomes policy failed, exchange rate developments no longer provided signals for wage formation and fiscal policy. High petroleum revenues, fiscal slippage and expectations of increased use of petroleum revenues contributed to this. The exchange rate was therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor. Towards the end of the 1990s, increased emphasis was placed on the fundamental preconditions for exchange rate stability. Monetary policy instruments were oriented with a view to bringing price and cost inflation down towards the price stability objective of the European Central Bank (ECB).  BIS Review 34/2004 1 
Monetary policy In most countries, price stability, or low and stable inflation, is the objective of monetary policy. Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that the absence of price stability has resulted in unstable output and employment.  History shows that higher growth cannot ultimately be achieved in exchange for higher inflation. An economic policy that fuels inflation does not generate higher economic growth. On the contrary, it paves the way for subsequent recession and unemployment.  After the Second World War, there was a long period of trying to achieve price stability by means of various intermediate targets such as a fixed exchange rate and a target for growth in the money supply. The first explicit inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK in 1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. Inflation targeting is now the norm in small and medium-sized open economies. Denmark is an important exception. Since the mid-1980s, Denmark has conducted a very disciplined fiscal and wage policy. Combined with ERM II membership, this has enabled Denmark to maintain a credible and successful fixed exchange rate regime.  Pursuant to the Regulation on Monetary Policy laid down by the Government on 29 March 2001, the operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation.  Norway’s mandate is as follows: “Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments. At the same time, monetary policy shall underpin fiscal policy by contributing to stable developments in output and employment.  Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  Norges Bank’s implementation of monetary policy shall, in accordance with the first paragraph, be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. [...]”  The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth its intentions. The last paragraph specifies what Norges Bank is required to do.  The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the internal value of the krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation fosters economic growth and stability in financial and property markets.  The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s external value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments.  With open trade with other countries and free capital movements, we do not have the instruments to fine-tune the krone exchange rate. The krone has appreciated when economic activity has been high and there have been expectations of a wide interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. The krone has depreciated when activity has declined and the interest rate differential has narrowed. There is also a strong tendency for the krone to revert to a level that stabilises the price level in Norway relative to our trading partners, measured in a common currency.1The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. The inflation target is such an anchor.  The conduct of monetary policy Norges Bank’s operational conduct of monetary policy shall be oriented towards low and stable inflation. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to variability in inflation as well as variability in output and employment. Inflation shall be 2½ per cent over time. Monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags, and the Bank must therefore be forward-looking in interest-rate setting. In the operational conduct of monetary policy in Norway, the path of inflation and the real economy in the period ahead will be taken into account.                                                        1  See Akram, Farooq Q (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk Økonomisk Tidsskrift, 118, pp 89-112. 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
Normally, the interest rate is set with a view to achieving inflation of 2½ per cent at the two-year horizon. This time horizon usually provides a reasonable balance between stabilising inflation on the one hand and smoothing fluctuations in output and employment on the other. If extraordinary conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than two years, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. The same applies if special emphasis is placed on developments in financial markets.  There is one main monetary policy instrument: the interest rate. The interest rate is set with a view to achieving low and stable inflation, while at the same time seeking to avoid substantial variations in output and employment.  In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour, capital and technology and by the ability to adapt, but in the short and medium term monetary policy can also have an impact on the real economy.  Flexible exchange rates In a small, open economy, the exchange rate is an important channel for monetary policy.  The krone fluctuates. This is not surprising because other countries’ currencies also fluctuate. The krone exchange rate is the price of our currency measured in a foreign currency. Developments in other countries are just as important for the krone as developments in the Norwegian economy. Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest rates as well as output and employment.  The chart shows the effective exchange rate for Norway and a number of other small countries with inflation targeting. Exchange rate fluctuations are approximately the same for Norway, Sweden and Canada, whereas the krone exchange rate fluctuates less than the exchange rate for Australia and New Zealand. Therefore, the krone does not stand out as particularly unstable compared with other countries’ currencies.  The forward exchange and options markets have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces transaction costs and it is easier to find counterparties. This has provided companies with greater scope for hedging against foreign exchange risk. Instruments that reduce the risks associated with a floating krone are increasingly being used, also in Norway.  Hedging against fluctuations in the krone involves costs for businesses. A krone that is stable - but too strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - but weak - is a source of high inflation.  Petroleum revenues generally provide substantial, but uneven currency inflows into Norway. The currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and large variations in the exchange rate. This tendency is countered when the annual use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget is predictable and independent of annual revenue flows, and the remainder is invested abroad.  Investments by the Government Petroleum Fund in foreign currencies create a capital outflow that contributes to curbing the appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability.  Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact on inflation and output. When there are prospects of moderate economic activity, low wage growth and low inflation, Norges Bank will reduce the interest rate. This will normally result in a depreciation of the krone. Prices for imported goods and services will increase. A weaker krone strengthens the competitiveness of Norwegian enterprises and indirectly leads to higher output, employment and inflation.  Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to exchange rate movements. During periods of political and economic unrest, investors may choose individual currencies as a safe haven - often the Swiss franc. In autumn 2002, the Norwegian krone was probably also perceived as a safe haven. In addition, oil prices rose as a result of the uncertainty associated with the war in Iraq.  Since December 2002, the interest rate has been reduced by a total of 5¼ percentage points. The krone depreciated by about 13 per cent from its strongest level in January 2003 up to summer 2003. In autumn 2003, the krone showed a tendency to appreciate against the euro. This partly reflected BIS Review 34/2004 3 
lowered market expectations concerning an interest rate increase abroad and expectations that interest rates might rise earlier in Norway than in other countries. At the same time, the euro appreciated in relation to other currencies. Changes in the krone resulted in an unintended tightening of monetary policy. The krone depreciated again in December, however, owing to low inflation figures and a reduction in interest rates. The interest rate reduction was probably of considerable importance as it eliminated the excess return on NOK investments.  The krone has again appreciated since last winter. Parallels can be drawn with the situation towards the end of 2002. The current high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high for a long period may have been important for the appreciation of the krone. When there is considerable uncertainty with regard to future developments in oil prices, market participants may hedge against risk by investing in NOK.  As mentioned earlier, the Petroleum Fund acts as a buffer against wide fluctuations in the krone exchange rate as a result of petroleum revenues. An increase in petroleum revenues will normally also result in higher capital outflow from the Petroleum Fund. The market may at times have a tendency to underestimate this stabilisation mechanism. If oil prices develop through the rest of 2004 in line with current forward prices, and the other assumptions in the Revised National Budget for 2004 for calculating allocations to the Petroleum Fund for 2004 prove to be correct, purchases of foreign currency for the Petroleum Fund may be resumed this year. This will then be in addition to the regular transfers of profit from the State’s Direct Financial Interest in petroleum activities (SDFI) to the Petroleum Fund, which are invested abroad.  Higher oil prices mean higher revenues for the oil companies. International and Norwegian oil companies with activities in Norway increase their capital outflow when profits increase. Thus, in the short and medium term, cumulative profits in the petroleum sector generate little added capital in the domestic economy.  If petroleum revenues are disregarded, Norway has a current account deficit. The deficit has been increasing in recent months, and this may also, in isolation, boost demand for foreign exchange in the Norwegian foreign exchange market.  The krone appreciation has probably been affected by shifts in themes in the international foreign exchange markets, due in part to an upward adjustment of interest rate expectations in the US in April. In addition, financial market expectations of higher interest rate increases in Norway in 2005 and 2006 relative to other countries have probably contributed. A self-reinforcing mechanism may have been functioning for a short period after the krone began to rise in value at the beginning of March this year.  Interest rate developments abroad may have a considerable influence on movements in the krone exchange rate. The inflation outlook in Norway implies that Norway will not be the frontrunner when other countries increase interest rates. As mentioned earlier, themes shift in foreign exchange markets. Norges Bank does not have the instruments for fine-tuning the exchange rate.  Normally, Norges Bank will not intervene in the foreign exchange market in order to influence the exchange rate. Foreign exchange market intervention, irrespective of whether foreign exchange is bought or sold, is not an appropriate instrument for influencing the krone over a longer period. We do not wish to act in a way that may trigger a game situation in the foreign exchange market. Foreign exchange intervention rather than a change in the interest rate may give ambiguous signals to foreign exchange operators and a game situation may arise. However, interventions may be appropriate if the krone deviates substantially from the level that the Bank judges to be reasonable in relation to fundamentals, and if exchange rate developments weaken the prospect of achieving the inflation target. Interventions may also be appropriate in response to pronounced short-term fluctuations in the krone when liquidity in the foreign exchange market falls to a very low level.  Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, when inflation is low and stable, the exchange rate will generally stabilise over time. When inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading partners for a longer period, the krone has generally depreciated. When inflation in Norway is expected to be broadly in line with that of other countries, the exchange rate will usually also return to its normal range following periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak.  The advantage of a flexible exchange rate is perhaps most evident when the economy is sluggish. If the krone were to remain at a level that is too strong, nominal wages would have to remain unchanged over a longer period or fall in order to bolster companies and jobs. This only occurs when unemployment is very high. With a flexible exchange rate, a depreciation of the krone can also boost competitiveness. A flexible exchange rate can reduce fluctuations in employment and output.  4 BIS Review 34/2004 
Empirical studies2 have also suggested that economic growth in industrialised countries with floating exchange rates has been as strong as, and often stronger than, growth in countries with a stable exchange rate. A precondition is that there is an economic policy framework so that inflation does not spin out of control.  The real exchange rate The chart shows developments in two measures of the real krone exchange rate, i.e. consumer prices and relative labour costs in Norway relative to trading partners, measured in a common currency. The real exchange rate measured by relative labour costs in a common currency is an expression of the cost competitiveness of Norwegian companies. The real krone exchange rate as measured in terms of developments in relative prices is an expression of the Norwegian krone’s purchasing power. When the curves in the chart are above zero, the exchange rate is stronger and competitiveness weaker than the average level since 1970. The real exchange rate has fluctuated considerably over time and has deviated substantially from the average level over longer periods. Nevertheless, there has been a tendency for the real exchange rate to revert to this level. In the chart, the point for 2004 shows the real exchange rate with wage and inflation projections for 2004 from Inflation Report 1/2004. In relative prices, the real exchange rate is now about 2 per cent weaker than the average since 1970, whereas it is almost 4 per cent stronger than its historical average measured in terms of relative labour costs.  Economic developments Interest rate expectations have been revised upwards in a number of countries.  Growth has picked up in the US. As in the second half of 2003, growth is primarily being driven by private consumption and business investment. Following a surprisingly long period of weak labour market developments, employment has begun to edge up and is now higher than at the same time last year. In recent months, inflation has increased from a very low level. As a result, interest rate expectations have been revised upwards, and the key rate in the US is expected to be raised at the end of June.  In the euro area, inflation has been approximately in line with the objective defined by the European Central Bank. The preliminary estimate for May points towards rising inflation, particularly as a result of higher oil prices. Capacity utilisation in the euro area is low and unemployment remains high. Growth potential is weaker than in the US, although GDP growth picked up in the first quarter. As in the US, private consumption is an important factor driving growth. Increased net exports also contributed to growth in the euro area in the first quarter. Interest rate expectations in the euro area have also been revised upwards somewhat recently. The market now expects the ECB to raise interest rates at the end of 2004 or the beginning of 2005.  Interest rate expectations were continuously revised downwards up to March 2004. Interest rates abroad have been unusually low for 2½ years. This has been the greatest challenge for our monetary policy. Even though a somewhat swifter rise is now expected, it appears that interest rates among our most important trading partners will remain low for a period ahead.  In Norway, output growth has picked up after a growth pause. The interest rate reductions since 2002 have contributed to the turnaround and a soft landing for the economy. Private consumption is showing fairly strong growth. Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in the Norwegian economy in the period ahead.  The analyses in Inflation Report 1/2004 indicate that inflation will remain low for a period, then rise through the summer and autumn. The depreciation of the krone from January 2003 and up to last winter is expected to push up prices for imported consumer goods, while the recent appreciation will have a dampening effect.                                                        2  See Kenneth Rogoff, Aasim M Husain, Ashoka Mody, Robin Brooks and Nienke Oomes (2003): “Evolution and Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes”, IMF Working Paper, 03/243, Eduardo Levy-Yeyati and Frederico Sturzenegger (2003): “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth”, American Economic Review, September 2003, pp 1173-93, and Jeannine Bailliu, Robert Lafrance and Jean-Francois Perrault (2003): “Does Exchange Rate Policy Matter for Growth?”, International Finance, 6:3, pp 381-414. BIS Review 34/2004 5 
In both March and April, inflation in Norway was approximately as projected in the Inflation Report. In April, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 0.2 per cent. Adjusted for some temporary factors, the year-on-year rise was 0.5 per cent.3 The rate of increase in the last three months was 1.1 per cent annualised.4 TNS Gallup’s expectations survey indicates that expectations concerning inflation ahead are stable at about 2½ per cent.  As you know, Norges Bank has established a regional network. In the interview round conducted earlier this spring, our contacts in Region South-West reported that the pick-up in the economy is broadening out and gaining strength, and that it is no longer solely driven by stronger household demand. In addition to a high level of activity in the construction industry and strong growth in retail trade, the upturn is now also being driven by higher exports and increased activity in the petroleum industry. Optimism seems to be holding up, and the market outlook for the next six months is bright for all sectors, although brightest for retail trade and construction. So far, optimism has only resulted in a moderate willingness to invest. In general, investment remains at a normal, average level. The exception is housing investment and investment within retail trade. In contrast to earlier periods, several sectors, such as petroleum-related manufacturing, retail trade and services for the business sector, are now reporting rising employment.  Growth in the Norwegian economy is probably somewhat stronger than projected in Inflation Report 1/04. On the other hand, capacity utilisation at the end of 2003 may have been somewhat lower than projected earlier. Consumer prices have moved approximately in line with projections in Inflation Report 1/2004.  The aim of monetary policy is higher inflation. With the current low level of inflation, it is appropriate to be particularly vigilant with regard to developments in consumer prices. However, consumer prices may show random variations from one month to the next. We now have several monthly observations showing a rise in prices that is consistent with the most recent forecasts. Later this year, we will receive further confirmation of whether consumer prices are rising in line with our projections. We also place emphasis on avoiding imbalances in the real economy. The economy is probably approaching a normal rate of capacity utilisation. When inflation increases from a very low level, this will provide a basis for gradually moving towards a more normal short- term interest rate level in Norway. This may counter excessive credit growth and excessive pressures on domestic resources in the medium term. Interest rate developments abroad may have a considerable influence on movements in the krone exchange rate. The inflation outlook in Norway implies that Norway will not be the frontrunner when other countries increase interest rates.  Interest rates were left unchanged at Norges Bank’s Executive Board meeting on 26 May 2004. Norges Bank’s key interest rate, the sight deposit rate, therefore remains at 1.75 per cent. According to Norges Bank’s assessment, with a sight deposit rate of 1.75 per cent at present, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2½ per cent is greater than the probability that it will be higher.                                                        3  Adjusted for the effect of the interest rate’s direct impact on house rents, changes in parental payments to day-care centres and for special factors relating to indirect tax changes earlier in the year. 4  Seasonally adjusted, three-month moving average recalculated as an annual rate. 6 BIS Review 34/2004 
Guy Quaden: Challenges for the European economy  Speech by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the Foreign Bankers’ Association in the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 27 May 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Members of the Foreign Bankers’ Association in the Netherlands,  I am very pleased and indeed I think it is a great honour for me to have been asked to be the keynote speaker at the 2004 Annual General Meeting of your Association. As you have noticed I have decided to talk about “Challenges for the European Economy” but of course I fully realize that I myself am facing a great challenge this evening, as I am aware that I am following in the footsteps of a large number of distinguished speakers you have invited for your previous lectures. I would only like to refer to Jean-Claude Trichet, Otmar Issing, Eddy George or David Dodge, colleagues or former colleagues within the Eurosystem or the G10 Governors’ Group. I hope my presentation will be as interesting as that of my colleagues I have the greatest admiration for. The European economy is facing many challenges: consolidating the current recovery, redressing public finances which have deteriorated in many countries, reducing unemployment which is still too high and preserving the social cohesion, preparing for the ageing process and in particular its financial consequences, but I think one of them is now the most important: improving Europe’s growth potential. Its realisation is a prerequisite for meeting the other challenges mentioned. From the outset I want to make it absolutely clear that I am neither a eurosceptic nor a europessimist. So, I fully acknowledge and admire the resounding success European integration has achieved in two fields over the past few years. As a central banker I would of course first like to refer to the introduction of the euro which, as you all know, was brought about in two stages. On 1 January 1999 financial markets started using the euro while the single monetary policy of the Eurosystem was implemented. Three years later the introduction of euro notes and coins led to the general use of the single currency by all economic agents, thereby doing away with national currencies. This changeover to the single currency was the final touch of European monetary integration and had a profound effect on the deepening of the single market through the elimination of the exchange risk, the reduction in transaction costs and the increase in price transparency. This improvement of the single market will enhance the overall efficiency of the European economy and, other things being equal, also its growth performance. However, it is doubtful whether the population of our countries correctly perceived the latter advantage. Indeed, the introduction of the euro unfortunately coincided with a severe slump in economic activity: while in 2000 real GDP growth in the euro area reached 3.5 p.c. it declined during the following years to reach a mere 0.4 p.c. in 2003. Earlier this month European integration achieved another major success. Ten new member states joined the European Union, which now makes European reunification almost complete. However, this historic event occurred immediately after a period of sluggish economic growth which left the European economy somewhat weakened. Therefore, the enlargement, instead of generating enthusiasm, has in many instances given rise to misgivings among the population and even among the enterprises. The concern regards the possible delocalisation of enterprises and significant job losses. At microeconomic and sectoral level, the integration of the ten new Member States will undoubtedly entail some adjustments and shifts but overall it should result in a win-win situation. The past decade has already brought a strong expansion of trading links between the old and new EU Member States. As purchasing power in those countries catches up and their markets become more accessible, European firms are set to expand their potential outlets while the continuing dismantling of trade barriers and harmonisation of the regulatory framework will gradually create a level playing field. The expansion of trade leading to increasing specialisation, and hence greater productivity, as well as consumers having a wider choice will produce benefits that are much larger than the costs of integration. BIS Review 34/2004 1 
These two recent major events show that insufficient growth is a real cause for concern for the population in our countries which feels insecure about their employment. This factor obscures the achievements European integration has reached and so prevents people from believing in the dynamism of European unification. Therefore weak growth could be a factor entailing growing euroscepticism, especially in Western Europe. For the coming months a reasonable optimism is justified. While the latest positive signals need to be confirmed by future developments, they underpin the expectation that the gradual recovery in the euro area will continue and will strengthen over time. The conditions are in place. First, the global economic upturn continues to be robust and broadly based, both geographically and across sectors, and world trade has also strengthened. In this context of a favourable external environment, euro area exports are expected to grow significantly this year and the next. Second, favourable financing conditions, improvements in corporate efficiency and earnings and the strength of global demand help investment. Over time, consumer spending should also be supported by growth in real disposable income and better labour market conditions. The latest data point to a stronger than expected recovery of real economic activity in the euro area at the beginning of 2004. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area real GDP increased by 0.6 p.c. quarter on quarter in the first quarter of 2004, after rising by 0.4 p.c. in the fourth quarter of 2003 (revised upwards from 0.3 p.c.). Concerning the prospects, the slight decline in May in the two business confidence indexes which are the most closely watched in the euro area - the German IFO and the National Bank of Belgium index - does not question the strong improvement recorded since the end of last year. Obviously the consolidation of the recovery is, as often, subject to some risks and uncertainties. Consumer confidence is still relatively weak in many countries and the strong rise of oil prices is of course not good news for the European economy. There is no free lunch. The strong growth in the United States and Asia has sustained economic activity in the rest of the world, but has also caused a rise in commodity prices. As regards oil, it is clear geopolitical uncertainties also contribute to rising prices. However one should not overdramatise either.The solidity of the euro exchange rate has limited rising oilbills for us. Moreover, owing to energy saving measures and the use of other types of fuel the relative weight of oil in the production of goods and services has declined markedly over the past thirty years. On an annual basis, the latest public and private sector forecasts point to growth in the euro area of 1.6 p.c. to 1.7 p.c. in 2004 and more than 2 p.c. next year. This is however not a reason to be satisfied and complacent. In the EU or in the eurozone we speak of a recovery when growth is approaching 2 p.c. while in the US they speak of a recession when growth is falling to 2 p.c. ! And, on the other hand, while most of the rest of the world is already enjoying robust growth, the recovery in Europe remains gradual and overly dependent on booming international trade. What is also needed are efforts to make the European economy more resistant to external shocks as those which have reduced its growth in the latest years and to increase its long term growth potential. Europe has to cope with a structural problem of low economic growth. The growth performance of the euro area is weak from an international point of view, in particular vis-à-vis the United States: over the past 10 years the American economy has shown an average GDP growth of 3.3 p.c., while the euro area could only reach an economic growth of 2 p.c. The euro area only succeeded in achieving a higher growth rate in 2001 when the United States were hit by a severe but short slowdown. The following years the American economy however showed a much stronger recovery than the euro area and now again acts as the main growth engine for the world economy. Yet it is important to note that data for the eurozone are averages for twelve countries and that a country like Finland in the euro area (and more generally the Nordic countries) has booked in the most recent decade performances in the field of growth and employment rates which are comparable to those of the US and are much better than those of countries like Germany and Italy. Given an unequal population growth - it is higher in the US - a further analysis shows that the gap in real GDP growth between the US and the euro area that opened up in the mid-1990s is half the size if measured in per capita terms. The remainder is due to differences in productivity growth (the increase in overall labour productivity in the US, measured by real GDP per person employed, reached on average 1.9 p.c. in the last 10 years, almost twice as much as the 1 p.c. recorded in the euro area) and to a much lower level of labour utilisation in the euro area. In the euro area unemployment rates 2 BIS Review 34/2004 
are currently around 3 percentage points higher, labour force participation rates more than 10 percentage points lower and annual hours worked per employed person lower by more than 300 hours. Europe is of course not the US. It has its own specificities which should be taken into account. So at least part of the gap in average hours worked between the US and the euro area should be attributed to structural preferences rather than to structural rigidites. However, when discussing this issue it has to be borne in mind that households also take into account the institutional environment, including tax, social security and pension systems when deciding on their labour supply. Moreover, the problem to what extent the present European system is sustainable cannot be ignored. The so-called European model has come under increasing pressure from demographic factors. Further policy changes towards stimulating labour supply are inevitable if living standards and social cohesion are to be preserved. Unlike social preferences and rigidities, macroeconomic policies m ust not be seen as an explanation of the weaker growth in the euro area. First of all this holds true for monetary policy. As you know, the Treaty of Maastricht unambiguously provides that maintaining price stability constitutes the primary objective of the European Central Bank. According to the definition of the ECB which was clarified about a year ago and which aims to create a stable anchor for price expectations, price stability implies an annual rise in the harmonised index of consumer price for the euro area below but close to 2 p.c. This objective must be maintained in the medium term. Central bankers can not prevent external shocks, such as a rise of commodity prices on the international markets, from resulting in a temporary rise of inflation. But, they have to preclude second-round effects. In its conduct of monetary policy, the ECB has already gained a high degree of credibility with market participants as is shown by moderate inflation expectations. These expectations remaining in line with its target the ECB was able to cut its key interest rate to historically very low levels (2 p.c. in nominal terms and actually zero in real terms). Monetary policy thus made its own contribution towards stabilising economic activity in the euro area. Ensuring price stability, as well as confidence in the euro, is the best contribution to higher and sustainable growth the ECB can make because it also allows for the advantage of low medium and long term market rates which in many European countries are still more important for the financing of investments by enterprises, households and government. In the fiscal sphere, almost all the governments in the euro zone allowed the automatic stabilisers to take full effect during the recent slowdown, and that effect was often reinforced by discretionary measures. Between 2000 and 2003, the budgetary deficit of general government in the euro area has grown from 0.9 p.c. of GDP to 2.7 p.c. The deficits of some countries have even exceeded the threshold of 3 p.c. Fiscal policy has thus not been an impediment to recovery. One might however wonder whether the stimulation of the economy intended by the fiscal easing in many countries was not eroded by the adverse impact which such a relaxation of discipline can have on the climate of confidence. It seems that people in Europe more and more have a “Ricardian perception” of fiscal deficits. They are more aware of the enormous challenges and costs our ageing society entails. People in the different European countries are really worried about the long-term sustainability of public finances. High fiscal deficits will only worsen their anxiety and so incite them to increase their precautionary savings. In this context, the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact are appropriate. It is not correct to describe it as a fiscal straitjacket. Starting from a budget in balance or in surplus at the peak of the cycle, a country can let the automatic stabilisers fully operate when the activity is slowing down. The main problem with the Pact is, I think, that better incentives are needed to respect fiscal discipline during good economic times. So I hope that the forthcoming recovery will be the right moment for the European governments now facing budgetary difficulties, to put their finances again on the right track, so that in that field it will be BIS Review 34/2004 3 
possible to reconcile short time flexibility with long term sustainability. In that case fiscal policy may again become an element of the required lasting macroeconomic stability. It is by paying more attention to the quality of public finances and by rendering the structure of taxes and that of expenses more growth oriented that Governments can contribute to stimulating Europe’s growth potential. I refer to expenditures such as education and improvement of human capital, public investment in infrastructure and research and development. R & D could become a comparative advantage of Europe. At the moment Europe invests 1.9 p.c. of GDP in R & D and is thus lagging behind the US figures and the Lisbon target (3 p.c.). Over the past years, European policymakers have become more aware of this growth problem Europe is facing. So, in March 2000, during the Lisbon summit, an ambitious strategy was adopted aiming to increase the rate of sustainable economic growth and even to enable Europe to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world in 2010. In order to achieve such a strategic goal the Lisbon agenda has brought together the different strands of reform policies on product, labour and capital markets aiming at promoting a more efficient allocation of resources and at higher growth potential. Moreover, in order to facilitate monitoring of progress with reforms, quantitative targets have been fixed to measure progress in particular on the labour market in achieving for instance higher participation and employment rates. The Lisbon agenda was excellent in terms of diagnosis. Until now it has however not been given a sufficiently powerful implementation. One cannot say that there was no progress in the last years in the field of structural reforms, but much remains to be done. The pace of reform needs to be significantly stepped up if the Lisbon targets are to be achieved. The review carried out by the high level group chaired by former Prime Minister Wim Kok provides an excellent opportunity to accelerate the process. Progress has been most tangible in deregulating and integrating product and financial markets. Since the introduction of the euro, the pace of financial markets’ reform has been impressive. This includes policy-induced reform, such as the Financial Services Action Plan initiated by the European Commission in the spring of 1999. Reform also covers market-led initiatives, as for instance the development of electronic trading platforms. As you know, the different financial markets have reached different levels of integration. So integration in euro money markets was achieved very quickly after the introduction of the new currency while for instance the euro area equity market, despite advances such as the setting up of Euronext, remains among the least integrated. Thus there is still need for continuation and completion. New progress should result from the cohesive and effective interplay of free competition, coordinated action by all market participants and policy enforcement by public authorities. Much progress has also been made regarding the integration and level of competition in productmarkets. However substantial barriers to free competition continue to exist, particularly preventing the integration of services’ markets and effective competition in network industries. Fostering competition in these fields should also contribute to a downward effect on prices. Further regulatory reforms should be accompanied by a sustained reduction in state aid - particularly if it constitutes economically questionable and sector-specific measures. In the end, this will promote the entry of new players, enhance innovation and reduce the tax burden. High unemployment and insufficient employment rates are still preoccupying. The labour market participation rates of women and the youngest and oldest age groups remain too weak in many countries. Thus far, progress with the implementation of labour market reforms has been uneven in the euro area. In some countries, significant achievements in terms of lower unemployment are already visible. Others are lagging behind. It is important to enhance the flexibility of labour markets to make the whole European economy better able to absorb economic shocks. Reforms are also needed not only to reduce non-wage labour costs and increase incentives for job creation but also to ensure the sustainability of the social security systems. The challenges are known and the analyses are completed. Now the implementation should be focused on. As I have said at the beginning of my speech, I am neither a eurosceptic nor a europessimist. So I believe Europe can implement the Lisbon agenda. The introduction of the euro was a splendid example of a not easy but successful structural reform. It can be and it should be followed by others. 4 BIS Review 34/2004 
The framework through which the Lisbon agenda is implemented relies largely on a peer pressure mechanism, mainly depending on goodwill of governments in individual EU countries. The pressure must be reinforced, including by clearly identifying and publicising successful and lagging country cases accross the EU and possibly industrialised countries more generally. Communication must also be improved. The transition from the pre-reform to the post-reform equilibrium conditions normally takes time and we must recognise that within this period some uncertainty may occur. For this reason the implementation of social reforms requires a strong leadership and a continuous explanation effort. We have to convince our public opinion that our countries would be better off - with more growth and more jobs - if we could deliver the reforms of the Lisbon agenda. I shall conclude with a last remark: the current recovery of economic activity, as welcome as it is, must surely not constitute a pretext for postponing a program of reforms, as its implementation is essential to achieve stronger and more sustainable growth in the long term. BIS Review 34/2004 5 
Otmar Issing: The euro and the Lisbon agenda Speech by Mr Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, at the 32nd Economics Conference of the Austrian National Bank, 28 May 2004. *      *      * 1. Introduction When the European Council agreed on the so-called Lisbon agenda in March 2000 the EU had witnessed a period with high real growth rates. “The Union is experiencing its best macro-economic outlook for a generation”, the Council concluded at the time. Against this background, the Lisbon European Council set itself its well-known strategic goal1 to be reached by 2010 and defined a broad agenda for structural reforms in labour, product and financial markets. Four years later, real GDP growth has dropped to significantly lower levels. So far, many structural reforms have been found difficult to implement and the Lisbon agenda’s mid-term goals for 2005 are unlikely to be reached.  In the following, I would first like to draw attention to the economic benefits of structural reforms and highlight where deficiencies in their implementation have become particularly obvious. I will then concentrate on two aspects regarding the Lisbon agenda, which I consider as being of particular interest from the viewpoint of the single monetary policy. First, I would like to focus on the ways in which structural reforms change the economic environment in which the single monetary policy is conducted. Second, I would like to highlight how in turn monetary policy can support the Lisbon process. Third and finally, I will argue that exploiting the euro area’s growth potential with the help of structural reforms will contribute to global economic growth and is thus indispensable for reducing existing global economic imbalances. 2. Main elements of the Lisbon agenda Let me first briefly explain why the European countries must proceed with structural reform and why we continuously ask euro area Member States to step up their reform efforts in this regard. Well-designed structural reforms increase the mobility of production factors between different uses and improve their allocation in an economy towards their most efficient use. In doing so, structural reforms raise factor productivity, open up additional employment opportunities and allow for lower prices of goods and services. Exploiting the opportunities of such a more efficient allocation of production factors will eventually allow an economy to achieve a higher real income and a higher sustainable long-run growth path.  In the last decade, euro area countries have made considerable progress with reforms in labour, product and capital markets, varying, however, considerably across countries. Among the outcomes were a higher level of competition in product markets due to, for example, a lower level of state aids and regulatory reform in network industries that resulted in substantial price reductions as well as in higher activity. For example, between 2000 and mid-2003 alone, the price decline in telecommunication services as measured by the HICP sub-index for telecommunications led to a cumulated downward effect on total HICP inflation of 0.33 percentage point.2 Moreover, its positive effect on real acticity supported the creation of new jobs. At the same time, labour market reforms undertaken during the 1990s seem to have contributed to the strong employment growth and to the considerable decline in unemployment in many countries during the cyclical upswing between 1997 and 2000. Reform measures in this field included, for example, improvements in countries’ job mediation systems, a more intensive use of part-time work contracts as well as policies raising the efficiency of tax and benefit systems.  With the so-called Lisbon agenda the European Council intends to reinforce these reform efforts. It identifies various areas for further reform, summarised under employment, research and innovation, the single market, social cohesion as well as sustainable development and the environment. I think we                                                       1  Namely, “to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion” by 2010. 2  See ECB Monthly Bulletin (2003), pp 26. BIS Review 33/2004 1 
all agree that stepping up structural reforms in these areas is indispensible for improving the euro area’s unsatisfactory growth potential and its ability to create employment, even more so after the EU has been enlarged to countries that have substantially lower labour costs.  The euro area’s insufficient flexibility is manifested in the high rate of unemployment, which amounted to 8.8% in 2003. This reveals shortcomings in the implementation of structural refoms that would improve the use of the euro area’s productive forces and increase their flexibility in response to economic shocks. It is thus crucial that the Lisbon agenda’s impetus is maintained, which must manifest itself in increased efforts to reach the agenda’s 2010 targets. There is, however, still a long way to go. For example, raising the euro area overall employment rate to 70% by 2010 can be expected to require an additional 15.3 million jobs, although hiding significantly varying challenges for different groups in the labour market. Whereas, for example, significant progress has been made to raise female employment, employment growth for older workers aged 55-64 would have to substantially exceed its annual average of 1.7% between 1996 and 2002 to achieve the employment target for older workers of 50% by 2010.  Making the Lisbon agenda a success therefore requires particular efforts in the field of labour market reform to open up additional employment opportunities. At the same time, further structural reforms need to increase the prerequisites for innovation, research and development, particularly by providing educational attainment levels adequate for labour market needs. Furthermore, a continuation of reforms in capital markets, a removal of barriers to competition particularly in the service sector as well as further liberalisation in electricity, postal services and transport as envisaged in the Lisbon agenda is needed.  I would like to conclude this part of my speech with three remarks: First, trust in the course of structural reform as fostered by the Lisbon agenda and a better understanding of the economic benefits structural reforms entail are conducive to raising consumer confidence and private consumption. It is thus indispensible to maintain trust in this course, and to keep commitments also in periods with slower growth.  Second, numeric targets seem to me currently the central measure to benchmark progress with structural reforms. As numeric targets increase necessary pressure for underperforming countries, it should be considered to strengthen this instrument. Third, as we all know, the implementation of changes in long-grown relationships is always a difficult task. When asked for their willingness for reform in general, a large part of the population would probably signal a high degree of approval. But as soon as a concrete measure would harm the personal status-quo, only a minority would agree. The main challenge for the Lisbon agenda’s success is thus to persuade the people of the long-term benefits of structural reform and to remove the scepticism with respect to short-term costs. In this regard, also the ECB plays its part in its communication on the benefits of structural reforms.  3. The impact of structural reforms on the conduct of monetary policy Let me now turn to the discussion of the implications that the implementation of the Lisbon agenda may have for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area.  The ECB has always stressed the importance of a swift implementation of structural reform agendas across the euro area. This reflects above all the firm belief that structural reforms enhance the welfare of the European citizens.  But structural reforms also tend to facilitate monetary policy and increase its effectiveness. A more flexible economic environment helps the labour and product markets to better adjust to economic shocks and respond to policy actions more quickly. For example, more flexible labour markets may imply that negative supply shocks are absorbed with a smaller short-term increase in inflationary pressures, as second round effects are more subdued. This, in turn, allows monetary policy to react less strongly. Such an environment will not only make it easier for monetary policy to maintain price stability, but it will also help to keep the volatility of inflation and output lower.  But there are also challenges for the central bank, arising from the uncertainty related to the changed economic environment in which monetary policy operates. More precisely, structural reforms may change the rules governing the dynamic evolution of the euro area economy and the transmission 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
mechanism of monetary policy actions in ways that are difficult to identify in the short run. I shall try, now, to elaborate on this more in detail.  Normally, economists think about structural reforms as having positive “supply” effects that allow firms to increase their productivity, while at the same time fostering aggregate demand. From the point of view of the monetary policymaker who adopts a forward looking strategy, understanding the nature of the changes in the supply potential of the economy is crucial for assessing to what extent such shocks have an impact on price stability. Moreover, changes in potential output growth can impact on the determination of the “equilibrium” real interest rate, as well as on the optimal time path towards such equilibrium real rate.  A first approach is to outline these issues under the simplifying assumption that the potential output and the real equilibrium interest rate can be estimated with a high degree of precision. In case the positive supply shock leads only to a one-off increase in the level of potential output, but not to a permanently higher output growth,3 the equilibrium real rate would not change. However, when the shock is permanent4 and leads to higher potential output growth the return on capital will increase and the equilibrium real interest rate will follow. This implies that in the long run policy rates need to be higher than otherwise. Once the possibly new “equilibrium” interest rate and potential output growth are pinned down, the central bank has to set interest rates by taking into consideration a large set of other indicators, including the short-term interactions of aggregate demand and supply. In case of a positive supply shock actual and potential output accelerate simultaneously only if demand and supply effects emerge at the same time and are of the same magnitude. If this was the case, and other things being equal, monetary policy would essentially need to align short-term rates with the higher equilibrium real interest rate which is consistent with the permanently higher potential growth. In a different situation, for instance when supply effects dominate in the short-run5 the increase in productivity and potential output levels brought about by structural reforms will often tend to reduce short-term inflationary pressures. In this case, the central bank would be in the position of eventually adjusting short-term rates more gradually towards the higher “equilibrium” as long as potential GDP temporarily expands more rapidly than demand and, consequently, inflationary pressures remain muted.  Everything just said, however, presumes that concepts like the precise level of the equilibrium interest rate, the natural rate of unemployment or the potential output are observed or estimated with a sufficient degree of confidence by the central bank. In reality this is not at all the case. Monetary policy decisions that have to be taken in real time and without the benefit of hindsight, will always face a particularly high degree of uncertainty when long-run trends in macroeconomic variables change, and also the fundamental relations linking macroeconomic variables change in ways that could render existing models of the transmission mechanism unreliable. In such a situation, monetary policy decision-making calls for great caution and any kind of mechanistic reactions, in particular to indicators whose developments are very difficult to interpret, should be avoided.  It seems plausible that in such an environment of high uncertainty, monetary policy is more efficient by assigning a more prominent role to indicators that can be more precisely measured or estimated rather than concepts that can only be estimated with a high degree of uncertainty. This is one of the reasons why typically, central banks do not rely on “output gap” estimates. Furthermore, when cross-checking all the available information, the central bank must carefully take into consideration the possibility of structural breaks in historical relationships as well as the signals sent by different models in the context of various types of approaches. In the end, when assessing the appropriateness of its monetary policy stance against the prospects of achieving its medium term objective the central bank has to make sure to incorporate all the information embedded in the economic and monetary analysis.  The ECB’s monetary policy strategy was designed precisely with the aim of ensuring that in the assessment of risks to price stability no relevant information would be lost and that appropriate                                                       3  For example, through a one-off increase in employment and/or labour productivity due to a more flexible labour market that allows workers to be re-allocated more efficiently. 4  For example through higher trend productivity growth resulting from the increased ability of firms to adopt new production technologies in a more flexible economic environment. 5  Because consumers smooth their expenditure or credit-market imperfections constrain them to borrow against (higher) future expected income. BIS Review 33/2004 3 
attention would be paid to different analytical perspectives. Its two-pillar approach is a way of conveying to the public the notion of a diversified analysis and of ensuring robust decision-making in an environment characterised by high uncertainty.  This approach also allows the ECB to assess the impact of structural reforms on both the cyclical and the more long-term components of the inflation process in the euro area. As noted before, in case reforms increase potential output growth in the euro area, the ECB will take into consideration the short-term relative developments in aggregate demand and supply. Furthermore, it will have to assess its assumptions for the desirable medium term evolution of monetary aggregates if potential growth were to change.  Let me give you an example that goes back to 2001, when in the context of the well known debate about the emergence of a possibly “new economy” the Governing Council decided to assess potential changes in trend productivity growth in the euro area and its implications for the reference value for monetary growth. The conclusion in December 2001 was that there is no decisive evidence of measurable and lasting increases in productivity growth in the euro area that would warrant an upward revision to trend potential growth.6 The Governing Council therefore opted in favour of a rather cautious attitude and, with the benefit of hindsight, was correct to do so - thus avoiding a possible policy mistake. 4. Price stability and the Lisbon agenda I would now like to outline what the ECB can contribute to supporting the implementation of the Lisbon agenda. In short, it can contribute by maintaining price stability and by helping to safeguard financial stability as contributions to a stable macroeconomic environment. In such a stable macroeconomic environment, structural reforms will be easier to implement. Let me explain this relationship by looking at some aspects of price stability. • First, price stability preserves and bolsters consumers’ purchasing power, thus supporting consumption. • Second, price stability enhances the efficiency of the market system at allocating resources, by making it easier for people to recognise changes in relative prices. • Third, price stability avoids additional menu costs, i.e. production costs occurring when printed prices have to be changed. • Fourth, price stability is associated with lower uncertainty and risk premia in financial markets, facilitating financial actions and ultimately implying lower medium and long-term interest rates, fostering investment. • Fifth, price stability provides markets with an indispensable nominal anchor for adjusting changes in wages consistently with productivity growth. • Sixth, price stability prevents the considerable and arbitrary redistribution of wealth and income that arises in inflationary as well as in deflationary environments. In this regard, price stability is a vital element of fostering sustainable growth as well as of supporting employment and social cohesion, thus supporting the Lisbon process in achieving its objectives. Moreover, as price stability helps to guide economic agents in their decisions to move production factors towards more efficient uses it should help structural reforms to exploit their welfare-enhancing benefits. As an additional aspect, within an environment of stable prices, a decline in relative prices in some sectors resulting from structural reforms would become more visible, supporting acceptance of such reforms. Price stability is thus the most important contribution of monetary policy to the Lisbon process.                                                       6  “... The Governing Council believes that the potential upward impact on trend output growth from structural reforms and technological innovation could be large. However, while some progress has been made in the field of structural reform, significant further steps - especially in the labour and goods markets - need to be taken in order to achieve a permanent and significant increase in potential output growth in the euro area. Against this background, the Governing Council will continue to monitor the evidence with regard to developments in productivity growth in the euro area, and the ECB’s monetary policy will take such evidence into account as appropriate.”. See ECB Press Release from 6 December 2001. 4 BIS Review 33/2004 
Empirical estimations show that even rather low rates of inflation can lead to welfare losses that might be larger than usually thought. A study for the US, for example, indicates that a permanent increase in the inflation rate from 0% to 4% can lead to permanent output losses ranging from 0.4-1.1%.7 There are, however, several arguments that support basing a definition of price stability on positive but low inflation rates. The ECB has thus provided a quantitative definition of price stability, namely a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the euro area as a whole of below 2% to be maintained over the medium term. Looking back, over the last five years, despite significant exogenous shocks the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy following this definition has resulted over the medium term in low and stable inflation. And it has ensured that medium and long-run inflation expectations have been well anchored. Monetary policy has thus delivered its necessary contribution to a stable macroeconomic environment supporting the implementation of structural reforms.  Perhaps less well-known but also important is the ECB’s and the ESCB’s contribution to a stable macroeconomic environment by promoting financial stability. This task is crucial as a well-developed and stable financial system improves the efficiency of financing decisions, favours a better allocation of investment in and among economies and thus supports economic growth. This was also recognised by the Lisbon Council when it called for accelerating the completion of the internal market for financial services and to “exploit the potential of the euro” in achieving this aim. The tasks of the ESCB in this regard consist of systematically monitoring financial stability conditions in EU and euro area countries. This monitoring particularly aims at identifying potential sources of vulnerability in the financial system of the euro area and the EU and to assess its resilience to shocks.  To sum up, maintaining price stability is a vital contribution to fostering non-inflationary sustainable growth and, together with financial stability, supports a stable macroeconomic environment, within which structural reforms can fully exploit their welfare enhancing effects. Maintaining price stability and promoting financial stability is thus the assistance monetary policy can render to the Lisbon agenda’s reform efforts. 5. Global aspects Increasing the euro area’s insufficient growth potential and its ability to adjust more flexibly to changes in economic variables becomes particularly important against the background of globalisation. This is even more the case as over the last years the international trade in goods, capital and services has witnessed imbalances. These imbalances are signalled by, for example, the persistent US current account deficit, which amounts to around 5% of GDP. This is connected with an increase in US net liabilities vis-à-vis the rest of the world from 5% in the early 1990s to roughly 23% of GDP at the end of 2002.  These imbalances will finally have to be corrected. An adjustment can, however, be brought about in several ways: First, the deficit country’s growth rate could decline relative to growth rates in the rest of the world. This would, among others, reduce this country’s demand for foreign goods and services, potentially hampering real growth because of reduced exports elsewhere in the world. Second, the global imbalance could be diminished by an acceleration of growth in the rest of the world as this would lead to an increased demand for the deficit country’s exports. The more flexible the adjustment to declining global imbalances is, the more orderly the necessary adjustment can be brought about, meaning with less and less sudden disruptions in key economic variables.  One may conjecture that, with its net outflows of goods and capital, part of the adjustment will also fall upon the euro area. In the US a view seems to prevail, which one could paraphrase with a previous statement by the then US Treasury Secretary Connolly with respect to the US currency: “It may be our deficit, but it is your problem”. One characteristic of this “problem” is the large outflow of investment capital from the EU and the euro area towards other regions in the world and the US market in particular. One reason for the large flow of capital towards US markets in the second half of the 1990s were surely overly optimistic expectations with regard to the “new economy”. Considering only investment since 1997, rough estimates indicate that EU investors have incurred tremendous losses, ranging from EUR 200 billion to EUR 540 billion until mid-2002. However, the large aggregate outflow                                                       7  Dotsey, M and P Ireland (1996): “The welfare costs of inflation in general equilibrium”, Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 631-55. BIS Review 33/2004 5 
of capital from Europe should be taken as a sign for its insufficient attractiveness for internationally mobile capital.  Having said this, the euro area can support the reduction of global imbalances by a much stronger contribution to global growth. This requires that the euro area exploits its growth potential and becomes a more attractive place to invest. Again, this calls for improving the functioning of labour, product and capital markets, as their partly insufficient flexibility has been found to act as impediment to investing in several euro area economies. Raising the rate of investment with the help of structural reforms is therefore not only a crucial measure to increase the euro area’s ability to adjust to declining global imbalances. By allowing them to achieve higher sustainable growth rates structural reforms also indirectly contribute to global growth and thus to reducing global imbalances.8  6. Conclusion The Lisbon agenda presses EU countries to make their homework in the field of structural reform. However, whereas some progress has been made, deficiencies remain, particularly in the labour and service markets. Reforms in labour markets have, however, been found hardest to implement and are most of the times accompanied by tensions. I hope Olivier Blanchard will be right in the end with his assessment that these tensions “are a symptom of change, not of immobility”.9  The Lisbon agenda has been crucial for raising Europe’s attention to the necessity for further structural reforms. Countries now have to implement well-designed policies that remedy the root causes of their particular problems in labour, product and financial markets. These structural reforms will improve the environment, in which the stability-oriented monetary policy is conducted. In turn, this process of reform can best be implemented within a stable macroeconomic environment in which microeconomic policies can fully develop their welfare-enhancing effects. The single monetary policy will continue to play its part in this respect by maintaining price stability and by promoting financial stability.                                                       8  See for a further discussion of this topic Issing O “Conditions for an orderly adjustment in the global economy”, European Integration, Vol 26, No 1, pp 83-92. 9 O Blanchard (2004): “The economic future of Europe”, NBER Working Paper ,Series No 10310. 6 BIS Review 33/2004 
Jens Thomsen: Brief overview of the Danish economy Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, at the meeting of the Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 27 May 2004.  *      *      * It now seems probable that the Danish economy reached a trough in the autumn of 2003 and that an upswing has set in; an upswing which has not been acknowledged until now, near the middle of 2004.  The upswing has primarily been reflected in private consumption, but in addition unemployment has been falling slightly since the turn of the year. Naturally, the final impact on unemployment is difficult to predict since unemployment typically reacts with a considerable and varying lag.  Unlike most other Western European countries, Denmark has a relatively low unemployment rate, and a strong upswing could lead to overheating. The greatest risk would be if a substantial economic upswing materialised in our neighbouring countries, but there are no indications of this. Germany, in particular, is having difficulties boosting its economy. A positive aspect is that growth in the 10 new EU member states is above four per cent, although they account for only four per cent of Denmark’s exports.  In the short term it would seem that only a domestically driven consumption boom with a substantial increase in the consumption ratio could lead to overheating. The consumption ratio is currently low, and the wealth ratio is high. Consequently, a marked consumption effect cannot be ruled out. The reversal of the Danish economy emphasises how difficult it is to finetune the economy by means of fiscal policy. Our knowledge is incomplete. It takes time to prepare fiscal-policy measures, and it takes time before they have an impact on unemployment. Such measures can easily have a disruptive effect on the economy when the underlying cyclical factors are uncer-tain and changing. “In practice there is a genuine risk that attempts to conduct active stabilisation policy will in themselves lead to cyclical fluctuations”, cf. the former economic advisor Torben Andersen in Udviklingslinier i økonomisk teori - Trends in economic theory - (2000, ed. Chr. Hjorth-Andersen). If fiscal policy is eased, it must also be tightened at a later stage; otherwise it will not be possible to maintain the long-term targets for the development in public finances.  The reflections on the sustainability of public finances in the consultation paper emphasise this need for subsequent fiscal-policy adjustment. In order to be sustainable, public finances must comply with a budgetary restriction to the effect that future government revenue must match the current government debt and future government expenditure. Such a restriction means than any budgetary relaxation must subsequently be counterbalanced by a tightening.  BIS Review 33/2004 1 
Lee Hsien Loong: Prospering in a rising Asia Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the opening dinner of the Conference Board Symposium on Asian Economies and Financial Markets, Singapore, 27 May 2004. *      *      * Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me first welcome all of you to the Conference Board Symposium on Asian Economies and Financial Markets, held for the first time here in Singapore. Asia’s comeback since the financial crisis Asian economies have come a long way since the financial crisis in 1997. For six years they have had a tumultuous ride, marked by unexpected shocks and painful adjustments. The September 11th attacks were followed by the Bali and Marriot bombings in Indonesia, which shook confidence in the region and brought the harsh realities of Islamist extremist terrorism closer to home. Last year, the Iraq war and the SARS outbreak weakened business sentiments and consumer spending, setting back economic recovery yet again. Prospects for the region have since brightened considerably, on the strength of a synchronised upturn in the G3 economies. The electronics industry, a lynchpin of export-driven Asian economies, is finally picking up robustly after a prolonged slump. Investor confidence has returned, bond spreads have narrowed, and stock markets have outperformed the developed countries, until very recently.  The Asian crisis forced governments in the region to tackle weaknesses in their financial and corporate sectors and implement much needed structural reforms. Weak banks have been recapitalised, bad loans reduced, and prudential regulations strengthened. Government finances have been put on a firmer footing, while balances of payments have moved into surplus. The result is a stronger and leaner Asia, more prepared for storms and more ready to seize opportunities.  A major development in recent years is the emergence of China as an economic powerhouse. China’s growth and transformation have been phenomenal. Its buoyant exports, supported by low-cost manufacturing capabilities, and its huge domestic market, have created strong competition as well as immense opportunities for the rest of the world. China’s growth has driven the rapid increase in intra-regional trade, and fuelled economic expansion in the region, if not worldwide. China’s economy is showing signs of overheating, but its government is mindful of the danger and determined to act decisively to rein in credit and investment. This gives them a good chance of achieving a soft landing. Beyond this cyclical issue, China is set to continue growing strongly for the next decade or two. The other Asian giant, India, is becoming a dynamic and prosperous economy. Liberalisation policies and market reforms are freeing up the long moribund Indian economy. State-owned enterprises are being privatised. Ports, airports, telecommunications and financial services have been opened up to competition and foreign participation. As the dead hand of bureaucracy is withdrawn, growth is taking off, especially in the services sector. With well-trained, English speaking, and cost-competitive professionals, India has created a niche for itself as the world’s back-office as well as a global software centre.  The BJP coalition’s unexpected defeat in the general elections reflects the unhappiness of rural voters who have not benefited from the liberalisation. This may cause the new Congress government to be more circumspect about pressing ahead with reforms, although optimistic commentators argue that the voters are pressing for faster reforms rather than slower. Whether or not that is so, the policy of liberalisation commands bipartisan support, and is likely to continue. After all, the new Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, was the architect of the initial economic reforms in the early 1990s. He has appointed as Finance Minister Mr Chidambaram, who is also a reformist and a former Commerce Minister and Finance Minister. I am therefore hopeful that the thrust of liberalisation will continue, and India will play increasingly a prominent role like China’s in the regional and global economies.  Closer to home, the prospects for Southeast Asian economies are also looking better. The region initially struggled as political and security concerns deterred foreign investments and distracted BIS Review 33/2004 1 
governments from tackling serious economic problems. But Southeast Asia has stabilised considerably in recent years. Governments are responding more vigorously to the threat of terrorism and restoring order and confidence. The political upheavals that swept across the region have also subsided, allowing governments to focus their attention on fostering growth and development.  The Thai economy has done particularly well. For the past few years it has been the fastest growing economy in Southeast Asia. Through a series of bold initiatives, the Thai government has revived the rural economy, stimulated domestic demand, and repaid its IMF loans. This has bolstered confidence and got business moving again.  Indonesia’s economy has improved significantly despite a complex political situation. Reforms were slow initially, as corruption and an unreliable legal system impeded progress. Nevertheless, Indonesia has made significant headway in financial sector reforms. IBRA accelerated the pace of its bank asset sales, while non-performing loans ratios fell from nearly 50% in 1998 to just 8% last year. Indonesia graduated from the IMF programme in December 2003, and has continued to maintain sound macroeconomic policies. While foreign direct investments remain slow, the oversubscribed US$1 billion sovereign bond sale in March this year is a vote of confidence from international investors. The challenge over the longer term is to attract enough investments to sustain growth and reduce unemployment. Overall, Asia is showing a new dynamism, and has put the financial crisis behind it. For all the difficulties that remain, this is probably the most promising region in the world.  Asia’s strategic landscape Asia’s economic growth rests on the stability of the strategic environment in the region. Constructive and stable relations among the major powers set limits on rivalries and conflicts in the region, and enable trade and investments to flourish.  The key post Cold War global geopolitical reality is America’s unique pre-eminence. The US will not always get its way; for example it is facing serious difficulties in Iraq. However, there is no credible challenger for America’s global position. In East Asia a strong US presence has been the cornerstone of peace since the end of the Second World War. The US will remain a vital and irreplaceable part of the East Asian strategic picture for the foreseeable future.  Of course in Asia as in other regions, many countries, including friends and allies of the US, are uncomfortable with the scope of US pre-eminence and some of its policies. But all still want the best possible relationship they can have with the US. They know that they cannot challenge US pre eminence and that no issue in the region can be resolved without America’s cooperation.  China is a prime example. China’s fundamental preoccupations are internal. It wants a stable regional environment in order to deal with them. Beijing will not compromise on its vital interests, one of which is the status of Taiwan. But it knows that it is also in China’s interest to have good relations with the US. For its part, the US knows that it needs the cooperation of China in order to deal with terrorism and other post Cold War challenges.  US China relations are the most important bilateral relationship in Asia and soon, perhaps in the world. Some degree of competition between the US and China is inevitable, but conflict is not. The complexity and multidimensional nature of US China relations requires both sides to balance and reconcile different perspectives to achieve equilibrium. Good US China relations will calm all of Asia. The major Asian powers are also striving to stabilise relations with one another, at least in part to better deal with post Cold War geopolitical realities. The most fundamental interest of all Asian countries is in development: in growth, trade and investments, not war. Three issues could disrupt Asia’s strategic stability. They are the India Pakistan conflict over Kashmir, the North Korean issue and Taiwan. All three have a potential nuclear dimension. Let me deal briefly with each one.  The India Pakistan conflict is complex, mired in history and religion. It is difficult to envisage a definitive solution. But the conflict can and has been managed. In recent months, we have seen encouraging signs of a thaw. We should not underestimate the importance of these small but positive steps, given that only a few years ago India and Pakistan were on the brink of a nuclear war. Both countries know that a conflict over Kashmir would have disastrous consequences that far outweigh any possible gains. It would grievously disrupt India’s economic reforms and perhaps permanently 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
relegate India behind China. For Pakistan, it could mean the end of the state as it presently exists. It is therefore a good sign that the new Indian Government has signalled that it wishes to continue dialogue and engagement with Pakistan.  Like Kashmir, it is difficult to see a definitive solution to the North Korean problem. But this too can be managed. The six party talks have reduced the risk of accidental war. The key actors are rational and, despite their differences, share a common interest in a peaceful resolution of the issue. Kim Jong Il is a master of brinkmanship. But he too is rational and must know that war will lead to the outcome that he fears most, the disappearance of North Korea as a sovereign state. Therefore, while he may go to the very edge, unlike Saddam Hussein, Kim will not deliberately step over it. The North Korean issue is a strong incentive for the US and China to cooperate for their common interest.  The risks of miscalculation are perhaps highest over Taiwan. The issue is extremely delicate because it engages the domestic politics of China, US and Taiwan. There is growing tension between economic forces that are integrating Taiwan with the Mainland and Taiwan’s desire for a separate identity. No PRC leadership can ever tolerate a bid for independence by Taiwan. If Taiwan pushes too far, the Chinese must react or be exposed as a ‘paper tiger’.  The US stand, and perceptions of the US stand in China and Taiwan, are key to the problem. President Bush has said publicly that he does not support Taiwan’s independence. But the US may still be drawn into a Cross Straits conflict. If this happens, there will be serious consequences for the entire region. But it is encouraging that Chen Shui-bian’s inauguration speech took a more conciliatory tone, suggesting that he is aware of the grave dangers, although he still left open the possibility of independence. In Southeast Asia, terrorism will be a major preoccupation for many years to come. Another terrorist attack will shake confidence in Southeast Asia, damaging growth prospects. The Southeast Asian waterways are vital lifelines for Japan, China and South Korea. A maritime terrorist attack that disrupts them will have wide economic and political repercussions. Unfortunately, there is widespread discomfort among Muslims everywhere with American policies in the Middle East and towards the Israel Palestine conflict. Mainstream Muslims are afraid to speak up against extremists for fear of appearing pro American. This is a serious problem that has not yet been adequately addressed.  One important question is the role of Islam in Southeast Asian countries. Traditional Southeast Asian Islam is syncretic and tolerant, but it is increasingly influenced by more austere Middle Eastern variants of Islam, especially Wahhabbism. Which way this battle for the soul of Islam goes is a key uncertainty that will determine the future of the region. In Malaysia, Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi won a clear victory over PAS, the opposition Islamist Party. He did not challenge PAS’ contention that Malaysia should be an Islamic State, but instead fought PAS on what kind of Islamic State Malaysia should be. His victory bolsters his vision of progressive Islam and should encourage mainstream Muslims everywhere. But PAS will not give up and is girding itself for a long-term struggle. In Indonesia, it is significant that all three major Presidential candidates are secular nationalists. But all three have also found it necessary to seek Vice Presidential candidates with strong Muslim credentials, and support from Muslim parties. Although Indonesia has a long history of tolerant, syncretic Islam, more so than other Southeast Asian countries, political Islam is now at the centre of Indonesian politics and a crucial swing factor. In Thailand, Prime Minister Thaksin’s pro business and pro growth economic policies have not found resonance in the Muslim south. The recent upsurge of Islamic separatist violence is worrying, though there is so far no evidence of international terrorist connections.  Southeast Asian governments, even those with large Muslim populations, are secular, moderate and intent on economic growth. If progressive and moderate forces are to win the global battle for the hearts and minds of the Muslims, Southeast Asia is perhaps the most favourable battleground. Riding on Asia’s growth This backdrop gives hope that the strategic and security environment in Asia will remain stable. I am also optimistic that Asian countries will continue to maintain stable political environments, pursue pro-business economic policies, and participate in the global economy. One significant economic issue countries must tackle is to strengthen and develop their financial sectors.  BIS Review 33/2004 3 
Asian countries need a two-pronged approach to do this. First, they should foster greater regional cooperation in financial markets to leverage on their collective strength. Second, individual countries need to press on with unfinished financial reforms and take judicious steps to liberalise the financial sector.  Greater regional cooperation On regional cooperation, countries have clearly recognised the benefits of greater trade integration, driven by the forces of globalisation. To facilitate the integration process, ASEAN has accelerated the timetable for the formation of an ASEAN Free Trade Area. Last October, the leaders decided to commit to creating an ASEAN Economic Community, giving for the first time a supranational cast to ASEAN’s aspirations. The ASEAN+3 process that links ASEAN with China, Japan and South Korea, ought eventually to evolve into an East Asian Economic Community that may include Australia and New Zealand. ASEAN is also negotiating free trade agreements with key trading partners. In addition to a Comprehensive Economic Partnership with Japan, ASEAN has targeted FTAs with China and India by the end of this decade. Meanwhile, individual ASEAN countries are already concluding FTAs with China, India and Japan.  More recently, regional countries have also embarked on various initiatives to deepen capital market cooperation and integration in the region. For example, the EMEAP Group, comprising 11 central banks and monetary authorities in the East Asia and Pacific region, has launched the Asian Bond Fund I. The group is now working towards launching the local currency-denominated Asian Bond Fund 2. The ASEAN+3 member countries have also made significant progress to develop regional bond markets under the Asian Bond Market Initiative and to establish a regional financing arrangement through the Chiang Mai Initiative. These initiatives are significant not only for their tangible economic benefits, but also as symbolic demonstrations of the collective interest in regional financial cooperation.  Alliances among Asian exchanges Another area with potential for regional financial collaboration is in the securities and futures exchanges market.  In US and especially in Europe, a wave of consolidation among leading exchanges has resulted in mega-exchanges that have the economies of scale to make investments in advanced infrastructure, offer competitive fees, and most importantly provide investors and issuers with the liquidity that they seek. Exchanges in Asia have thus far been largely insulated from the trends of consolidation. Asian stock markets are generally smaller in size and less liquid than those in more developed countries. To remain relevant to international investors in this changing landscape, regional exchanges should deepen their collaboration with one another.  The decision of the recent ASEAN Finance Ministers’ meeting to explore alliances and linkages among ASEAN securities markets will catalyse and encourage this collaboration. Regional exchanges are already taking the first steps. The Singapore Exchange, SGX, for instance, established a co-trading linkage with the Australian Stock Exchange in 2001. It is in discussions with Tokyo Stock Exchange on a possible alliance, and has recently started talks with Bursa Malaysia, formerly the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, on possible collaborations.  Pressing on with reforms at the national level While pursuing regional initiatives, individual countries need to press on with reforms at the national level. Although many Asian countries have significantly strengthened their financial systems, they still need to follow through with reforms in the financial and corporate sectors. Singapore’s financial system was lucky to emerge from the Asian crisis relatively unscathed. During the crisis, we undertook an extensive liberalisation program aimed at deepening and broadening capital markets, consolidating and upgrading the local banks, and enhancing Singapore’s position as an international financial centre. At the same time, we put in place a new supervisory framework to oversee financial institutions, shifting from one-size-fits-all regulation to more risk-based supervision. 4 BIS Review 33/2004 
Our efforts have achieved encouraging results. Our debt market has grown three-fold since 1998 to reach S$90 billion in 2002, driven by growing demand in the region for debt financing. Our wealth management industry more than doubled in the same period, with total Assets Under Management growing from S$150 billion in 1998 to S$344 billion in 2002. In treasury activities, we have maintained our position as the fourth largest FX centre in the world, with an average daily trading volume of US$119 billion in 2003. The local banks have consolidated from seven into three banks that are larger and stronger, and are building up their regional footprints. In the recent Financial System Stability Assessment of Singapore, the IMF affirmed the robustness of Singapore’s financial system and the soundness of our legal, supervisory and institutional framework.  We are heartened by these outcomes. But we still need to press on with further reforms and policy adjustments, because the international financial landscape continues to evolve. In this regard, let me highlight two things that MAS is doing.  Revisions to capital adequacy requirements of locally incorporated banks First, MAS will be revising the capital adequacy requirements of locally incorporated banks. Singapore banks have since 1992 been required to meet a minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio, or CAR, requirement of 12%. MAS has progressively adjusted this requirement.1 However, the current MAS requirement of 12% Total CAR of which 8% must be Tier 1 capital still exceeds those in other major financial centres.  As part of MAS’ efforts to keep our regulatory framework up-to-date with international best practices, we started to review the CAR requirements in March last year. I am sure the industry will be pleased to know that MAS has completed the review. MAS will announce the details at a press conference tomorrow evening. I will touch briefly on the three components of the revisions.  (i) Minimum CAR The first change is in the minimum CAR requirements of local banks. MAS will lower this minimum CAR to 10%, of which at least 7% should comprise Tier 1 capital. This is competitive, taking into account our small and open economy, and the systemic importance of the three local banks. Some other countries, including Switzerland, similarly have a higher requirement than other developed jurisdictions. This reduction in minimum CAR does not necessarily translate into a full 2% lowering of the total CAR requirements because in parallel with this, MAS will amend the rules for computing CAR, which is the second component of the package of CAR revisions.  (ii) Changes in CAR computation rules  One noteworthy revision to the computation rules will be a requirement for banks to set aside more capital for significant investments, commensurate with the risks associated with such investments. We had stated in August last year that this would be done, when we extended by two years the grace period for Singapore banks to divest non-financial businesses.2Another significant revision is to allow banks to include 45% of the revaluation surpluses from banks’ holdings of property assets as well as portfolio equity investments as Upper Tier 2 capital. This will raise the capital available to banks, but it is unlikely to offset the higher capital that they will have to set aside for significant investments. In line with the policy of setting more transparent requirements, MAS will publish these CAR requirements and computation rules. Local banks will report their CAR based on the revised rules starting from their second quarter financial results.                                                        1  MAS lowered the Tier 1 component from 12% to 10% in November 1998, and again from 10% to 8% in September 2000. 2  “Extension of grace period for banks divestment of non-financial businesses”, MAS Press Release, 22 August 2003. BIS Review 33/2004 5 
(iii) Bank specific supervisory CAR requirements.  The third component is supervisory CAR. Like other supervisors, MAS may impose additional bank-specific supervisory CAR to address risks not adequately covered by the minimum requirement. MAS has refined the framework for setting these supervisory CAR add-ons.  It takes advantage of MAS’ existing risk-based supervisory approach and is based on MAS’ risk assessment of individual banks. In line with international practice, these supervisory CAR add-ons will be kept confidential.  Impact of the revisions The adjustments in our CAR framework will allow local banks to manage their capital more flexibly. Banks which have lower risk profiles and which are better managed will enjoy lower total regulatory CAR requirements than before. At the same time, the adjustments will maintain prudential standards observed by supervisors in other major financial centres, which tend to be more stringent than the minimum standards stipulated under the current Capital Accord.  Overall, these changes will result in modest but meaningful reductions to the CAR requirements, but they may or may not translate into immediate capital reductions for the banks. Leading banks tend to maintain capital at levels well above regulatory minimums, and that will undoubtedly prove to be the case in Singapore as well. In managing their capital positions, banks will also take into account their future expansion plans, as well as the risks they potentially face in their business environment.  Non-internationalisation of Singapore dolla (S$) policy The second policy adjustment concerns the non-internationalisation of Singapore dollar. Monetary policy in Singapore is centred on the management of the exchange rate. As an international financial centre with open capital markets, we are exposed to large and sometimes, volatile capital flows. To facilitate the effective conduct of our monetary policy and to avoid large swings in our S$ exchange rate, we have a policy of discouraging the internationalisation of the S$. However, we recognised that the trade-off was a less vibrant capital market, particularly the debt market. So we have progressively relaxed the specific restrictions over the past six years, while maintaining the intent of the policy. The results have been positive.  The non-internationalisation policy is now down to two basic safeguards to discourage speculation in the S$ - banks may not lend S$ to non-resident financial institutions in order to speculate on the S$, and non-resident borrowers who raise S$ through bank borrowings or on our capital markets must swap or convert these S$ to foreign currencies before remitting them abroad. This stance remains appropriate, and continues to underpin the effective conduct of our monetary policy. Nevertheless, there is scope for further fine-tuning. We have decided that non-resident, non-financial issuers of S$ bonds and equities will no longer be required to swap or convert their S$ proceeds into foreign currencies before remitting abroad. Non-resident, financial issuers of bonds and equities will still have to do so. This will give the issuers greater flexibility in managing their S$ funds.  In addition, MAS will exempt from the restrictions under the policy, any extension of temporary overdrafts of S$ vostro accounts to prevent settlement failures. This will facilitate straight-through processing and more efficient handling of S$ payments.  With the progressive relaxation of the S$ restrictions, the current policy essentially limits only lending of S$ to non-resident financial institutions for the purpose of speculating in the S$, and does not specifically seek to prevent the internationalisation of the S$. The present label: “Non-Internationalisation of the S$” may suggest that Singapore restricts foreign participation in S$ markets, which we do not do. We have therefore also decided to rename the policy "Lending of S$ to non-resident financial institutions".  Conclusion Asia has had a remarkable recovery and can now look forward to a period of renewed growth and prosperity. Financial markets will play a major role in this process. Despite some strategic and security 6 BIS Review 33/2004 
risks in the region, the political situation is generally stable and positive. There are challenges ahead, but with greater regional collaboration and integration, and continued reforms and developments to financial sectors in individual countries, Asians, and investors in the region, can look forward to a vibrant and dynamic future. BIS Review 33/2004 7 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Structural reforms and growth, as highlighted by the Irish case Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, delivered at the Whitaker lecture organised by the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, Dublin, 31 May 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen,  It is a real pleasure for me to speak at this inaugural lecture in honour of Dr. T.K. Whitaker, for several reasons.  Firstly, in doing so I have the satisfaction of honouring a great man, a great European and a great Central Banker. Dr. Whitaker is a man whose inspiration and efforts were used at a critical time in Irish history to bring Ireland on a journey of transformation from economic stagnation to a position of stunning and exemplary economic success. Secondly, you, Dr. Whitaker, deserve to take the satisfaction and pride of knowing that your contribution to the success of the Irish economy has not been bounded by Ireland’s shores. Rather the process of transformation that you began over four decades ago has become a model for the millions of new citizens of the European Union. The new Member States of the EU have had to confront economic challenges whose magnitude and long-term importance are similar to those that faced Ireland when you began your work. Thanks to Ireland’s economic success, to which you devoted your life, we can be confident that economic reform works.  Today I have the opportunity to highlight the importance of structural and fiscal reforms in an enlarged Europe. Ireland’s contribution in this area is not confined to inspiration from its exemplary policy record. The Irish Presidency of the European Union is working to stimulate progress in structural reform through its prioritisation of the Lisbon Agenda. Together with the great events of European Union enlargement and the progress being made in other areas, this should be a source of pride for Ireland.  Speaking about Ireland’s EU Presidency, and noting that the outgoing President of the European Parliament, Pat Cox, is also Irish, I cannot resist mentioning with pride my own Celtic roots as a native “Breton”! Before experiencing economic spring, Ireland has had to go through a long winter of economic inertia. For decades after the establishment of Ireland’s independence a climate of economic and social pessimism became prevalent in a country which appeared to have little to offer its citizens but the prospect of emigration and low revenues. Between 1951 and 1958, as Europe’s economy rebounded, Ireland’s relative GDP per capita actually fell from 75 to 60 per cent of the EU average.  It was the year 1958 in which an important turning point was made in Irish modern economic history: The Programme for Economic Expansion was published under your leadership and inspiration as the then Secretary of the Department of Finance.  This publication pointed a way out from what appeared to be an intractable downward spiral of weakening economic activity, high inflation, low living standards, chronic unemployment and a level of emigration that was comparable to the birth rate. With its emphasis on free trade, increased competition and the need to end protectionism, this document pointed the way to an Ireland that was to become economically more open, industrially more diverse and increasingly confident of its future.  Your inspiration was followed by your action as Ireland’s top public servant. In the same year of 1958, the Industrial Development Authority was created, bringing the stimulus of foreign investment into the Irish economy. Subsequently, you guided Ireland’s programme of trade liberalisation and structural reform in the 1960s. Economic growth accelerated as a result. In 1973 Ireland acceded to the EU in a process to which you played a significant role as Governor of the Irish Central Bank.  So far I have looked backward but in true Central Banking style I have done so only so that I may look forward, in particular to the challenges facing Europe now. In an enlarged Europe, the vision you have displayed in inspiring, designing and implementing economic reform in the 1950s is very relevant to us today.  BIS Review 33/2004 1 
Allow me now to focus on this theme and in particular on the important topics of structural reform and fiscal consolidation, explaining for each of them their merits, including in light of the Irish experience Economic and Monetary Union has been highly successful in fostering macroeconomic stability in Europe. The ECB has provided its own contribution to this success through the safeguarding of price stability in the euro area. However, important efforts are still needed to fully realise the advantages of a stable single currency. Structural reforms that are designed to increase the flexibility of markets offer the key to achieving higher sustainable growth, increasing employment, promoting innovation and securing the sustainability of social security systems in the EU. They furthermore enhance the capacity of the participating countries to cushion macroeconomic shocks. By contrast, the more rigid labour, product and financial markets are, the higher will be the employment and income losses experienced in response to changing domestic and global economic conditions.  It is widely recognised that structural reforms are needed to improve the prospects of the euro area. Given that demographics in the EU are less dynamic than in other economies, including the US, the case for a decisive implementation of structural reforms is even more pressing. This is not to say that there has been no progress in structural reform across Europe in past years. Indeed, a number of governments have made important and significant steps to address structural rigidities in their countries. Progress has been uneven however and we still have a distance to cover before reaching the goals that have been set.  The impetus from determined structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets would set in motion a virtuous circle of increasing confidence: the more credible the reforms are, the more confidence they will create, and the more confidence is created, the sooner positive results will be visible. So, I would like to give you some examples of where I think further progress with structural reform is needed in Europe, to enhance job creation, growth and economic resilience. One of the most difficult and persistent challenges facing Europe is to reduce structural unemployment and elevate the level of activity rate. In 2003, 9% of the labour force in the European Union was unemployed, a level of three percentage points higher than in the US. The rate of youth unemployment was more than double that of adult unemployment. The overall rate of activity is around 62 % in the euro area where it is as around 75 % in the United States. Some countries have started to reform their social security systems and unemployment schemes and early retirement incentives have been reduced. But more progress of this type is necessary to attract more people into the labour market, particularly as Europe’s populations become older, and to reach the goal which has been set up in the LISBON agenda, namely a rate of activity of 70 % by 2010. In a number of cases, together with high marginal tax rates, the legal and regulatory environment in Europe continues to provide a disincentive to take up work and to continue working later on in life. And, there are still, in certain sectors of activity, a large mismatch between skills and vacancies, implying the need for improved education and training. Finally, wages should more strongly reflect regional and sectoral productivity differences.  EU countries also made progress in product market reforms during the 1990s, having positive effects on the integration and level of competition in goods markets, but barriers to competition and innovation in Europe remain. Attention should be paid in particular to the share of EU Internal Market legislation not yet transposed into national laws, the incomplete integration of the service sector, where most new jobs are created, and remaining regulations that hamper the internal market. Progress on this front is extremely important as many forms of national regulations hamper integration and competition and keep prices above levels observed in more integrated markets. Furthermore, state subsidies and in particular sectoral aid continue to distort European product market. The Lisbon target that R&D investment should reach 3% of GDP, with two-thirds financed privately, is not yet achieved.  Finally much progress has been achieved in capital market reforms, not least due to the introduction of the euro. But the further integration of national capital markets towards a truly European financial market could make an even more important contribution to safeguarding against country-specific shocks. It would also result in greater availability of risk capital - particularly for innovative enterprises - and, more generally, in a reduction in financing costs for productive investments. Structural reforms in capital markets should aim to allow a more effective allocation of savings toward the most rewarding investment opportunities. Further efforts should also be made to promote foreign investment in the euro area in order to attract additional capital and promote a greater transfer of technology. In this context, one has to consider the astonishing experience of Ireland, which recovered from poor economic and fiscal conditions in the mid-1980s to an impressive pace of economic activity and sound 2 BIS Review 33/2004 
fiscal position in no more than a decade. In addition to a favourable macroeconomic environment and the benefits derived from participation in the European Union, the economic recovery was grounded on far-reaching home made structural reforms in the labour, capital and product markets.  The strengthening of the labour market was strongly underpinned by a supportive policy framework. A strong pickup in labour supply and impressive productivity gains were associated with favourable demographics and, more recently, an increase in skilled immigration. Furthermore, unemployment was dramatically reduced through a more efficient matching of individuals and job vacancies. Labour market participation, including that of women, was increased through structural reforms to reduce tax wedges and the human capital of the labour force was upgraded through a significant investment in education. Ireland’s economic success can therefore be linked to the transformation of its labour market into a plentiful supply of competitively priced and quality labour resources. Important successes were also made through structural reform within product and capital markets. The liberalisation of trade and investment through the Single European Market programme had positive effects on output and productivity and put downward pressure on costs and prices. Goods markets became more integrated. Research and development supported the dynamic gains from faster growth. Foreign direct investment also made a very significant contribution to Ireland’s growing economy. This streamed into Ireland, placing the country as one of the premier host countries for US foreign direct investment in the world during the 1990s. The EU’s Structural and Cohesion Funds were well used to improve Ireland’s infrastructure and educational system. Moreover, Ireland developed a transparent regulatory framework.  To conclude on structural reforms, I think the key issue now is to bridge the gap between strategy and implementation in Europe - to identify the best policy practices and make structural reform happen. The European Union has a number of useful institutional instruments and processes in place, such as the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, the Employment guidelines and the Spring European Council, to foster implementation. In this respect, the ECB has always backed the diagnosis, the agenda and the goals that were adopted by the Lisbon European Council in 2000. The Presidency Conclusions of the Spring 2004 European Council delivered a message of determination and confidence which reinforced the validity and relevance of the Lisbon process. We have a consensus on the “road map”. The issue today is to improve “navigation”, to improve the decision making process and the effective delivery of the reforms. Convincing the people of Europe that all European citizens will be better off thanks to these reforms is absolutely key. The success of Ireland was largely due to the fact that the Irish citizens were rightly convinced that this road map would improve their own situation. Moving to the second topic of my speech, i.e. fiscal policies, let me stress that we Europeans have been very bold in creating a single currency in the absence of a political federation, a federal government and a federal budget at the euro area level. Some observers were indeed arguing that without a federal budget of some significance the policy mix would be very erratic, depending on the random behaviour of the different national fiscal policies of the member countries. They were also arguing that without a federal budget it would be impossible to weather, with the help of the fiscal channel, asymmetric shocks hitting one particular member economy. In this respect, the very existence of the Stability and Growth Pact actually allows to refute these two arguments: first, the Maastricht Treaty and the Pact provide a mutual surveillance by the “peers”- i.e the Ministers of Finance - of national fiscal policies; second, by calling upon Member States to maintain their budget close to balance or in surplus over the medium term, the Pact allows the automatic stabilisers to play in full in countries facing an economic downturn, without breaching the 3% ceiling for the deficit. Beyond these economic underpinnings, other considerations are worth mentioning: a fiscal policy set according to rules adds to macroeconomic stability by providing agents with expectations of a predictable economic environment; this reduces uncertainty and promotes longer term decision making, notably investment decisions, and economic growth; in addition, sound fiscal policies contribute to lower risk premia on long term interest rates and thus support more favourable financing conditions; finally, fiscal discipline prevents spill-over effects from one country to another in the form of higher interest rates. Some people argue that fiscal consolidation is detrimental to demand and economic activity. I would maintain that wealth and expectational effects of well-designed consolidation programmes might very much reduce and possibly even outweigh the traditional Keynesian multiplier effects of fiscal policy on demand and activity. If fiscal consolidation is perceived by the private sector as a credible sign that public spending will be permanently lower in future years, households will revise upwards their expected permanent income in anticipation of lower future taxes. Therefore, current and planned consumption will also increase.  BIS Review 33/2004 3 
In addition, fiscal consolidation might improve long-term financing conditions by way of less demand on the savings pool (reducing crowding out) and lower risk premia on government paper. Hence, wealth effects prompted by lower nominal and real interest rates would support larger consumption. Furthermore, following more favourable financing conditions, private investment is also likely to increase.  The case for expansionary effects on the supply side, via an improved competitiveness of the economy, is also important. If fiscal consolidation can induce moderating effects on wage demand, relative unit labour costs might decrease, with positive medium-term effects on real GDP growth through a greater competitiveness of the productive sector. Such effects are buoyed if lower expected tax rates and more efficient public expenditure enhance the working incentives and the investment environment. It is also important to recognise that fiscal policies can promote growth and employment via appropriate reallocations of the level and composition of government taxes and expenditures without hampering in any respect the fiscal rules. Reducing inefficient public spending can reduce disincentives to work and help to finance tax cuts. Furthermore, public expenditures can be redirected towards productivity-enhancing physical and human capital accumulation rather than, for example, the provision of subsidies for declining industries.  In this respect, the dramatic acceleration of output in Ireland in the post 1987 period can be associated with a vigorous and successful project of fiscal consolidation starting in 1987. This programme was based on tight expenditure control via subsidy cuts, social security reform and a streamlining of the public sector and control of public expenditure.  Ireland’s experience, similar to the Danish experience in 1983-89, clearly shows how policies geared to fiscal consolidation do not necessarily entail contractionary effects on real aggregate demand and economic activity. On the contrary, in these two countries, in spite of the tightening policies undertaken, the rate of growth showed a significant increase in relation to previous years. In particular, in these countries, significant budget consolidation based on spending reduction enhanced the long term fiscal sustainability and increased the policy credibility of a more favourable tax regime. Regarding Ireland, the budget deficit was reduced from 10.1% of GDP in 1986 to 1.7% in 1989, while the debt ratio declined from 113% of GDP to 100.4% of GDP; over the same period GDP growth accelerated from 0.3% to 6.2%; the overall consolidation effort, as measured through the structural fiscal balance, amounted to 5.1% of GDP over these three years. In the years afterwards, Ireland continued to enjoy high rates of GDP growth and kept large structural fiscal surpluses (almost always above 5% of GDP), thus allowing for a steady and rapid decline of the debt ratio (which reached 32.4% of GDP in 2003). The Irish and Danish experience brings evidence that expansionary expectation effects may dominate on the contractionary effects of a fiscal consolidation. In both cases there is a considerable evidence that the consumer boom was prompted by the wealth effects of cuts in public spending, as a signal of lower future taxes, concomitantly to the wealth effects implied by the fall in interest rates. On the supply side, a low tax environment has underpinned the pick up in economic activity in Ireland.  Coming back to Europe as a whole, confidence among European citizens is vital for a stronger economic recovery and sustained growth. The ECB’s Governing Council recognises that the still moderate level of consumer confidence is related in part to the debate about the appropriate path for fiscal policy and structural reform in many countries in the euro area. Also for this reason, progress with the implementation of the necessary structural reforms and more determined efforts to establish sound fiscal positions over the medium term are key to stronger confidence. The successful implementation of structural economic and fiscal reforms requires significant and tireless efforts of explanation, pedagogy and adequate public communication. Over time, everybody will benefit from more growth, employment and opportunities. These gains from reform are often overlooked in the public debate. In fact, there is a formidable challenge to gain the support of public opinion for implementing structural reforms.  What are the implications in the current economic environment? Fiscal imbalances are quite significant in a number of EU countries with deficits and public debt ratios being too high. For these countries, there are solid economic reasons to argue that credible fiscal consolidation would boost growth in net terms, the so-called “Ricardian” effect being more important than the “Keynisian” effect. Reducing such imbalances is likely to have positive expectational effects of a more favourable tax regime and better financing conditions in the future.  4 BIS Review 33/2004 
Moreover, we would probably all agree that tax and spending ratios in some countries are too high and unfavourable for investment and economic dynamism. Expenditure-based fiscal consolidation and reform that would credibly reduce disincentives to work, invest and innovate could have significant confidence effects even in the short run.  To conclude, I would like to return to the Lisbon reform agenda set in 2000, which was ambitious, but at the same time, absolutely necessary. It was clear that implementing effectively the necessary reforms would be a real challenge and this challenge requires that we win the heart and the trust of the people. Indeed, many European countries are currently at a crossroad. First, and as regards public finances, countries are faced with the option of either profoundly reforming their public expenditure and social security systems or putting their long run sustainability at risk. Second, I am convinced that economic activity, employment and innovation in the EU can only be lifted to a new, structurally higher, level by far-reaching and progressive structural reforms. These must go hand in hand with fiscal consolidation. The long-term advantages of following such a strategy far outweigh the short-term costs of its implementation. I therefore strongly encourage and support those governments that have the courage and leadership to follow this path and hope that other countries will follow their positive example. Dr. Whitaker, let me express my profound admiration for the example you have shown to Central Bankers everywhere in your endurance and constant commitment to the public good. The fruits of your life’s work are all around us today and will play a role in inspiring policy reform in Europe. I for one, Dr Whitaker, salute you for your work, and thank you for the inspiration you have given all of us. Thank you for your attention. BIS Review 33/2004 5 
Wu Xiaolin: China’s monetary and interest rate policy in year 2004 Speech by Miss Wu Xiaolin, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Forum of Financial Opening and Commercial Bank Reform of China, Beijing, 17 April 2004. *      *      * The 3rd Plenum of the 16th CPC National Congress calls for deepening financial reform through pushing forward financial institutions reform and improving financial supervisory and regulatory regime. Commercial bank reform, one important component of financial reform, is inseparable from the improvement of financial regulatory regime, which will not only lay the foundation for commercial bank reform, but also intensify the requirements for the operation and management of commercial banks. Given current economic and financial situation, central bank’s monetary policy stance in year 2004 is to rein in excessive money and credit growth, avoid excessive volatility of interest rates and accelerate interest rate liberalization. Next, I would like to focus on China’s Monetary and Interest Rate Policy in Year 2004. I. Monetary policy targets in 2004 We expect to keep the M2 and M1 growth rates at around 17%, new RMB lending around RMB 2.6 trillion yuan, and CPI around 3%. The ultimate objective of our monetary policy is to maintain balanced economic growth. Large population and comparatively insufficient resources in China pose constraints on economic growth. Therefore, the economy should be developed in a pragmatic, coordinated and balanced way. According to the 7% growth rate target for 2004 set by the Central Committee, and considering that money supply growth and new lending in 2004 should be lower than those in previous year due to the time lag of excessive credit growth in 2003, we decided on the aforementioned monetary policy targets. With appropriate macroeconomic adjustment and regulation, the CPI in year 2004 is expected to be kept at around 3%. To be more specific, hangover effect may contribute 2.2 pp to CPI, new inflation factors and price adjustment policies contribute 1 pp. Combined with other non-quantifiable upward price pressure, the CPI growth rate could maintain at around 3% if macroeconomic adjustment measures gradually take effect. Given that China’s economy, in recent years, has been in the process of transition and integration into the world economy, the correlations among economic variables kept changing; hence the selection of intermediate monetary policy targets provoked debate in academia. Before any clear conclusion is reached, we have to make the intermediate targets a synthetic target, focusing on M2 and credit scale while considering money market rates. II. Apply various monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner to reach monetary policy targets China’s economy, currently right in the transition period, is not comparable to command or developed market economy. The complexity of macroeconomic development poses challenges to monetary policy. In this connection, only if we utilize various monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner, can we reach the monetary policy targets. At present, the major monetary policy instruments include: open market operation, reserve requirement, interest rate policy, re-lending and rediscount, and credit policy. i. Sterilize excessive forex position through open market operation while maintaining sufficient liquidity in the market Over the past two years, China’s foreign exchange reserve has grown fast, leading to substantial increase in base money injection as a result of Forex purchase. In line with the overall money and credit plan, the People’s Bank of China (PBC) has maintained the stable growth of base money through open market operation. Since 22nd April 2004, the central bank has intensified currency withdraw from circulation through issuing central bank bills. By the end of 2003, the central bank has made 63 issues of central bank bills, with a total issuance amount of RMB 722.68 billion yuan, and outstanding amount of RMB 337.68 billion yuan. In 2003, base money injection as a result of Forex purchase added up to RMB 1,145.9 billion yuan, while open market operation withdrew BIS Review 32/2004 1 
RMB 269.4 billion yuan base money, resulting in a net base money injection of RMB 876.5 billion yuan. At the same time, the PBC has provided sufficient liquidity to financial institutions through flexible market operation. At the end of last August, the IPO of Huaxia Bank led to relatively large liquidity shortage in the commercial banks. Under such circumstance, the PBC, on August 26 and September 2nd, 2003, twice reduced the issuance scale of 3-month central bank bills and injected liquidity to commercial banks through 7-day reverse repo transaction; At the time of Changjiang Power IPO on November 11 last year, the PBC again conducted 7-day reserve repo transaction. Under the guidance of open market operation, the 7-day repo rates, typical inter-bank interest ratea, have remained stable at around 2.15% despite of the liquidity fluctuations resulted from IPOs, which indicates that open market operation has reached expected target. Given sufficient liquidity of financial institutions and falling trend of money market rates during the first quarter of this year, the PBC intensified sterilization operation. In this period, the cumulative amount of central bill issuance reached RMB 435.2 billion yuan and outstanding amount stood at RMB 615.45 billion yuan; Base money injection as a result of Forex purchase amounted to RMB 291.6 billion yuan, and open market operation withdrew RMB 281 billion yuan, resulting in a net base money injection of RMB 10.6 billion yuan and basically offsetting the Forex position of base money. ii. Use reserve requirement policy in a flexible way to lower the cost of currency withdraw and improve the operation of commercial banks In order to rein in the obviously excessive credit growth, the PBC raised the required reserve ratio by one pp on September 21, 2003. Traditional Money and Banking theories regard required reserve ratio hike as a relatively drastic measure, nevertheless the central bank interpreted it as a mild move. The major reason is that the central bank has to withdraw a large amount of excess liquidity because of fast growth of foreign exchange reserves, To do so, if the central bank only issue CB bills without any other measure, it has to raise the interest rates on CB bills to a very high level given strong economic expansion momentum and commercial banks’ wide interest rate differentials which is larger than the returns on CB bills, however, high interest rate would have significant implications on the economy. In contrast, the 1 pp rise of required reserve ratio enabled the central bank to reduced at a lower cost the commercial banks’ excess reserve by around RMB150 billion yuan, accounting for only 6% of their holdings of treasury bills, financial bonds and CB bills. Therefore, the required reserve ratio hike is actually a mild policy measure. Moreover, the policy was announced one month in advance, giving sufficient time for financial institutions to manage their liquidity. The PBC also provided timely support to those financial institutions with short-term liquidity difficulties, so as to maintain the overall stable developments of financial operation and money market interest rates. With the approval of the State Council, the PBC announced on March 25, 2004 that the required reserve ratio for financial institutions with capital adequacy ratio below a specific level would rise 0.5 pp to 7.5%, while the ratio for other financial institutions remained unchanged. State-owned commercial banks, urban and rural credit cooperatives were exempt from the differentiated required reserve ratio policy. On April 11, 2004, the PBC announced again that the required reserve ratio for all financial institutions except from urban and rural credit cooperatives would rise 0.5 pp since April 25, 2004. The differentiated required reserve ratio scheme is both a transitional policy in line with China’s current financial system, and an innovation based on the original purpose of required reserve ratio policy, i.e. to ensure the payment and settlement of commercial banks, and to prevent over-lending by financial institutions attracted to favorable loan terms which may undermine their liquidity and payment capacity. The required reserve ratio policy then gradually evolved into a monetary policy instrument, and the deposit insurance regime combined with supervision on capital adequacy ratio started to replace it as policy tools to impose prompt corrective actions on financial institutions based on different risk profiles. Given the fact that China has yet to establish deposit insurance system, and quite a number of financial institutions failed to reach the 8% capital adequacy ratio, the differentiated required reserve ratio scheme is conducive to curb excessive credit expansion of the financial institutions with low capital adequacy ratio and poor asset quality, and to prevent the one-size-fits-all approach in macro financial adjustment and regulation. 2 BIS Review 32/2004 
iii. Utilize other monetary policy instruments At the same time, the PBC will strengthen credit management by rigorously curbing loans to over-invested industries, and keeping the proportion of medium and long term loans at reasonable level. The PBC will also endeavor to adjust loan structure, urge financial institutions to implement credit policy, promote financial ecological development, enhance re-lending and rediscount management, continue to improve financial service to rural economy, and further promote inter-bank market development. III. The priority of China’s current interest rate policy is to enhance institutional reform so as to facilitate monetary policy transmission mechanism In a market economy, interest rate policy is conducted through adjusting interest rates to influence market financing costs and signal the central bank’s judgment on economic development and liquidity position. In the games between central bank and the public, the signal effect is bigger than financing cost. i. Adjust interest rates flexibly on the condition of maintaining both internal and external equilibrium Since September 2003, the Year-on-Year (YOY) consumption price level has grown fast to 3.2% at the end of December, implying increasing inflation pressure. From January to March 2004, the YOY CPI rose 3.2%, 2.1%, and 3.1% respectively and month-to-month (MOM) rose 1.1%, –0.2% and 0.3% respectively. The CPI in the first half of this year may continue to rise, but current one-year loan rate is only 5.31%. If real loan rates fall negative at some point of time, the behavior of economic agents will be distorted. The enterprises will accumulate raw materials because they can make profits simply by borrowing, thus aggravating raw material shortage, pushing price level further up and leading funds to circulate in retailing rather than be invested in manufacturing. Therefore, price level is one indicator the central bank must closely monitor when considering interest rate policy. In addition, the central bank must also take into account the issue of Forex arbitrage. Over the past two years, capital inflows have led to substantial rise in Forex position. The amount of capital inflow is directly linked to domestic and foreign interest rate differentials. Currently the one-year domestic RMB deposit rate is 1.98%, 1.4 pp higher than the 0.5625% one-year domestic USD deposit rate and 0.92 pp higher than the 1.06% one-year US CD rate. In this connection, we must flexibly adjust interest rates on the condition of maintaining both internal and external equilibrium. ii. Establish floating benchmark interest rate regime and signal to the public in a timely manner With the approval of the State Council, the PBC decided to adopt floating relending rate regime. Relendings refers to the loans central bank grants to financial institutions. Floating relending rate regime means that the PBC, according to macroeconomic and financial situation, can set and announce the extent by which the relending rates move above benchmark rates within the fluctuation band authorized by the State Council. Effective on March 25, 2004, the rates on one-year-or-less liquidity relendings rose by 0.63 pp from existing benchmark level. In order to support agricultural development, floating relending rate regime for rural credit cooperatives will be implemented gradually in three years, and three years later, the rate increments for RCCs will be half those for other financial institutions. The adoption of floating relending rate regime is another important step toward interest rate liberalization. It helps not only improve interest rate formation mechanism and the central bank’s capability of guiding market rates, but also upgrade the effectiveness and transparency of relending management. iii. Change the ways of resetting loan rates to guide commercial banks to enhance risk management and make positive reaction to the interest rate changes by central bank With the approval of the State Council, the PBC changed the way of resetting loan rates. Effective on January 1st, 2004, the ways of resetting loan (excluding household mortgages) rates are determined by borrowers and lenders through negotiation. The frequency of resetting rates on medium and long BIS Review 32/2004 3 
term RMB loans, previously once a year and now determined by borrowers and lenders, can be monthly, quarterly, annual, or fixed. This policy move has corrected the asymmetry between fixed deposit rates and annually changed loan rates. Consequently, commercial banks can determine the way of resetting loan rates according to customer’s credit rating, and flexibly design loan products. Also, shortened resetting intervals help commercial banks spot problems the customer’s solvency problem. In addition, when central bank changes benchmark rates, commercial banks can promptly adjust loan rates based on lending agreement, thus mitigating interest rate risk, facilitating the transmission of monetary policy to manufacturing and consumption. The change of loan rates resetting policy forced commercial banks to establish offer system, to factor in credit risk and interest risk when estimating profits, and to set up internal transfer pricing mechanism. iv. Speed up the adoption of loan rate floor and deposit rate ceiling policy and urge commercial banks to improve asset/liability management (ALM) With the control of lending scale and deposit/lending rates, the commercial banks’ ALM only focuses on the ratio of deposit to lendings. Interest rate liberalization, nevertheless, requires commercial banks to focus on interest rate risk and capital adequacy ratio. (i) Loan rates floor management Loan rate floor management calls for commercial banks to adjust asset structure with risk pricing. According to a survey on September 2002, less than half of the outstanding commercial bank lendings are fixed rate, while in stock-holding commercial banks, the percentage of fixed rate loans is only 36%. Since the 0.9-1.7 pp floating range has basically liberalized the lending rates, commercial banks must learn how to price risk. Loan pricing must take into account such factors as fund cost, direct and indirect costs, loan taxation cost, loan maturity, loan risk and target profit. Fund cost rate refers to the cost for commercial banks to obtain fund in the market with similar maturity and cash flows as the loan extended to clients, i.e. the internal transfer price of the loan. Direct costs, including all costs related to loan product and client services, can be derived from direct cost rate using activity-based-cost (ABC) or average-cost method. Indirect costs, generated from operations other than loan activities, can be calculated using average-cost method. Because the calculation of direct and indirect costs both use historical data, the data must be updated regularly so as to ensure its effectiveness and applicability. In China, taxation cost rate is the operating tax rate plus added cost per loan. Credit risk premium is used to cover expected loan loss and the expected loan loss rate equals default rate multiplied by loan loss rate. To estimate loan loss, commercial banks must set up internal rating modes. The longer the loan’s maturity, the higher the lendings rate. The logic behind is that longer maturity means longer financing period, consequently higher financing cost and greater possibility of changing cost, therefore, the loan rates should rise accordingly. Target profit can be estimated using return on capital and the ratio of capital to lending. At present, loan pricing is one weakness of our commercial banks, because in the past they didn’t have much chance to do it due to interest rate control. In the process of interest rate liberalization in coming years, commercial banks need step up efforts in pricing product, accumulate experience and basic data, and strengthen international competitiveness. (ii) Deposit rate ceiling management Deposit rate ceiling management requires commercial banks to actively adjust their liability scale and structure, and adapt themselves to capital adequacy ratio management. Western commercial banking management theories have evolved from asset management, to liability management, finally to asset/liability management. Liability management originated at the end of the1960’s, when high inflation and sharp and unexpected interest rate hike, combined with rigorous interest rate control in many countries, led to disintermediation and fund shortage in commercial banks. Commercial banks then had to attach great importance to liability management and attract fund back into commercial banks through innovation. However, China’s liability management originated in a very different backdrop. In China, funds and risks are over-concentrated in banks while capital adequacy ratio of most commercial banks are low. To meet capital adequacy ratio requirements, commercial banks must reduce either asset or liability. With deposit rate ceiling policy, commercial banks can tailor deposit price to specific situation. 4 BIS Review 32/2004 
Commercial banks with low capital adequacy ratio can reduce deposit by lowering deposit rates so as to mitigate the pressure of excessively expanding loans to avoid loss due to large liability. Therefore, deposit rate ceiling policy not only helps rein in excessive credit growth and mitigate inflation pressure and non-performing loan risks, but also guide funds into capital market to promote capital market development. v. Actively push forward financial derivatives transaction with a purpose of providing commercial banks and customers with hedging instruments during interest liberalization. Both financial institutions and their customers need instruments to hedge interest rate risks after interest rates are liberalized. In fact, according to option-pricing theory, financial institutions, even without derivatives, can use basic instruments to create transactions with the same nature as derivatives to hedge risks. But the pitfall is its relatively high cost and risk. Derivative hedging is cost-effective and convenient, but risky due to high leverage, which was reflected to some extent in the meltdown of Barrings and LTCM. In this regard, we will enhance the internal control of financial institutions before pushing forward derivative transactions and finally provide commercial banks and customers with hedging instruments. With the approaching of fully opening up of China’s banking sector, commercial bank reform is urgent. I believe that, with clear policy and development direction set by Central Committee and State Council and more favorable reform environment, commercial bank reform will proceed successfully through joint efforts by all staff in banking sector. BIS Review 32/2004 5 
Paul Hartmann: The impact of financial infrastructure transformation on monetary policy execution - the Namibian experience Keynote address presented by Mr Paul Hartmann, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Namibia, on behalf of Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the Perago User Conference 2004, Pretoria, 22 September 2004. *      *      * Mr. Chairman Participants from Central and Commercial Banks Representatives from various Corporations Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen It is a great pleasure to address you this morning at this Perago’s User Conference 2004, which is the second user conference that Perago has arranged. In line with the theme of this conference, which is “inventing and enabling our future”, the focus of my address today is on the impact of financial infrastructure transformation on monetary policy execution in relation to the Namibian experience. Ladies and gentlemen, when we refer to payment systems, we are looking at instruments, organisations, operating procedures, and information and communication systems used to initiate and transmit payment information from payer to payee to settle payments - that is, transfers of money. When such systems are designed, it is critical that they enhance the efficiency with which monetary policy is conducted, the soundness of financial institutions, and the functioning of the economy as a whole. The growing complexity and diversity of financial markets and financial instruments, globalisation and integration of markets, and strong growth in private capital flows call for the strengthening of such links. The payment system, therefore, represents the interaction between transactions in the real economy, such as purchase of goods and services, including financial instruments and financial transactions, and this interaction gives rise to payment and settlement obligations. Banking institutions play a role of payment intermediaries because they hold the settlement accounts of those engaged in economic activity. Amongst the banks there should be an interbank transfer system, representing the clearing and settlement process. The central bank is responsible for final settlement and payment transfers that take place across the accounts which banks hold at central banks.  Mr. Chairman, the increased attention being paid to modern payment systems was triggered by the a massive increase in the number and value of settlement transaction, as well as the technological advances that caused much faster movement of funds. There is also widespread consensus of the pivotal role that payment systems play in any market economy, that is: • as a vital element in the financial infrastructure of the economy; • as a necessary channel for effective economic management, particularly through monetary policy; • as a means of promoting economic efficiency. In my address today, I am expected to focus primarily on the role of payment systems in monetary policy execution with respect to the Namibian experience, but it would be to the benefit of the audience if I take the scope of my presentation a bit wider. I must also stress right at the outset that as a member of the Common Monetary Area (CMA) it is not possible for Namibia to pursue an independent monetary policy. Monetary policy intervention is very much dictated by the monetary policy stance taken by South Africa. Therefore, the use of our RTGS system in monetary policy execution is quite limited. Nevertheless, the financial infrastructure transformation that Namibia has undertaken and continues to undertake has enabled us to better understand and manage domestic and cross-border payment and liquidity flows and to institute appropriate risk management strategies. Against this background, I will firstly deal with the role of payment systems in monetary policy implementation. Secondly, I would like to share our experience in reforming the Namibian payment system. Then I will outline issues related to the Bank of Namibia’s accommodation policy that had to be reformed to allow for the smooth and efficient functioning of our RTGS system. BIS Review 53/2004 1 
1. Payment systems and monetary policy implementation The large-value payment system of a developed market economy has a major role to play in the successful implementation of the key responsibly of every central bank - namely achieving and maintaining monetary and financial stability. In a modern market economy, the main instrument of monetary policy is the short-term interest rate, i.e. the rate at which commercial banks can borrow from and lend to each other in the money markets. Central banks control this interest rate through their ability - as the ultimate provider of liquidity to the banking system - to influence the balance between supply of and demand for funds in money markets. In some countries, changes in the level of mandatory reserves that the commercial banks are required to hold with the central bank are also used to influence the supply/demand balance and hence generate the required movement in short-term interest rates, and therefore in the whole spectrum of interest rates in the economy. Through open-market operations some central banks intervene in the market to maintain interest rates at desired levels. An efficient interbank money market is a prerequisite for these processes to be successful. Also, the central bank should be in a position to reliably forecast factors that influence the daily liquidity in the monetary system. A reliable RTGS system is therefore indispensable to enable central banks to determine the monetary conditions in the economy and to implement appropriate monetary policy. The Namibian RTGS system certainly enables us to monitor the monetary conditions, but the Bank of Namibia does not have the ability to use its Bank rate to influence the liquidity situation and market conditions in the way that most central banks can do. Also, we do not manipulate the reserve asset requirement to manage the liquidity situation in Namibia. Moreover, an active interbank market is still lacking in Namibia, as banks conduct interbank transactions with their South African parent companies rather than with other domestic banks. However, as I will indicate later on there are still other tools and methods with which we can manage liquidity within the RTGS system. Let me now retract a bit by giving you an overview of the payment system reform project in Namibia. 2. Namibia’s payment system reform project Namibia’s payment system reform project is essentially driven by three key considerations: • Firstly, the foremost driving force behind the project is the realisation that the Namibian payment system reform process is essential to reduce various payment system risks and increasing the efficiency of the Namibian financial system and the functioning of its economy. • Secondly, South Africa, having been the settlement centre for a long period of time, has realised by allowing its payment system to be used by other countries it could introduce risk from these countries, which, in turn, could destabilise its financial system. CMA countries were therefore, encouraged to establish their own domestic clearing and settlement arrangements and to institute appropriate arrangements for cross-border transactions. • Thirdly, under the consultative framework provided by the SADC Central Bank Governors, an initiative was established to define and implement safe, efficient and harmonised payment systems in SADC member states and to implement a regional cross-border payments strategy in support of the free-trade protocol. The guiding principle that led our reform programme was the realisation that safe, efficient and cost effective payment systems are critical to the sound functioning of the financial system and are a key requirement in maintaining and promoting financial stability. A sound and safe functioning payment system also facilitates prudential supervision, and improves monetary policy intervention and liquidity management.  The national payment system reform project is driven by the entire banking industry and led by the Bank of Namibia as overseer of the clearing and settlement processes. The Bank of Namibia and the Bankers Association of Namibia have agreed that the Bank would spearhead the settlement leg of the project, while commercial banks would assume responsibility for seeking appropriate solutions for the Namibian payment and clearing arrangements. Commercial Banks are driving the payment and clearing process in line with standards laid down by the Bank of Namibia. Both projects are closely co-ordinated between the Bank and commercial banks and for each a steering committee has been created. 2 BIS Review 53/2004 
Namibia has implemented a settlement system through Perago who was the system and service provider and also project manager. This system is called NISS - the acronym for Namibia Inter-bank Settlement System that went live on the 10th June 2002. The system is based on Real-Time Gross Settlement principles and has enabled Namibian banks to exchange payments electronically, in real-time, amongst each other and between themselves and the Bank of Namibia. In accordance with international practices, these funds transfers are final and irrevocable, and in this way the Namibian system is brought in line with generally accepted principles for safe and efficient national payment system. All commercial banks in Namibia are connected to NISS via SWIFT, the international de facto financial message carrier. They are entering the system through the NISS entry user interface also provided by Perago. On the 16th April 2004 the Bank of Namibia and two commercial banks have switched to Trustlink a bureau service for SWIFT. This link-up will improve efficiency in that all services related to SWIFT will be provided by the bureau, while there is also a substantial cost savings to this arrangement. Namibia’s RTGS system is not simply the installation of computer hardware and software - it involved the reengineering of the financial system in Namibia. A number of existing policies, procedures and rules have been modified and fine-tuned to support the overall financial system of the country and to enhance the effectiveness of central bank policies. Some legal statutes have been created such as the Payment System Management Act and some amended such as the Bills of Exchange Act in order to make the system legally enforceable and to properly align it to the Namibian legal environment. As such, it required a willingness to change from existing policies, practices and processes that existed then. The advantages of NISS to commercial banks are the improved visibility and management of risk and exposures, optimal usage of own liquidity and possible new services to customers. For the Bank of Namibia, the system led to enhanced mechanism supporting monetary policy execution, containment of systemic risk and a platform for financial market deepening. Overall, the system has improved the international risk profile of Namibia. Payment instruments take many forms, such as cash, money orders, cheques, debit and credit cards, electronic funds transfers, point of sale and automated teller machines. The importance placed on these instruments is its liquidity, which relates especially to general acceptability and marketability, with little or no risk of capital loss. These payment instruments must be cleared and this is done normally through a clearing process that will allow settlement to take place. In Namibia, NISS is currently settling obligations resulting from domestic cheques and high-value interbank payments. The remaining payment streams i.e. cards and electronic payments will follow at a later stage. This means that the annual turnover in the NISS is still quite small: in 2003 the ratio of settlement turnover to GDP was about 7:1, compared to ratio of more than 30:1 in South Africa. Apart from the domestic cheque clearance, most domestic and cross-border payments arrangements and clearing systems are still integrated and intertwined in the South African payment system, making use of various payment and clearing services through Bankserv, the South African inter-bank payment services utility company. The Namibian clearing project is therefore aimed at designing, developing and installing systems that will support paper, card and electronic transactions through Namibianised systems. The clearing system project is primarily driven by the commercial banks in accordance with a high-level project plan has been approved by all parties. The Clearing System Steering Committee has agreed to appoint a project adviser to assist in defining the system architecture, preparing a Request-for-Proposal (RFP) and evaluating the system proposals. The Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) system should be operational at the end of May 2004. By October 2004 the EFT and Cheque streams should be migrated to the new platform (NAMCLEAR) and fully integrated with the settlement system. All current paper, card or electronic based transactions will continue to be offered to the public and businesses. The significant difference, however, is the fact that all these transactions will be supported by Namibian systems. Moreover, cheque clearance should be much faster than is currently the case, meaning that beneficiaries will obtain quick value for cheque payments. People and businesses that make and receive payments will have the advantage of improved cash flows, which may further stimulate trade and the velocity of money in circulation. One area where further consideration will have to be given is transactions to and from South Africa. At the time when Namibian payment systems become operational and Namibia no longer depends on South African payment systems, cross-border payments will have to be made on a correspondent BIS Review 53/2004 3 
banking relationship. Still, the Bank of Namibia and the banking industry will continue seeking system solutions that will allow and support electronic linkages between Namibian and South African payment systems. 3. Issues pertaining to liquidity management The implementation of the NISS on 10 June 2002 and the subsequent introduction of Intra-day Repurchase Agreement (repo) on 27 October 2003 compelled the Bank to introduce a new lending policy and credit facilities for local banking institutions. More specifically, the Bank introduced a lending system comprising the following components: • Before the implementation of NISS, the Bank allowed banking institutions to overdraw their current account against securities pledged to the Bank. The purpose of the facility was not specified meaning it could be used for liquidity for settlement and non-settlement purposes. The facility did not have any time limit. Collateralised credit attracted interest at the Bank Rate, while double the Bank Rate was charged for uncollateralised credit. • Shortly after the introduction of NISS, as an interim measure, the Bank provided credit to banking institutions through the Credit Limit Module in NISS. In this arrangement a limit for each participant was set daily against the collateral pledged to the Bank. This facility was added to an existing credit facility offered by the Bank, which provides credit for non-settlement purposes. Both facilities attracted interest at the Bank Rate. • With the introduction of the intraday repo on 27 October 2003, the Bank started providing credit to participants through repurchase agreements and credit limits collateralised by reserve balances. In this case credit is only available for intra-day and overnight purposes. For longer periods, credit was provided on a facility outside NISS. The Bank Rate applied to both facilities. In September 2003, all settlement transitions were brought on a same-day settlement basis. Previously, NISS participants had until 09h00 the next morning to obtain sufficient liquidity to settle obligations accrued during the previous fund settlement value date. This modification has obliged participants to retain sufficient liquidity on their settlement accounts to meet their daily settlement obligations. Same-day settlement also saw increased liquid deposits held by commercial banks on the Bank’s call account. Interest payable on these balances in a way became a policy tool to manage liquidity to some extent. During times of high outflows, the rate is increased, while the rate is decreased at times of excess domestic liquidity. Moreover, same-day settlement has sharply reduced the used the intraday credit / repo, because it obliged participants to use their own liquid funds rather than rely on central bank intraday credit (which was actually overnight credit). For example, maximum intraday credit extended to NISS participant was about 14 percent of the settlement value in June 2003; this ratio has come down to about 6 percent in April this year. These reforms were mainly meant to improve the ability of the central bank to manage the liquidity of the monetary system and to manage risk exposures. Let me now turn a few further reforms that the Bank of Namibia is currently envisaging. 4. Bank of Namibia’s proposed accommodation policy Mr. Chairman, I would like to turn our attention to Bank of Namibia’s accommodation policy, since I regard this as an important component of monetary policy. A central bank could provide credit facilities as part of its payment services, especially in connection with large value transfer systems, to facilitate a smooth flow of settlement in the payment system. But, the central bank will not want these credit operations to reduce its control over liquidity and monetary management. It will also want to avoid becoming lender of first resort for market participants. On the contrary, it would want to foster the development of private money markets, including those for intraday funds. Moreover, in granting credit, a central bank will typically wish to use both prices and objective rationing criteria comprising (i) observance of regulatory and supervisory norms, (ii) provision of collateral, and (iii) requirements for borrowers’ capital. 4 BIS Review 53/2004 
Our new policy focus is for the Bank to provide liquidity to banking institutions through four different facilities, each with different terms and conditions. These facilities are the Intraday Repurchase Agreement, the Seven-day Repurchase Agreement, the Marginal Lending Facility, and Lender of Last Resort. Since the Lender of Last resort would be highly discretionary, I will focus more on the other three. Before I move on to explain how the facilities are applied, let me explain the underlying principles of our accommodation policy: • The Bank recognises its distinct role of short-term liquidity provider to NISS participants with a view to enhance timely and smooth settlement. This role should, however, not interfere with the Bank’s monetary policy or liquidity management roles. • In the same vein, the Bank should guard against perpetual lending as this could bleak the view on financial soundness of banking institutions. For this reason, any lending to banking institutions shall be for a limited time period. • The RTGS environment requires participants to maintain adequate balances on their settlement accounts at the Bank and not rely on the central bank to fulfil that obligation. • Liquidity provision by the Bank should not come at the expense of local interbank money market development. Therefore, since the Bank prefers not to be the lender of first resort, it encourages banking institutions to first seek liquidity in the local market and increase their holding of eligible financial instruments. • In providing accommodation to banking institutions, the Bank shall ensure that credit extended shall at all times be fully and appropriately secured. Banking institutions are therefore encouraged or even compelled to hold appropriate mix of securities reflecting their liabilities. • For each accommodation window, the Bank shall ensure that securities repoed or collateralised to each facility will not overlap with securities in other facilities. For this reason, securities will be differentiated in terms of maturities and issuers. Having expressed the principles of our accommodation policy, let me explain the three main accommodation windows that the Bank is currently considering. Intraday Repurchase Agreements In this facility, the Bank grants short-term or intraday liquidity to banking institutions in NISS for settlement needs only. Credit is extended primarily through the following: • The automatic repo facility using eligible securities in a Repurchase Agreement between the Bank and banking institutions. • Banking institutions are allowed to use up to 25 per cent of funds held in the minimum reserve account at the Bank, provided that the prescribed balance is restored to the required minimum over the 14 day averaging period. The facility is automatic provided that: • a banking institution has entered into a valid repo agreement with the Bank; • a banking institution has sufficient and appropriate securities reserved for repo purposes with the Bank of Namibia; and • a banking institution has maintained a sufficient balance on its minimum reserve account over a 14 day maintenance period. Credit through this facility will only be provided during the day, i.e. intraday. However, it may be expandable overnight and must be repurchased before the close of the next working day i.e., before the second night. If a banking institution does not have sufficient funds to repurchase its securities back, it could obtain credit from the next facilities i.e., Seven-day Repo and/or Marginal Lending Facility. BIS Review 53/2004 5 
Seven-day Repurchase Agreement This facility provides liquidity to banking institutions under the premise of monetary policy or liquidity management. Accordingly, it provides liquidity to banking institutions when they do not have sufficient securities for additional credit at the intraday facility in the NISS. For this reason, a banking institution may apply to obtain credit to either repurchase its securities and/or obtain sufficient credit for anticipated settlement needs. Liquidity is provided under this facility through a Seven-Day Repurchase Agreement. This facility operates under standing conditions and it is obtained through prior application to the Bank. It is, however, managed outside the NISS. Marginal Lending Facility This facility has been introduced to offer special assistance to banking institutions that could not obtain sufficient liquidity at the first two facilities. The use of this facility is highly discouraged and would only be used under special circumstances. Thus, lending through this facility would be considered on a merit of each case presented to the Bank. This facility serves as an important indicator for example: • It gives clear indication as to when a banking institution should be suspended from the NISS. • It gives indication as to when Banking Supervision Department should be notified. • It provides a smooth path to action under the lender of last resort policy. 5. Conclusion Mr. Chairman, in my address today I have given you a generic overview of the importance of payment systems in monetary policy implementation. To understand the Namibian situation, I have also given you a brief impression of our payment system reform process and the strategic and policy considerations that went into the design and operation of the systems. Yet the reform process is not over yet. There are always areas where one can modify or fine-tune certain procedures, operations and policies to improve the effectiveness of the system and to reduce or contain risks. I trust that the audience has obtained a better understanding of the role of payment system in monetary policy implementation and the way Namibia has addressed certain vital policy issues. In hindsight, I think the capital we have invested in our RTGS system has proven to be worthwhile. With the implementation of an electronic settlement system, a number related policy issues became evident and were reconsidered and reformed. The system, accompanied with our accommodating policies, has enabled Namibia to come closer to meeting the BIS core principles for systemically important payment systems. What remains to be achieved is to complete the Namibianised clearing systems for the three payment streams, to establish a clearing house and payment system management body and to effectively oversee the payment systems to ensure that sufficient attention is given to risk reduction and management of their design and operation. The infrastructure that we have developed has certainly enabled Namibia to fulfil its statutory role to promote and maintain an efficient payment system. Finally, I would like to thank Perago for hosting this meeting as the continued consultation between Perago as suppliers and developers of payment system applications and we as users is vitally important. I wish you all fruitful deliberations over the next few days. I thank you. 6 BIS Review 53/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Current issues on the European Central Bank and the euro Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Club International La Redoute, Bonn, 27 September 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great honour and pleasure to speak to the Club International La Redoute here in Bonn. Tonight, I plan to share with you some reflections about the ECB and the euro which has now been with us for quite a while. Contrary to what some critics had predicted before its launch almost six years ago, the euro has been a success from its very start. From day one of its existence, we have managed to deliver what we promised to deliver - that is a new single currency that would be at least as good and confidence-inspiring as the best performers among the previous national currencies were prior to the introduction of the euro. That is why I would like to share with you some thoughts on the main factors, principles and mechanisms which helped the ECB to make the euro a success. I would also like to elaborate on the implications of the historic enlargement of Europe for the future integration of new Member States in the field of monetary policy. My first remark relates to the successful transition to the euro With the introduction of the euro almost six years ago we engaged in a grand enterprise that irreversibly tied together the economic and monetary destiny of eleven, then twelve, sovereign nation states. We were asked to deliver a new single currency that would be at least as good and as credible as the most credible ones among the previous national currencies - and we promised to deliver. It was a solemn promise made to the more than 300 million people in Europe. It was crucial for a smooth transition to the euro. Had we failed in meeting this promise, a number of people in Europe would have seen their medium and long term market interest rates rise at the moment of transition, reflecting the deterioration of the quality of the new currency. At the same time, to meet this promise was extraordinarily demanding because the success of the transition to the euro was very much depending on the immediate achievement of a high level of credibility. And this credibility in the delivery of price stability had to be intact not only in a two-year or five-year perspective, but also on a ten-year and even thirty-year basis. I well remember that, before we started our work, success was not taken for granted. Sceptics doubted that it was possible to establish the euro as a stable currency and to successfully formulate a monetary policy for a currency area, so diverse in many respects. In particular, the coexistence of sovereign national fiscal policies and a supranational monetary policy was considered as a dangerous mixture. The single approach implied by the single monetary policy was criticised as a serious hindrance to further economic convergence. Some sceptics even took the view that a stability-oriented monetary policy was bound to fail in such a situation.  Where do we stand today? The experiences over the past five and a half years make it clear that the euro has been firmly established as a stable and credible currency. The introduction of the euro both in book-entry form and in the form of banknotes and coins went extremely smoothly and was virtually free of technical problems. In January 1999 we established almost over night a unified money market which worked well from the very start. New payment systems for large-value transactions were implemented successfully. Three years later the introduction of the euro notes and coins, which was a unique logistical undertaking, took place smoothly, without any major hitches. Equally important, the ECB’s monetary policy has been successful in keeping inflation and inflation expectations under control, even in the face of exceptional uncertainty and a number of substantial, mainly upward, price shocks hitting the euro area economy. To a large extent, the ECB’s monetary policy has been operating in a context of exceptional economic, financial and geopolitical uncertainty, as was for instance the period following the traumatic terrorist attacks of 9/11 three years ago. It is my strong belief that the euro and our single monetary policy have considerably contributed to protecting our economies which otherwise could have been much more adversely affected. BIS Review 53/2004 1 
With a view to anchoring long term inflation expectations we kept a steady hand and never overreacted, which bears testimony to our capacity to weather difficulties. We succeeded in delivering the best yield curve available in the economies that were to form the euro area. This was in sharp contrast to the view of some observers who argued that the quality of the euro as a new currency would converge only towards a sort of arithmetic average of the legacy currencies, rather than to the benchmark set by the most credible national currencies that were merged into the euro. In fact, what happened is that the very low market interest rates that existed only in a small number of economies were immediately extended to the full body of the euro area. Long-term inflation expectations aligned with the low levels of the best performing economies that were merged into the euro. As a consequence, with nominal and real interest rates at historically low levels, Europe now enjoys much more favourable financial conditions than in the 1990s. This success is all the more remarkable given that the ECB started without a track record of its own. In this respect, we can say today that the ECB was borne credible. But why was that? In my view, there have been mainly three, closely related, factors or principles at work: a clear and unambiguous institutional setting, the ECB’s strong commitment to a high degree of transparency and its monetary policy strategy. Clear mandate to an independent central bank Let me start by making a few remarks on our mandate which is to deliver price stability. This mandate mirrors the mandates of a very large majority of the EU national central banks before 1999. It is enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, which was signed by all governments of the European Union and ratified by all national parliaments, thereby reflecting a clear preference of the citizens of Europe for a stable currency. Consequently, our mandate to maintain price stability is included in an eminent place, under the “Union’s objectives”, in the draft Constitution just approved by the European Council last June. This clear assignment of responsibility to monetary policy has been indispensable in ensuring a high degree of credibility for our policy from the very outset. But why is price stability an economically desirable objective? Well, price stability enhances the efficiency of the price mechanism in allocating resources. It is associated, in particular, with lower uncertainty and risk premia in financial markets. This facilitates financial transactions and ultimately implies lower medium and long-term interest rates, thereby fostering investment. Stable prices also prevent an ad hoc redistribution of wealth and income as a result of unexpected price developments, which in turn contributes to social cohesion. As both historical experience and a full body of academic research illustrates, maintaining price stability is a necessary condition for monetary policy to foster sustainable growth and job creation. Independence To ensure that we can fulfil our mandate effectively, the Treaty assigns considerable independence to the Eurosystem which consists of the ECB and the 12 national central banks of the EU Member States which have adopted the euro. Today, there is a broad consensus among central bankers and economists that a high degree of independence allows the central bank to conduct its monetary policy in a consistent manner, to fulfil its mandate to guarantee price stability and thereby to gain and maintain a high degree of public confidence in its policy. Once the public and the markets are convinced of the central bank’s commitment to preserve price stability, they will act - for example, in wage and price setting - in a way that facilitates the achievement of this goal. A virtuous cycle is created which is conducive to creating an environment of stable prices in which economic activity can flourish. At the same time central bank independence goes hand in hand with the need for transparency. Transparency In fact, today, transparency is the rule of the game. Striving for a high degree of transparency in monetary policy is widely acknowledged as a fundamental principle of efficient monetary policy. It includes the setting of clear benchmarks for accountability, which, in democratic societies, is the quid pro quo of independence. It also includes the announcement of unambiguous objectives to the public, a timely and comprehensive release of all pertinent information and the contents of monetary policy 2 BIS Review 53/2004 
deliberations. In this sense, transparency does not only serve accountability, but also helps the markets to trace, to understand and broadly anticipate how monetary policy systematically reacts to observable data and indicators, thereby enhancing the credibility, predictability and effectiveness of monetary policy. The ECB has played a leading role in this general trend towards greater transparency and openness. It has in fact set standards of transparency in the practice of monetary policy. Acknowledging that transparency ultimately is about public understanding of what we do and why, we have from the very beginning practised an open and transparent communication with market participants and the public at large. We have placed strong emphasis on transparency of the decision-making process, on the provision of timely and clear explanations of our economic diagnosis to the general public and market participants, and on accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament. This was an extremely important element for a new institution such as the ECB which was lacking a track record. The first and most important step towards a high degree of transparency was the explicit announcement of our monetary policy strategy in October 1998, well before we actually started conducting the single monetary policy in the euro area. It clearly stated the basic concepts driving our monetary policy and thus helped to reduce the acute uncertainty faced by market participants at that time.  As regards our communication policy, we have been from the very beginning very bold. In 1999 the state of the art of central banking communication was, with only very few exceptions, to display the diagnosis of the central bank with a delay of five or six weeks by publishing the minutes. As a rule, no timely and comprehensive explanation was given by issuing a detailed communiqué and by holding a press conference after the policy meeting. In fact, the ECB was among the first central banks to give a real time detailed analysis and diagnosis and to organize regular press conferences and, to date, it still remains the only one doing so shortly after each of its monetary policy meetings. In our press conferences, we give a full and detailed explanation of our analysis and of the reasons underlying our policy decisions. The introductory statement opening our press conference consists of an extended summary of the deliberations of the Governing Council in which the situation is assessed and our diagnosis expressed. The press conference furthermore allows a transparent interaction with participants and, through them, with the full body of observers, savers and investors. All this wealth of information is provided in “real time”. In addition, the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin provides the public with the full set of detailed assessments and data underlying our policy decisions only a few days after they are taken. This demonstrates our strong will to be transparent. Our commitment for transparency has been actually more and more acknowledged. This is reflected in the evidence of the first five and a half years (supported by recent empirical work) which suggests that we have been highly predictable in our decisions - at least as much as other very influential central banks. This also demonstrates that our monetary policy is well understood by external observers. Monetary policy strategy Let me now come to the third factor behind the success of the euro and the ECB, which lies at the heart of our monetary policy concept: the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. To devise the best possible monetary policy for the new currency, we aimed to build on the wisdom and the wealth of experience with the conduct of monetary policy that had been accumulated in the preceding decades by central banks and academic institutions in industrialised countries, in particular those forming the euro area. The ECB’s definition of price stability  As I have emphasised above, the basis for our strategy is our mandate from the Treaty to maintain price stability as the primary objective of monetary policy. In order to make this mandate operational, the Governing Council of the ECB in October 1998 sharpened the focus by defining price stability in quantitative terms as the year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of below 2%. This public announcement was absolutely instrumental in preserving continuity at the moment of transition from the previous national currencies to the euro: the euro was given the very same definition of price stability as the one attributed to the most credible national currencies benefiting from the lowest market interest rates. We further clarified last year that, in the pursuit of price stability, the BIS Review 53/2004 3 
ECB aims at inflation rates below but close to 2%, thereby preserving a sufficient safety margin against the risk of deflation. There are great advantages of a clear, publicly announced quantitative definition of price stability: First, it is good for transparency, as everybody knows precisely what we are aiming at. Second, it is good for accountability, as the the public can judge whether and how we are achieving our own goals in comparison with the yardstick we made public. Finally, it is good for medium and long-term credibility, as inflationary expectations can be more easily anchored. The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy  Ever since the announcement of its strategy in 1998 the ECB has also made it clear that price stability is to be maintained over the medium term. The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy clarifies that the time horizon over which price stability has to be re-established needs to be tailored to the prevailing circumstances in the economy. By adapting the appropriate monetary policy horizon to the prevailing economic circumstances, the ECB makes an important contribution to avoiding unnecessary volatility in output and employment growth.  Moreover, our focus on the medium term embodies a commitment to avoid overly activist and ambitious attempts to fine-tune inflation outcomes. This also contributes to ensuring that expectations remain consistent with our declared policy objective over the medium term and helps the ECB to preserve its high degree of credibility,  Comprehensiveness of the analytical framework  We are all constantly bombarded with economic news. In order to protect itself against the risk of being swamped by latest indicators and to be able to deeply understand the main factors driving economic, monetary and financial developments, the central bank, in its daily operations, has to filter an enormous amount of information. It routinely seeks to define the state of the economy as new circumstances arise and evaluate their implications for the risks to price stability. This is a highly demanding exercise, because economic shocks do not come about with labels and are difficult to identify in real time. In addition, the economy is potentially always subject to several forms of structural change. As a consequence, it is clear for all central banks that no simple rules linking policy to one or two privileged indicators can substitute for an accurate examination of economic developments in all their complexities.  From the beginning, the ECB felt the need to adopt a conceptual framework that could help it sort through a wealth of potentially conflicting statistics, and organize the various pieces into a reliable road map for internal analysis and communication with the public. This required the adoption of a framework that concentrated more on picturing the economy as a large, complex and permanently evolving system. As a consequence, in our analysis we incorporate all possible pertinent information, all relevant forecasts and modelling exercises, including private sector views. We are not dependent for our decisions on the mechanical result of an equation or a single set of equations or an algorithm. In a very complex world, where the complexity of reality cannot be adequately captured by any single model and where uncertainty is an important element to take into account in any decision, there is also need for judgement by the policymaking bodies in taking policy decisions, particularly in assessing the likelihood of certain hypothetical scenarios potentially materialising. Specifically, we opted for a ‘binocular’ perspective over the economy, organised in an “economic analysis” and a “monetary analysis”. This policy framework, which is well known as the ‘two pillar approach’, conveys the notion of a diversified analysis. Our economic analysis focuses on real activity and financial conditions to study shorter-run deviations of inflation from its long-term trends. However, we also complement this economic analysis with a monetary analysis, which places great emphasis on the longer-term trends of inflation. Monetary analysis allows us to cross-check, from a medium to long-term perspective, the information stemming from the economic analysis. It constantly reminds the central bank of the fundamental principle that, while responding to economic developments as they unfold, it must never lose sight of the fact that, over sufficiently extended horizons, the rate of money growth must be consistent with its price stability objective. This cross-check ensures that all relevant information is taken into account in our assessment of the risks to price stability and that monetary policy has a nominal anchor beyond - 4 BIS Review 53/2004 
and even well beyond - the conventional projection horizon. It also induces and reinforces a firm sense of direction, discouraging policy agitation.  The need for structural reforms However, good monetary policy alone is not sufficient to make monetary union a success. We have to be clear and realistic about what monetary policy can deliver and, even more importantly, what it cannot. Monetary policy, even though well-designed and implemented, cannot solve all Europe’s economic problems. Appropriate structural reforms decisively implemented by national governments are vital for sustainable, non-inflationary growth of the euro area economy. To increase the growth potential in Europe, structural reforms are needed for the euro area. This fact has long been recognised by EU policymakers, most notably by the European Council when it adopted the Lisbon Strategy four years ago to foster economic growth and drive job creation. Ambitious, well-designed and decisively implemented structural reforms in labour, product and capital markets will enhance the shock absorption capacity of the economy and the effectiveness of macroeconomic policies. In this respect, a convincing commitment to decisively implementing structural reforms and a credible communication of their economic benefits to the general public is crucial for raising consumer and investor confidence and, ultimately, growth and employment. The new and stimulating challenge of enlargement Let me now turn to the new and stimulating challenge of enlargement, which, in my view, offers a great opportunity for the European economy as a whole. The enlargement of the European Union by ten countries from Central and Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean on 1st May this year was without any doubt a major milestone in the history of European integration. These countries together comprise a population of 75 million people which is about one fifth of that in the enlarged EU. While the economic weight of the new Member States is, at the current stage, less significant - their total GDP as a share of the existing members is about 5% (at market exchange rates, as compared with around 8% of the EU GDP when Spain and Portugal joined the EU in 1986), this will change in the future as their per-capita income levels are catching up with those in the rest of the EU. What are the economic implications of EU enlargement for the European economy? The debate about the effects of enlargement is often dominated by concerns, such as the risk of mass migration from the new Member States, involving increased pressure on labour markets and welfare systems of the other Member States. In my view, the benefits that enlargement brings are often neglected in such discussions. I am convinced that EU enlargement is a win-win game for both the old and the new Member States, which will contribute positively to economic growth and welfare in the European Union as a whole. Let me explain why. First of all, let me recall that over the past decade, the preparations for enlargement have already had a significant impact on the European economy, especially in terms of trade and financial integration between the new and the existing EU members. Profound structural changes in the new Member States in the past 15 years alongside with sub stantial progress towards the opening of markets early in the transition process (mainly through the implementation of the so-called Europe Agreements) have led to a tremendous increase in trade with the new Member States. Since 1995, the share of the current new Member States in the EU-15 exports and imports outside the EU (so-called extra-EU exports and imports) has increased by an impressive 50% to more than 13% and almost 12%, respectively. Likewise, impressive progress has been made during the past decade in terms of financial integration. Substantial inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI), constituting by far the largest share of total cumulative net private capital inflows to the new Member States, stand out in this respect and, in fact, FDI has been a key driver of productivity growth and export dynamics. Especially after the Russian crisis at the end of the 1990s, FDI flows from the EU-15 to the new Member States increased spectacularly and, according to the most recent data, the share of the current new Member States in the EU-15’s total extra FDI outflows amounts to more than 12%. The enlargement of the Single Market is beginning to strengthen the degree of competition as the accession of the new Member States increases the number of suppliers within the Single Market. In addition, an enlarged Single Market is enhancing the scope for economies of scale. These effects should lower prices and increase productivity, thereby contributing to an increase in the potential BIS Review 53/2004 5 
growth rate. Furthermore, the extension of the Single Market should increase the range and varieties of products available to producers and consumers. However, these clear benefits do not come automatically. To what extent and how quickly they can be reaped depends critically on whether macroeconomic conditions are stable and the extent to which structural reforms are implemented.  From a central bank perspective, enlargement marks the beginning of a process which will lead to the integration of new Member States in the euro area, as these countries have no opt-out clause. This integration is taking place in a well-defined institutional framework and comprises several stages. The first phase for the new Member States is the period after EU accession and before joining the exchange rate mechanism (ERM II), which is a multilateral arrangement of fixed but adjustable exchange rates with a central parity and a standard fluctuation band of ±15% against the euro. The second phase starts with entry into ERM II and stretches all the way to the introduction of the euro. As you may know, three new Member States already entered ERM II in late June, while this step is still ahead for the other new Member States.  In this context, let me recall that there are no formal criteria to be met for entry into ERM II. However, successful and smooth participation requires that major policy adjustments - for example relating to fiscal policy and price liberalisation - are undertaken before joining the mechanism. Participation in ERM II can be an important means to anchor exchange rate and inflation expectations and to promote discipline. It can help orient macroeconomic policies to stability, while at the same time allowing for a degree of flexibility, if needed, through the wide standard fluctuation band and the possibility of adjusting the central parity.  Beyond membership in the ERM II lies the adoption of the euro. Joining the euro area is an irrevocable decision and thus a step of major importance requiring circumspection and careful preparation. All new Member States are expected to adopt the euro in due course once they are deemed to have fulfilled the conditions set by the Treaty. As in the past, each country will be assessed on its own merits and its particular situation, based on the principle of equal treatment. Therefore, no additional criteria for the adoption of the euro by the new Member States will be introduced, while at the same time there will be no relaxation of the criteria laid out in the Treaty, including the criteria concerning the sustainability of nominal convergence.  Concluding remarks Let me conclude. As promised six years ago, our new currency has been firmly and credibly established as a stable currency. We have ensured a successful transition to the euro by transferring to the new currency the same degree of credibility as the one of the most credible national currencies that were merged into the euro. Thanks to the institutional setting of the Treaty and our monetary policy concept, the ECB was borne credible and has managed to maintain its high degree of credibility. Long-term interest rates have converged not to the average of pre-EMU levels but to those of the best previous benchmarks. Yet, there is no reason to be complacent. Ahead lie further challenges, most stimulating among them, the enlargement of the euro area. I thank you for your attention. 6 BIS Review 53/2004 
Nout Wellink: Business cycles and foreign direct investment Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Chamber Luncheon of the American Chamber of Commerce in the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 23 September 2004. *      *      * I feel honoured to speak to this distinguished group of people today. To the general public in the Netherlands, the ‘AmCham’ may not be a well-known organization. However, the list of its members proves that its goals and purposes have wide support in the Dutch business community. As we have known since centuries, foreign investment and trade between countries enhance welfare in both countries, and it is vital to sustain and promote this in a globalizing world economy. Your active role in this process is highly appreciated. Traditionally, Dutch-American trading and investment relations have been extensive. In particular, on average around a quarter of outward Dutch direct investment flows is directed towards the United States. Over the last ten years mutual direct investment flows have increased. This increase was similar to the global increase in foreign direct investment that started in the 1980s. In 2000, the Dutch foreign direct investment position in the US had a value of around 20% of Dutch GDP, which is a quarter of the total Dutch foreign investment position. Fifteen years earlier, in 1985, this value was just 12%. In my talk this afternoon, I will further explore the effects of increased direct investment exposures. In particular, their effects on the behaviour of international business cycles. I will start by elaborating on two observations concerning business cycles. First, in contrast to the past, when business cycles generally became more moderate over the longer term, the Dutch business cycle has become more volatile recently. Moreover, Dutch and US business cycles have become more synchronized. Let me elaborate on the increased volatility of the Dutch business cycle first. According to our current knowledge, the Dutch economy has passed the trough of the cycle around the end of last year. Last year, GDP growth reached its lowest rate in the past twenty years, at a negative rate of 0.9%. Compared to other European countries, our growth rate was exceptionally low; more than one percentage point below the average. This low performance was in strong contrast with performance in the second half of the nineties. In those years Dutch GDP growth was consistently higher than the euro area average. This illustrates that the Dutch economy has acquired a kind of boom-bust character, which indicates a more volatile cyclical growth pattern. Another indication is given by the rise in the standard deviation of growth rates. This measure of volatility has almost doubled over the last four years, compared to the four years before. For a significant part, the comparative strength of the upturn and the severity of the downturn in the Netherlands can be attributed to the open character of the Dutch economy. The spectacular growth of world trade since 1995 and the declining exchange rate of the euro have boosted exports. The downturn that followed had an opposite and - again - comparatively strong effect on the Dutch economy. However, more can be said about the latest Dutch business cycle - I will return to that later. First, we should take a view from a longer term, more global perspective. Although the volatility of economic growth during the latest Dutch business cycle was higher than before, the long term, global pattern is very different. Since a long time, at least since 1960, but even more pronounced since 1980, the volatility of GDP growth [measured by the standard deviation] has shown a downward trend. In other words, from a longer term perspective, the business cycle has become more stable. All G7 economies, as well as the Dutch economy, have become more stable. This increasing stabilization has been labelled by economists as ‘the Great Moderation’, especially with respect to the US economy. To give a quantitative illustration, the standard deviation of quarterly growth rates in the Netherlands was 2.4% in the 1980s; over the period since 1990 it has fallen to 1.4%. Similar figures have been found for the US. Extensive research has been devoted to an explanation for this moderation of the business cycle over the past twenty years. There are two explanations which I would like to focus on in this speech. The first explanation that has been proposed is structural change. This explanation suggests that there have been improvements in the ability of modern economies to absorb shocks. For example, due to improved methods of inventory management, there are less severe fluctuations in inventory BIS Review 53/2004 1 
stocks. Other examples are deregulation of financial markets, and the improved resilience and strength of the financial sector. Financial institutions are more able to diversify their risks, both internationally and among types of financial products. Therefore, the supply of credit to the private sector has become more sophisticated, enhancing the ability of firms to smooth their activity during the business cycle. Second, economic research convincingly shows that the number and size of shocks hitting economies has diminished over the past twenty years. In this sense, the observed moderation of business cycles since the 1980s can be seen as the result of good luck. However, as a consequence, it is possible that we may experience an increase in volatility again, if we run out of luck. Besides volatility, there is a second characteristic of recent business cycles that deserves attention: international co-movement - or synchronization - of cycles. Business cycles in modern economies tend to move together. For example, the rate of correlation between the US and Dutch growth rates varies between 0.4 and 0.5, since 1960. An extensively studied question has been whether there has been an increase in the amount of synchronization of business cycles. In general, the available evidence indicates that there is no overall tendency towards closer synchronization or co-movement, over the past quarter century. However, at a more detailed level, the picture is different. There are cases of increased synchronization within groups or pairs of countries. For example, within the group of euro area countries, synchronization has become closer since the nineteen-eighties. Moreover, in the latest cycle, correlation between US and Dutch growth rates has increased significantly, to a value of 0.65. From this, we may conclude that Dutch and US growth rates have become more synchronized in the most recent cycle. In general, there are two sources for co-movement of economies. First, it is clear that general shocks to the economy, which affect many countries, lead to correlated national economic developments. This reflects a common reaction of more or less comparable countries to the same exogenous factor. Examples are energy price shocks, or major developments in technology. Second, in addition to common shocks, country-specific shocks are important, to the extent that they spill over to other countries. Spill overs of shocks require economic linkages between countries, like trade and financial flows. Hence, stronger linkages raise the probability of co-movement. For example, an increase in economic activity in one country boosts activity in its trading partners because of higher foreign demand. More recently, another transmission channel between countries has increased in importance: foreign direct investment, or FDI. Several factors have contributed to the strong increase of FDI flows since the mid-nineties, like the liberalization of capital flows, reduced trade barriers and the widespread use of ICT-technologies. Interestingly, results from empirical analysis at DNB have shown that countries with comparatively large bilateral FDI positions tend to have a higher correlation of output growth rates. In other words, FDI may intensify co-movement of business cycles. In particular, this appears to be the case in the period 1995-2001. There are two ways in which FDI acts as a transmission channel for economic shocks, depending on where the shock occurs: in the home country or the host - the foreign - country. First, shocks in a foreign investor’s home country may affect its financial position at home, and force it to cutback its activity in host countries as well. Second, due to shocks in a host country, the value of a firm’s investments abroad may be affected. Consequently, that firm’s net worth at home is affected as well. Net worth, in turn, is related to financing costs, so it is obvious that a reduction of the value of foreign investments may reduce investments in the home country, because of higher costs. Let me try to integrate what I have said so far. On the one hand, international economic linkages, like trade and FDI flows, have become stronger and more sophisticated. In itself this would lead to more co-movement (or synchronization) of business cycles, because common and country-specific shocks are transferred more ‘effectively’ and rapidly between countries. For example, accounting problems in the US not only had national effects, but were also transferred to European countries through channels within multinational firms (like Ahold and Anderson). On the other hand, there are signs that the amount and strength of common shocks has decreased. I mentioned this earlier as an explanation for the global moderation of business cycles. As a result, the enhanced transmission channel for country-specific shocks has been compensated for by smaller and less frequent common international shocks. This explains why, on a global scale, co-movement of cycles has remained fairly stable. 2 BIS Review 53/2004 
Having discussed the global picture, I will return to the Netherlands now. As I said, the Dutch business cycle has become more volatile recently, as well as more synchronized with the US. Both observations are in contrast to the global picture of more moderate cycles with stable synchronization. In my opinion, these atypical features of the Dutch business cycle can be explained in the terms that I used to describe the global picture. First, the Dutch economy has been subject to some especially powerful country-specific shocks. An example is the exceptionally favourable housing market development in the nineteen-nineties, which had a positive effect on private consumption. Later on, consumption has been negatively affected by political developments, which reduced consumer confidence significantly. Besides, the size of the external sector and the large FDI positions make the Dutch economy particularly sensitive to international developments, especially from the US. This is also reflected in the stock market - our own research indicates that the Dutch stock market is traditionally highly correlated with the US stock market, in comparison to other European countries. In terms of FDI, the US is by far the most important partner of the Netherlands. As a percentage of GDP, Dutch investments in the US are larger than those of any other European country. Hence it is no surprise that some international and US shocks have had a sizeable effect on the Dutch economy, like the sharp correction in international stock markets in 2000, as well as the geopolitical tensions of the recent years. As a consequence, the Dutch business cycle was more volatile and moved more closely together with the US economy than did business cycles in other countries. It is challenging now to take a look ahead. What do these observations, that I have sketched here, imply for global business cycles in the near future? Will business cycles remain moderate and will co-movement remain stable? Let me try to discuss some implications from my remarks so far. One implication to take note of, is related to the vulnerability of economies to international shocks. Several studies have concluded that business cycles have moderated, because the amount and size of shocks have diminished. However, this might not continue indefinitely - we may run out of luck. Major international shocks could occur again, significantly enhancing international business cycle volatility and co-movement. In fact, we have recently experienced that terrorism and geopolitical tensions may act as a shock to the economy, for example through global shocks in confidence levels or through disruptions of energy supply. An obvious result could be a disruptive shock to oil prices. In this respect, the results of a recent study on oil price shocks are striking. It found that an oil price shock that is related to political factors and supply side conditions has more severe implications than other types of oil price shocks, such as shocks related to demand conditions. Since 1984, an oil price shock of this type has not occurred, except in the past half year. Were such a large international shock to materialize, one should be aware that the partial consequences for the exposed countries can be larger than in the past. This is because the transmission channels of shocks, such as FDI and trade flows, have increased over time and will probably continue to do so. However, this is not to say that we should aim at reducing these international linkages. Let me elaborate on this. First, one should not forget that international trade and other linkages may transmit economic disturbances, but have beneficial effects as well. FDI has become an important mechanism for the transfer of technology, including management techniques. In this way, FDI supports a smooth adoption of technologies that can make an economy less vulnerable to cyclical factors. For example, scale economies may drive multinational firms to apply state-of-the-art ICT-technology or management models in different countries. I will not conceal that there also have been mistakes in this respect - there have been clear cases of overinvestment during the global boom in mergers and acquisitions. However, there is reliable empirical evidence that technology transfers through FDI have stimulated the rate of technological progress. Second, the negative effect of international shocks may be kept in check by ongoing improvements in the resilience of the financial sector. This month, the IMF reported (in its WEO) that the global financial system is in its strongest shape over the past three years. Finally, there are structural changes in the economy that indicate that firms are becoming more flexible and are less affected by cyclical developments. Let me illustrate this by focussing on the Dutch economy; however, similar developments have been found for the US economy. A remarkable development can be observed in the sectoral pattern of employment changes. More than before, sectors or industries may be denoted as either structurally shrinking or structurally growing; independent of the state of the business cycle. Less than before, industries that shrink in a downturn can expect to grow again in the next upturn of the cycle. Consequently, employees are BIS Review 53/2004 3 
made redundant in sectors which are subject to structural shrinking, and must find new jobs in growth sectors. During the 1995-2002 cycle, these sectors accounted for 96% of employment, as compared to 71% during the 1987-1994 cycle. This changing pattern of sectoral employment indicates that labour and product markets have become more dynamic and flexible. A flexible labour market is conducive to labour productivity growth in the long term. Moreover, the ongoing changes in the sectoral composition of employment indicate that companies are forced to carry out ongoing restructuring, for example, as a result of increasing competition and innovation. Let me conclude here. Every business cycle is unique. However, we may try to find patterns and take lessons from the past and from other countries. In summary, over the long run, business cycles tend to be more moderate and co-movement appears to be less strong than we would expect. Most of this can be explained by the absence of international shocks to the economy. However, since economies have increasingly become integrated, the risks of disturbances spilling over to other countries seem to be greater than ever. On the other hand, as I have indicated, modern economies are becoming more resilient at the same time. This may be viewed as a positive effect of increased economic linkages. It is my opinion that this effect should be encouraged; and I am convinced that the task of improving economic linkages is well dedicated to the AmCham. Looking at the current business cycle, I am convinced that the worst part is behind us now. Most indicators point to a sustained recovery of the US and the world economy. As we emerge from this downturn it will become clear that the Dutch economy has experienced a volatile business cycle and that strong linkages to the US economy can be a great advantage.  4 BIS Review 53/2004 
Marion Williams: The tourism sector - growth prospects and challenges Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados Hotel Association, Christchurch, 8 September 2004. *      *      * Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure for me to deliver the feature address to the annual meeting of the Barbados Hotel and Tourism Association. This association along with the BTA and the Ministry of Tourism has worked extremely hard over the years and especially hard since 2001, to ensure the survival and the rapid growth of the sector. My address will describe the economic landscape and will address issues of repositioning and will also flag issues to be considered but will stop short of prescribing solutions. Repositioning In recent years, Barbados’ dependence on the performance of the tourism sector has never been more obvious. International developments and external challenges have forced the country to focus on policies and programmes to ensure that Barbados is able to compete successfully within an increasingly challenging environment. We have thus far weathered the storm (no pun intended) but important challenges lie ahead both at a broad macroeconomic level and at the sectoral level. At the broader economic level, Barbados will need to focus on developing our physical and economic infrastructure. There comes a time when incremental increases will not do unless the structure is revamped and repositioned. Yet we need to be continuously mindful of what is fiscally prudent. We also need to keep our energy policy under review in the light of rising oil prices, and we need to ensure that our manufacturing and agricultural sectors are so repositioned as to have viable futures given global trade developments. The issues of financial liberalisation and liberalisation pressures on services are also continuing challenges both within CSME and within other negotiating fora. We need also to get the maximum advantage out of the tourism sector and give this key sector our fullest support. In the medium term it will continue to be our flagbearer. Credit rating In spite of the recent downgrade of Barbados’ sovereign credit rating, the medium term prospects for Barbados are promising. We still expect to grow by approximately 2.5%, led by tourism. The financial markets have in fact recognised that Barbados continues to be a good credit and the risk premium on Barbados’ sovereign debt has not been affected by the recent ratings action. Not only has tourism been the best performing sector, but its performance last year and this year so far has been at its highest in recent years. While we do need to have balanced growth, and I am a great advocate of that approach, we should not be apologetic about the fact that the tourism sector has outperformed all others. Foreign exchange earnings The foreign exchange earning capacity of the sector has helped to offset some of the downside risks of the country’s debt levels. Earning as it did about $1.3 billion in foreign exchange in 2003 (expected to rise to $1.4 billion in 2004) contributing to close to 16% of gross domestic product, and employing over 11% of the labour force; the sector has contributed handsomely to the economic performance of the Barbadian economy even when international developments have presented tremendous challenges. I think it is a credit to the hard work of the officials in the sector and to Government’s willingness to provide support, that this outcome has been possible. The sector was able in 2003 to register output growth of 7.3% (6.7% in long stay arrivals) against a global decline of 1%. This compared with an annual average of 3% between the period 1994-2003. However, in 2004 growth has been particularly robust, reaching as high as a real value added of 10% in January to June. BIS Review 52/2004 1 
Satellite accounting for tourism I read with interest the recent report of the Private Sector Trade Team’s sectoral profile on the tourism industry - an excellent document. The tourism satellite accounting approach which measures the indirect contribution of the sector to output and which puts this at 52%, is and interesting statistic. Statisticians have always known that tourism’s overall contribution to GDP is much greater than 15-16% of GDP, when indirect effects are taken into account, but the double counting that results has hindered that approach. How, for example can we say that the construction of - say Hilton hotel - should not be included in statistics for the construction sector, but rather be included in the output of the tourism sector. These are the statistical challenges, and they are governed by international standards which, for international comparability, require standard measurements. However the satellite approach is a very useful one for giving us a more precise and measurable appreciation of the indirect impact of the sector on the Barbados economy, and can assist in strategising on the intersectoral linkages between tourism and other sectors, thus allowing allied sectors to spot opportunities. The growth rates predicted for tourism and its anticipated continuing expansion, and are dependent on specific conditions, such as a growing world economy, low energy prices and a global decline in conflicts. Energy costs In the case of energy, the current level of oil prices must be of concern as the cost of utilities, operating costs and investment have constantly been an issue with respect to their cost impact on the tourism product in Barbados. Therefore, continued buoyancy in the price of oil will impact on economic prospects. Government earlier this year passed on some of these price increases to the consumer. This had an impact on all sector of the economy, including tourism. This was however prior to the since galloping increase in oil prices. Even the airlines have imposed a fuel tax but it is unclear whether this will have far-reaching implications. In a simulation run by the economists at the Central Bank it was found that a 25% rise in domestic fuel prices reduces nominal GDP by approximately one percentage point, implying that higher oil prices do impact on overall output. An analysis by sector has not however been conducted so we are unable to say what proportion of this impact would borne by the tourism sector. Exchange rate changes Meanwhile exchange markets have been dominated by declines in the US dollar. Not withstanding some rebound since last February, World Economic Outlook, an IMF Report, notes that the US dollar depreciated by 3 1/4 percent in trade weighted terms since September 2003 and by 16 ½ percent since its peak in February 2002. The dollar depreciated significantly against the Euro and against the Yen. This would have made travel from these source markets more attractive, and because the Barbados dollar is tied to the US, would not have affected travel from the US market. The Report also indicates that in developed economies (our main source markets) business confidence is rising, unemployment is improving, consumer confidence is up and global investment is promising. This augurs well for travel in late 2004 and 2005. The Latin American market While Latin America is not a major source market for the Caribbean, ECLAC reports that rising commodity prices in Latin America have resulted in the highest surplus in goods and services in 13 years and the best current account surplus in half a century. This would have positively affected discretionary income available for travel. However, it is not clear that the improvements are sufficiently significant as to lead to greater travel to the Caribbean from those markets, but the information should be noted and monitored when future strategies involving that market are being developed. Many Caribbean markets also provide a continuing growth opportunity, particularly since some of our neighbours to the South are experiencing prosperous times. 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
Comparative advantage In preparing for increased competitiveness, any country is best able to reap benefits if it specialises in areas on the basis of its comparative advantage. Clearly tourism is an area in which Barbados has a comparative advantage. In the case of tourism, our comparative advantage is one with which we were endowed. But competitive advantage can be built and engineered. Also, the buoyant sectors can help to support other sectors. The offshore services sector is able to support the tourism sector. Developments in that sector therefore ought to be of great interest to tourism officials and changes in the face of this sector should be monitored closely. It is important that we identify these linkages and build on these synergies. The development of local craft is an example of synergies between tourism and local manufacturing. In fact, the craft industry is largely a foreign exchange earner like any other export industry though it is not always so perceived. Sectoral linkages Tourism-linked sectors grow strongly when tourism performs well. Consequently, distribution, utilities, and the transport and communication sectors have exhibited good growth rates over the same period. Much of the major increases in construction activity, in particular, over the past five years, has been tourism-related. Capital investment in the sector has also been a source of long term capital flows which benefit the balance of payments and help to boost our foreign exchange reserves. This emphasises the catalytic role which the tourism sector plays. If we can ensure that our service industry is globally recognised for its quality, we can also use our visiting tourists as marketing agents (by word of mouth) for our service products on a broader scale. The service and the quality of our products therefore have to be superior if we are going to use our tourism linkages to effectively sell them abroad, and this includes the ambience and the environment in which these sales take place. The cruise industry Despite the rapid growth in long stay visitors, the fastest growth in numbers has been in the cruise business. I read recently that fifty percent of new cruises are destined for Caribbean waters. Yet the value-added from cruise visitors is very much lower than that for long stay visitors. This is something on which Barbados and the region must strategise together so as to reap greater benefits. After our failed attempt to raise a tax on cruise passengers regionally, it may be time for us to seriously consider an entrance into the cruise business, either on our own or in partnership with others. It is a market from which we need to reap greater benefits. This industry is expected to reach the 800,000 mark this year, and so far this year cruise arrivals have grown almost 30%. This is clearly a booming business. Currently however, it is the ship owners who are reaping the greatest benefits. They have the capital, we have the waters. Our private sectors need to work on getting into joint ventures with the ship owners and we should consider using a common cruise policy to give ourselves leverage. We should not give up on this. Market forecasts Future forecasts of world economic growth can have important implications for tourism’s sources and markets. Forecasts differ among individual regions and groups of countries. Generally however, whereas growth in the industrialised nations is expected to converge and is unlikely to change significantly, some individual markets will do better than others. In addition, there is an evident widening of the gap between, not only rich and poor countries, but between the rich and the poor within countries in our tourist markets. This suggests that upmarket tourism will continue to be an important target market. Indeed, in those countries whose economies are flagging, the high end of the travel market is expected to be less affected. This suggests that we should continue to market ourselves, among other things, as a playground for the rich, as this may lead to reliance on a more inelastic type of demand which is not particularly affected by economic slumps. Source markets Economic performance of our source markets will influence the travel market. Global trends suggest that in the euro area the recovery remains subdued. While there are signs of a pickup in investment, BIS Review 52/2004 3 
household consumption remains weak but a gradual strengthening in domestic demand is expected. In Japan, GDP growth continues to exceed expectations with strong external demand - notably from China - accompanied by rising investment and latterly a pickup in consumption. This may have implications for the marketing thrust by the industry in these countries. Indications are that international tourism will continue to be concentrated from the main source regions of the world. The US economy is projected to grow by 4.6% in 2004 and 3.9% in 2005, the euro area by 1.7% in 2004 and 2.3% in 2005, and Canada by 2.6% in 2004 and 3.1% in 2005. The heaviest international travel flows will therefore continue to be within Europe and the USA - at least over the medium-term - partly because of growth, but also because of higher per capita incomes and longer leisure time. The IMF Outlook refers to the global recovery as becoming “increasingly well established”. Dynamic growth markets Countries regarded as dynamic growth travel markets are: China and the Southeast Asia region, and in some cases the Mediterranean and eastern European countries. Other Europe’s market share decreased slightly from 1995, but with a 57.8% share of the market there are still by far the most dominant tourist destinations. Only a few developing and emerging market countries are expected to do especially well. However, within CARICOM itself, travel has grown even faster than international travel to the region. The Caribbean must however continue to work on increasing its share of the global market. National treatment It will be important during the next few years that tourism investors are not put off by what appears to be the impending prospect of liberalisation and a scenario where because of “national treatment” considerations they may feel uneasy. It may appear that countries will have to offer similar concessions to non-residents which they now offer to Barbadian residents, but some of these positions can be negotiated and it will be influenced by what the country commits to. Also, changes in position in the negotiating arena appear possible and it would be unwise not to grasp the opportunities offered by the various concessions and special legislation such as the Tourism Development Act and others while they are still available based on the fear that they will not last. I urge you to grasp these opportunities now. Industry consolidation Given that tourism’s growth globally has been reinforced by consolidation among every component of the major tourism service suppliers and by technological advances, our tourism sector cannot afford not to take advantage of these incentives so as to counteract some of the diseconomies of scale which small countries like ours face. All stages in the tourism value-added chain - travel agents, travel organisers, the transport and hotel and catering industries - are subject to growing competition. Growth in size, trends towards concentration, and strategic alliances are pervasive. Expansion and concentration strategies are increasingly pursued internationally through investment, mergers and joint ventures, both horizontally and vertically. I am not necessarily recommending mergers but I am suggesting that this region needs to respond pro-actively by forming alliances and partnerships among themselves and with the big players so as to increase its economic and operational space even if ownership is not increased or even though mergers may not take place. Bargaining and negotiation The increasing trend towards concentration, makes it difficult for small and medium-sized companies in this segment to survive without a broad regional or even global presence. We must be agile and respond to these challenges to small developing states, as we seek to negotiate the most appropriate deals with tourism suppliers as there are likely to be fewer actors among which to bargain and possibly more uniformity in price. 4 BIS Review 52/2004 
A consumer driven sector It is not far-fetched to say that tourism is moving from a supplier-dominated industry to a consumer driven business. Some destinations, in an effort to either remain demand-driven have embarked on providing man-made travel and adventure environments which will entice the customer to choose their destination on grounds of specific performance and not on price alone. As a relatively high cost destination the Caribbean may need to adopt this approach. Scale diseconomies again may require the use of existing incentive support to assist in providing these ancilliary attractions. Accessibility and air travel Transport is increasingly being determined with the co-operation of strategic partners and alliances - and Barbados’ officials are becoming more adept at negotiating their way through this network. I am going to be very provocative here. As a tourism dependent economy, it might well be worthwhile for Barbados to consider getting back into long haul airline ownership jointly with one of our regional partners. As a tourism destination, Barbados has a lot of leverage. We need to use it. I am speaking here to the private sector. Brand name hotels Fewer brand name hotels are getting involved in real estate ownership today than say 10 years ago but they are willing to supply services to the industry. Because of the advantage of marketing under a brand name, this has become more and more attractive for small destinations, but somehow Barbados has not been too successful in this regard - Hilton hotel being a more recent exception. We may wish to opt to place greater energies into this search to bring brand names to Barbados and utilise existing unused prime locations more effectively. Again this is a challenge to the private sector to pool resources so as to take advantage of existing opportunities. Barbados as a retirement destination The recent thrust to market Barbados as a retirement destination is also an interesting one - tourism for senior citizens is a growing area. In the industrialised nations the most critical aspect of population growth is the reversal of the age distribution. This comparatively larger proportion of retired people in the total population will also influence the structure of tourist demand. In addition, the growth in tourism continues to be closely tied to the relationship between working hours and leisure. In the majority of the advanced western industrialised nations’ average working hours under collective bargaining agreements have fallen steadily over the past 20 years, while vacation length has increased. Florida is a perfect example of the employment of such a strategy for retirees. In the Florida case the added advantage is that there is no state tax, only federal taxes. We may not need (or be able to afford) to offer any other tax advantage. However, as Barbados is presently embarked on reducing its personal income taxation, this together with the double taxation treaty benefits may be sufficient. New forms of marketing The use of the Internet as a platform specifically enables service providers, hotels tour companies and the like, to reduce costs by contacting customers directly. With the cost of communication being lowered in Barbados, there may be opportunities for greater use here. Although figures on the number of current bookings made through the Internet to local businesses are not available, it can nevertheless be assumed that the number, given the proper attention, will increase in future as usage costs decline. It would be useful for forward planning to get a better idea, on the basis of an industry survey, of how much this is used and how effective it has been. With direct marketing, there is the opportunity to compare prices directly, there are no opening hours to worry about, and additional information can be obtained through other media. However, the retiree market which we hope to target more, may be less inclined to use these facilities as they are likely to be less computer dependent. BIS Review 52/2004 5 
Restructuring the market In sum, global competition in tourism will be further intensified. However, there are a number of requirements for continuing success which will continue to be important for the industry over the medium term of which you as industry specialists are already well aware. Among them: • The increased concern for safety and security; • Permanent investment on quality; • Incorporation of new technologies; • Stress on value for money; and • Developing public-private sector partnerships. In respect of quality output and value for money we need to encourage job flexibility. Performance-based pay or some means of creating incentives to encourage production of higher quality output, is therefore desirable. Barbados as a small economy has managed to cater to varying segments of the market and to combine up-market with the middle-market tourism. The challenge of combining the retirement market and the up-market tourism should not be beyond us. The tourist industry may in future have to focus more on a “hybrid consumer” whose travel choices and vacation activities will be increasingly complex. This multiple-segment marketing may have implications for ancilliary services - but this is where the linkages will become evident and where the satellite measurement of tourism’s impact will become important for estimating where the opportunities lie. Tourism and the environment - a dilemma For many countries, an undisturbed natural balance, unspoilt landscapes and varied fauna and flora are their tourist attractions. Damage to the environment arises firstly as a result of processes unrelated to tourism, and secondly as the result of inappropriate utilisation of resources by the tourism sector itself. It is not only an environmental problem, but also an economic one. There is a cost to preservation of the environment and the industry may have increasingly to bear some of that cost so as to relieve Government of some of this burden. Hurricanes and tourism in the Caribbean Will any of the foregoing analysis change with the advent of hurricane IVAN? It is possible that over the short term there may be some reticence about travelling to the region during the hurricane season, particularly if the clean up and recovery is prolonged. In some part, Barbados may even benefit from diversion of visitors formerly heading for Grenada or even Cayman. It is unfortunate that we should benefit from the misfortunes of others but this is the reality. We have had hurricanes before and we have not seen a medium term impact on long haul flights to the region. Also, Florida has been badly hit as well, so we may also benefit from a diversion by visitors originally headed to Florida. With respect to cruises, in my view, Cruises are more likely to bypass the affected islands than bypass the Caribbean. You, the specialists in the sector are in a better position to make these predictions. This is just a layman’s view. Tourism as a model industry? I would like to conclude with the remark that planning tourism like monetary and economic strategies, is today an increasingly demanding challenge. Given the number of variables to be taken into account, the industry will be faced with the task of dealing with increasing complexity. However, Barbados is a highly regarded brand. Our product will speak for it self. What we need are resources to market ourselves effectively to the world. Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 6 BIS Review 52/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 22 September 2004. *      *      * Je vous remercie, Madame la Présidente, de votre accueil. Ceci étant ma première audition devant votre commission dans sa nouvelle composition, permettez-moi de souligner que je partage entièrement votre désir de continuer les relations étroites et fructueuses que nos institutions ont développées au cours des dernières années. Je me réjouis à la perspective de poursuivre notre dialogue dans cet esprit franc et coopératif, sachant combien cela est essentiel pour le bon fonctionnement de l’Union Economique et Monétaire. Ich möchte diese Gelegenheit auch nutzen, um der langjährigen Vorsitzenden dieses Ausschusses und seines Vorgängergremiums, des Unterausschusses für Währungsfragen, Frau Randzio-Plath, nochmals herzlich für die ausgezeichnete Zusammenarbeit während der vergangenen Jahre zu danken. Madam Chairman, honourable Committee Members, in my testimony today I will provide you with the ECB’s assessment of current economic and monetary developments. I will then address a number of other issues of topical importance, namely fiscal policy, the implementation of structural reforms and, finally, issues related to euro banknotes. Economic and monetary developments At the time of my last appearance before this Committee in April, I foresaw that annual inflation rates would edge up temporarily to above 2%, mainly on account of oil price developments and increases in indirect taxes. At the same time, I stated that we expected the economic recovery which had started in the second half of 2003 to continue, albeit at a gradual pace. In this light, I assessed that the outlook for price developments over the medium term remained consistent with price stability. Against this background, the Governing Council had left the key ECB interest rates unchanged at their historically low level of 2.0% since June 2003. The data that have become available over the past few months in fact confirm the outlook I gave in April. They indicate that the economic recovery in the euro area has maintained its momentum. In the second quarter of 2004, real GDP grew at a rate of 0.5% relative to the previous quarter, after 0.6% in the first quarter. The conditions for a continuation of the economic recovery remain in place. On the external side, global demand remains robust, notwithstanding temporary fluctuations, contributing to euro area export growth. On the domestic side, higher corporate profitability and favourable financing conditions should support business investment. In particular, the level of interest rates is very low by historical standards, in both nominal and real terms. Private consumption should also be sustained by growth in real disposable income and, with some time lag, by an improvement in the labour market. Against this background, we expect the present gradual recovery to continue in the coming quarters and to become more broadly based, leading to a somewhat stronger upswing in the course of 2005. This picture is consistent with the most recent ECB/Eurosystem staff economic projections which, as you may be aware, are now published on a quarterly basis. The last projections, published on 2 September, envisage that euro area real GDP growth will recover from 0.5% in 2003 to between 1.6% and 2.2% on average in 2004, and will be slightly higher, between 1.8% and 2.8%, in 2005. I should add that forecasts from international organisations and other sources convey a broadly similar picture. While this outlook for economic activity is surrounded by some uncertainty, overall the risks appear to be broadly balanced. On the upside, the momentum of the recovery, which was stronger in the first half of 2004 than was anticipated earlier in the year, may imply a positive stimulus in the coming quarters. On the downside, there are still concerns about continuing economic imbalances in other parts of the world which could affect the sustainability of the economic recovery, at both the global and euro area levels. In addition, if oil prices were to reach higher levels than currently expected by markets, this could dampen somewhat both foreign and domestic demand, even if the recent rise in oil BIS Review 52/2004 1 
prices cannot, by any mean, be compared with the historical first and second oil shocks of the 70s and the beginning of the 80s. Regarding the outlook for inflation, recent oil price developments, together with increases in indirect taxes, have pushed inflation rates in the euro area to levels somewhat higher than 2% over recent months. Nonetheless, there is little evidence as yet of stronger underlying inflationary pressures building up domestically. In particular, wage developments should remain moderate. Against this background, the ECB staff projections put average annual HICP inflation at between 2.1% and 2.3% for 2004 and between 1.3% and 2.3% for 2005. These projections are broadly consistent with other recently released forecasts. However, several upward risks to the outlook for inflation exist. Concerns relate in particular to oil price developments, which pose a potential risk of second-round effects emerging in wage and price-setting. Further risks relate to the future evolution of indirect taxes and administered prices. Cross-checking the economic analysis with the monetary analysis also supports the case for strong vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability. The prevailing low level of interest rates is fuelling monetary and credit growth. While M3 growth has been moderating since the summer of 2003 as a result of a normalisation of portfolio allocation behaviour (following the easing of the exceptional economic and financial uncertainty which had prevailed previously), it remains resilient and is increasingly driven by developments in its most liquid components. Given the strength of M3 growth over the past few years, there remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. As a consequence, inflationary risks could rise. In addition, high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a source of strong asset price increases. Overall, while the prospects for price developments remain in line with price stability over the medium term, upside risks to price stability have emerged. The Governing Council will remain vigilant with regard to all developments which could imply risks to price stability over the medium term. The markets and the general public should rest assured that price stability will be maintained over the medium term. As regards fiscal policy, the latest budgetary notifications provide a mixed picture of public finance developments. The euro area deficit is expected to increase slightly. While some countries maintain sound budgetary positions, a significant proportion of the euro area countries are expected to have deficits near or above 3% of GDP. A majority of these countries are likely to miss the original budgetary targets set in their stability programmes. Euro area public debt is projected to increase further. With a few exceptions, public debt will remain largely unchanged or increase in countries with larger fiscal imbalances. Although the period of significant further increases in public deficits seems to be coming to an end, important challenges for the consolidation of public finances are to be faced. Member States should use the improvement in the macroeconomic environment for renewed consolidation so as to comply with their commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact. Clearly, this would add credibility to the European fiscal framework and create confidence in the sustainability of public finances, thereby reinforcing confidence in the overall economic outlook. As recently stated by the ECOFIN Council, budgetary policies need to set the right priorities towards structural reform, innovation and competitiveness in support of the Lisbon agenda to promote economic growth and employment creation. Fiscal consolidations should be designed to form an integral part of such a comprehensive reform strategy. As regards the European fiscal framework, the Governing Council is convinced that, whilst substantial improvements in the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact are welcome, there is no need for changes to the text of the Treaty and of the Pact itself, namely the regulations concerned. The Pact is a very important and pertinent framework for dealing with countries’ fiscal developments on a level playing-field, particularly within the single currency area. At the same time, we consider that improvements could be introduced in its implementation. There seems to be some common ground on elements to improve the implementation of the preventive arm, and the need for a stronger focus on public debt and sustainability. As regards the corrective arm of the Pact, the ECB’s main message is that the nominal anchor of the framework, namely the 3% deficit-to-GDP reference value should not be undermined. Therefore, proposals that would allow for a loosening of the excessive deficit procedure, such as suggestions put forward with regard to the definition of exceptional circumstances and the time frame for the correction of excessive deficits, and proposals to introduce country-specific elements are not contributing to the solidity and soundness of EMU in our view. 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
A sound monetary policy and a stable macroeconomic framework are necessary for sustainable economic growth in the euro area. But this alone is not sufficient. The implementation of well-designed structural reforms in labour, product and capital markets is of the utmost importance for the euro area at the current juncture. The economic recovery would be stronger and more sustained if ambitious, well-designed structural reforms were to be implemented that improve the microeconomic fundamentals of the euro area and its resilience to adverse domestic and global economic developments. In this respect, a convincing commitment to the implementation of structural reforms and a successful communication of their economic benefits to the general public is crucial for raising consumer confidence and, ultimately, growth and employment. We are aware of the fact that structural reforms normally take time to show up in improved economic outcomes, which often makes it politically difficult to implement such reforms. Against this background we very much welcome the positive steps undertaken over recent months by several governments and Parliaments in the euro area and we strongly encourage them to continue and intensify these efforts. Issues related to euro banknotes Let me now highlight a few issues related to the experience with euro banknotes during the first couple of years. Since the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002, circulation has steadily increased. Indeed, by end-August 2004 some 9 billion banknotes with a value of EUR 460 billion were in circulation, an increase of 10% in terms of volume and 18% in terms of value compared with circulation one year earlier. As regards the quality of banknotes, the Eurosystem closely monitors the banknotes in circulation and takes the appropriate measures to refresh the cash cycle, when needed. At the same time, the ECB is currently examining ways to enhance the durability of banknotes. Moreover, to avoid shortages of certain denominations within the euro area which may occur in the event of strong cross-border flows of banknotes, the Eurosystem has set up a cross-euro area stock management scheme. This system greatly enhances efficiency in the use of banknote stocks, since shortages in one country can be compensated for by excess stocks in another country. Turning to the issue of combating counterfeiting, the rate of counterfeiting has been relatively stable during the past 12 months, with around 50,000 to 55,000 counterfeit banknotes per month withdrawn from circulation. Assessing this number against the number of genuine banknotes in circulation (approximately 9 billion), the population of the euro area countries (more than 300 million) and the number of cash transactions involving banknotes (estimated to be approximately 120 billion per year), the initial years of experience with euro banknotes have proven that European citizens can remain confident in the security of their money. That being said, to improve even more the efficiency of the fight against counterfeiting, the Eurosystem has recently issued updated communication material on the security features, which should help cash users to spot counterfeits. However, there is no room for any complacency. Cooperation in this domain is constantly being improved. In this context, a steering group comprising representatives from the ECB, the Commission and Europol was established to ensure the exchange of information and the coordination of activities in the field of combating counterfeiting at the EU level. At the same time, the international dimension of combating counterfeiting has gained increased importance. To take account of this development, the ECB concluded a bilateral agreement with Interpol - as was already done with Europol - which focuses in particular on the exchange of information and assistance in training and education exercises. Moreover, the ECB cooperates at the technical level with central banks or law enforcement authorities in key countries outside the euro area where euro banknotes are circulating. In addition, bilateral cooperation agreements on combating euro counterfeiting have recently been concluded with the Bulgarian National Bank and the National Bank of Ukraine. I am now ready to answer your questions. BIS Review 52/2004 3 
Jaime Caruana: Making diligent preparations for Basel II Opening remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Thirteenth International Conference of Banking Supervisors (ICBS), Madrid, 22-23 September 2004. *      *      * 1. Welcome and overview Distinguished guests and friends: as the Governor of the Bank of Spain, it is my pleasure to serve as your host at the Thirteenth International Conference of Banking Supervisors here in Madrid. I am also privileged to serve in a second capacity at this event as chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. In that regard, it is my honour to launch our dialogue on the two main themes selected for this conference. As you know, the Committee reached agreement on an historic revision of the international capital framework just this past June. So naturally an important focus for this conference will be on preparing for its implementation. In addition, because Basel II relies increasingly on the quantification of risk exposures to understand a bank’s risk profile, it is more important than ever before to look behind the numbers and into the rules that define how exposures are measured. The second day of our conference will be devoted to the emerging issues in accounting and their relevance to banking supervision. I am indebted to the Secretariat of the Basle Committee, the staff of the BIS, as well as to my colleagues at the Bank of Spain, for choosing speakers who will encourage a lively conversation on these two themes. In my own remarks this morning, I would like to open with some thoughts first on the implications of “Basel II” for banking supervision worldwide. While much has been said about its sophistication, I believe that many have overlooked key principles in Basel II that are relevant to all supervisors and all banks in all markets. In that regard, it is important to remember that Basel II’s success depends on a broad range of other preparations and measures that we undertake to strengthen safety and soundness; in the second part of my remarks, I will offer some views on the other mechanisms, that lie at the heart of a sound system of supervision more generally. As I will mention, many of our safety and soundness goals are more easily achieved when supervisors apply these mechanisms more consistently: this makes it critical for the Basel Committee to continue to expand its ties and seek greater cooperation with the broader supervisory community. Finally, I would like to close with some brief thoughts on the rules that govern transparency and disclosure in our jurisdictions and on our responsibilities as supervisors to encourage their continued advancement. With that overview, I would like to share some thoughts on the implications of Basel II for supervision, which is my first topic. 2. Implications of Basel II for supervision When we last met as the community of bank supervisors in Cape Town under a brilliant South African sun, you may recall that the chairman of the Basel Committee at that time, Bill McDonough, described the revision of the capital framework as a “tremendous journey” for all of us. He was quite right. Our journey has lasted five years. Supervisors, central bankers, and representatives of the industry have spent countless hours researching and debating the paths to follow. The public and transparent nature of our consultations subjected our proposals to intense scrutiny. This made our journey a difficult one, but by testing our ideas, we found ways to improve the capital framework. Today, two years and an ocean away from our mid-point meeting in Cape Town, I am privileged to announce that our journey to “Basel II” concludes a key stage here in Spain. For that, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to you, the members of the supervisory community, for your collaboration, your contributions, and your commitment to the new framework. Basel II emerged from the remarkable spirit of goodwill, cooperation, and dedication to financial stability shared by bank supervisors and central banks worldwide. By providing your perspectives and experience, you helped to ensure the relevance of the “three pillars” to many kinds of banks in many different economies. BIS Review 52/2004 1 
Because of your assistance, the question before us today is not whether Basel II is applicable to a particular market. Instead, the important question is when Basel II should be implemented. Only national authorities can answer that question. The text that we published this past June will now form the basis for national rule-making and approval processes. Yet adopting Basel II on the same timetable as the member countries of the Basel Committee may not be feasible for all countries. In fact, Basel II may be a lesser priority compared to other efforts to promote the fundamentals of safety and soundness in each country’s banking system. Regardless of when we intend to adopt Basel II in our countries, Cicero would have understood the task ahead for all of us: he wrote that, “In all matters, before beginning, a diligent preparation should be made.” Indeed, the success of Basel II in promoting the health of our banking systems tomorrow will depend critically on the diligent preparations that we undertake today. So now the journey begins anew for us. As we prepare for the next stage of our journey, all of us must encourage our banks to improve their management of risk. We must enhance our own skills as supervisors. And we must strive to make our markets more transparent. Cooperation and transparency will be key in this new journey and Basel II can play a catalytic role. Basel II offers us an important way forward and provides us with tools for enhancing our supervisory systems. As we review the text of Basel II to consider our next steps, it is easy to be impressed by some of its advanced techniques for quantifying the risk of loss. But the formulas in Basel II are not revolutionary. The advanced approaches to credit and operational risk contained in Basel II reflect the tremendous advances in risk management achieved among some of the most sophisticated banking organisations. Indeed, rather than inventing something new, the Committee adopted many of the sound practices that the industry had already identified. What is new in Basel II, and what matters most for supervision, is the marriage of two important trends. By building on these trends, Basel II will incorporate principles that are relevant for all supervisors. 2.1 First trend: qualitative assessments of internal controls The first trend that is captured in Basel II represents a shift in the focus of safety and soundness evaluations. In the past, supervisors emphasised the use of backward-looking evaluations of a bank’s performance to determine its financial condition. This drew our attention toward past results rather than future risks and a bank’s readiness to manage them. In contrast, today many supervisors focus more on qualitative reviews of the internal control structures that protect a bank against its specific risks. This represents a far more difficult way of evaluating a bank’s safety and soundness. It requires that we look beyond the numbers and into the bank’s internal processes. By deepening our insight into a bank’s risk management, we gain a much better understanding of its strategies and controls. We learn what risks the bank believes are ahead and what measures it takes to mitigate them. We also develop a more refined sense of a bank’s sensitivity and ability to adapt to potential conditions in the future. This first trend of adopting a more “risk-focused” approach to banking supervision has a positive effect on banks as well. When we examine the quality of a bank’s risk management, we demonstrate to management the importance that we ascribe to developing and maintaining safe and sound control structures. A risk-focused approach thereby creates implicit incentives for bank management to understand and to find better ways to control its risks. What results is not just a more proactive risk management function, but also a greater commitment to sound corporate governance across the bank. 2.2 Second trend: incorporate incentives into supervision Basel II recognises this result and goes one step further by creating not just implicit but also explicit economic incentives for banks to improve the quality of their risk management. The inclusion of incentives directly in the regulatory framework represents the second important trend in supervision. The proper use of incentives can help to align a bank’s objectives more closely with public policy goals of safety and soundness. In recent years, supervisors have begun to move more generally toward a system of supervision that encourages prudent risk-taking through the offering of incentives rather than simply enforcing compliance with rigid rules. Internationally, the 1996 Market Risk Amendment to 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
the existing Basel Accord represented the first time that banks received explicit capital benefits for developing more sophisticated measures of risk, in that case market risk. Basel II continues this trend by extending incentives to the treatment of credit risk and operational risk. 2.3 Basel II embraces both trends By stepping back a bit from Basel II’s formulas, we can see that the new capital framework builds on two important trends to incorporate a new philosophy for banking supervision. It combines a risk-focused approach to supervision with incentives for prudent risk-taking into a coherent policy objective that seeks to promote adequate capitalisation. By incorporating in all three of its pillars clear incentives for banks to improve their management of risk, Basel II reinforces management’s focus on control structures. • For example, in Basel II’s minimum capital requirements - or Pillar 1 - regulatory capital charges are aligned more closely to a bank’s own measures of risk. This creates immediate incentives for banks to improve those measures. • Likewise, Pillar 2 - supervisory review - emphasises that responsibility for evaluating capital adequacy lies with a bank’s management. Supervisors will review and respond to those internal assessments, thereby creating incentives for banks to evaluate their exposures thoroughly and to plan their capital strategies carefully. • Finally, Pillar 3 - market discipline - seeks to make a bank’s risk profile more transparent to outside investors and market participants. This should better enable the market to reward banks that take a responsible approach to risk management and penalise those that do not. Market discipline can serve as a powerful incentive for prudent behaviour: indeed, markets are sometimes stricter than supervisors. Basel II’s combination of a process-oriented focus with incentives for banks to improve their risk management offers benefits both for individual banks and for the banking system as a whole. For an individual bank, Basel II encourages management to adopt approaches that are relevant to the risks the bank faces and that are appropriate for its level of sophistication. That, in turn, ensures that the bank takes prudent steps to protect itself against losses, including making appropriate use of its capital resources. The consequences are even greater at a macro level. I believe that, when risks are properly assessed and managed across all banks, our banking system becomes more stable, less sensitive to the swings of the business cycle, and better able to promote sustainable growth. This benefits not just individual banks, but also businesses and consumers alike. 3. Strengthening the foundation for Basel II To achieve these benefits, supervisors must ensure that the foundation for Basel II is ready. Basel II’s success in promoting improvements in risk management, and thereby in promoting financial stability, depends on the support of a broad range of other mechanisms and measures in the banking and supervisory structure. I’d like to turn now to the second part of my remarks and offer some views on the elements that comprise a strong foundation, not just for Basel II, but also for safety and soundness more broadly. Basel II draws heavily on the well-known and well-tested structure of the 1988 Accord. It retains its definition of capital and its notion that capital requirements should reflect the risk of an asset. The Standardised Approach to credit risk in Basel II represents a modest revision of the existing Accord. And in some jurisdictions and for some banking organisations - especially smaller banks that engage in more traditional, lower-risk businesses - the 1988 Accord may remain a relevant standard. So supervisors need not abandon the 1988 Accord in the near future. However, we have found that as banks engage in more advanced activities, the simplicity of the 1988 Accord quickly becomes a liability. Because it is a static rule, it is falling behind the pace of innovation and advances in technology, telecommunications, and risk measurement and management practices. Basel II provides banks and supervisors with a remedy, one that represents a more flexible and forward-looking approach to capital supervision. In that light, the question I hear from many supervisors is what else can they do to prepare for a future move toward Basel II? I believe that we must strengthen three BIS Review 52/2004 3 
areas of supervision in particular that form the foundation necessary for Basel II - and that are, in themselves, equally crucial to safety and soundness. First, a system of effective supervision must exist in a country. The Basel Committee has previously helped to identify 25 principles that contribute to a supervisor’s effectiveness. They are enumerated in the Core Principles for Effective Supervision and outline the authority and resources that a supervisor must have to promote financial stability. They include having adequate legal authority to set and apply licensing criteria, prudential regulations and capital requirements; having the ability to conduct ongoing evaluations of a bank’s operations and to respond when banks fail to meet regulatory requirements; and having the ability to apply this authority to the consolidated global operations of their banking organisations and to the domestic operations of foreign banks. When applying these principles to internationally active banks, supervisors must furthermore be able to share information with home and host supervisors as necessary. Second, we must ensure that the market in which Basel II is to be applied is moving toward greater transparency and is subject to a clear set of rules. Sound accounting and provisioning standards must be enforced so that capital ratios - however calculated - reflect meaningfully the bank’s ability to absorb losses. The legal and judicial system must make the rights and responsibilities of both banks and their counterparties clear and enforceable so that banks and borrowers can make the most effective use of collateral, guarantees, and other measures to secure credit. Third, we must confirm that the banking industry is developing a sense of a “culture” of risk management. This is perhaps the hardest criterion to define. To a great degree, Basel II is intended to create incentives for the banks to renew their focus on a risk management culture. At a minimum, countries that seek to apply Basel II must ensure that their banks view risk management not as an exercise in complying with external requirements, but rather as a means for pursuing opportunities responsibly. We must all understand as well that risk management is an art, not a science: it is a way to approach business decisions, but it does not provide automatic answers. Its successful application requires that we constantly improve our skills and our expertise. It demands the use of the best tools and best data available to support our analyses. And ultimately, it requires that we apply our best human judgement to all significant decisions. All of us can take immediate steps to strengthen our financial and supervisory infrastructure along these three areas. We must ensure the effectiveness of our supervisory systems. We must improve the transparency of our markets. And we must promote the development of sound risk management cultures. We do not need to implement Basel II formally to introduce or to strengthen the principles behind its three pillars. However, beginning to apply those principles can be an excellent way to lay the foundation for Basel II in the future. For example, supervisors could consider or continue to focus on internal processes and move toward a system of risk-based supervision, to complement and enhance traditional supervision. We can improve our capacity to look beyond the numbers and evaluate the quality and capabilities of a bank’s risk management and measurement. At the same time, supervisors can nurture a “risk management culture” by emphasising that banks are responsible for evaluating their capital needs and for developing a strategy to maintain their capital levels, in line with the principles of Pillar 2. Finally, to improve market discipline along the lines of Pillar 3, some supervisors may wish to begin by ensuring a basic level of disclosure across all banks. They could discuss with banks, investors, and other marketplace participants what information they need to understand a bank’s risk profile and then work to establish relevant reporting requirements. Clearly, we have many diligent preparations to make in the coming months and years as we prepare for Basel II. Later today, Nick LePan will share more detailed perspectives on the challenges ahead. Our workshops this afternoon will consider how to plan our transitions to Basel II, to prepare for the adoption of advanced approaches to risk management and the implementation of Pillar 2, and to strengthen cooperation between home and host supervisors. With regard to this last topic of cooperation, I believe that our safety and soundness goals can be achieved more easily when supervisors adopt more consistent approaches. In particular, Basel II will have the greatest impact if supervisors work in concert rather than in a vacuum. This makes it critical for the Basel Committee to build its ties and to encourage cooperation with other supervisors. Indeed, as I suggested earlier, many of the improvements to the Basel II proposals resulted from discussions with other supervisors and central banks. The quality of our dialogue illustrates the very good state of relations between all banking supervisors today. This event, for example, represents one 4 BIS Review 52/2004 
of the most important opportunities for an exchange of views among Committee members and other supervisors. But what begins here must translate into other avenues for communication on both multilateral and bilateral levels. In this regard, the Core Principles Liaison Group, or CPLG, serves as the main forum for exchanges between Basel Committee members and other supervisors. This working group includes representatives from Committee member countries, 16 non-G10 supervisors, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank. Earlier this year, I chaired a very productive special session with this group. I learned first-hand the views of CPLG members on ways to build the Committee’s rapport with other supervisors. I also received valuable suggestions on the Committee’s projects. The Committee will continue to rely on the expertise of the CPLG to provide non-G10 reactions to many of its main initiatives. For example, the Accord Implementation Group, which is chaired by Nick Le Pan, the Vice Chairman of the Committee and Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada, holds regular meetings with the CPLG to bring attention to non-G10 issues in implementing Basel II. Beyond this standing group, the Committee seeks other avenues for formal and informal discussions with other supervisors. The CPLG itself has recently suggested that regional groups of banking supervisors strengthen their activities so that they may serve as another channel for greater communication, cooperation, and commitment to shared objectives. The Basel Committee has long supported the development and mission of these regional groups. These groups foster regional cooperation as well as continued dialogue with the Basel Committee and other supervisors. More than a dozen of these regional groups exist, most of which met here yesterday. I encourage all of them to continue to develop programmes of their own. At a meeting between the Committee and the principals of the various regional groups, we discussed additional ways to strengthen future interactions between the Basel Committee and regional groups. One other formal effort that the Committee and its members support includes those events sponsored by the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements. The FSI provides technical assistance to supervisory agencies worldwide in enhancing the quality of their supervisory systems and the skills of their staff. The Basel Committee and its member agencies remain committed to the activities of the FSI and to working together with fellow supervisors in an efficient and transparent manner. It is one of my highest priorities as chairman of the Committee to strengthen our outreach and communication with fellow supervisors. 4. Accounting Our overarching goal in these discussions is to help ensure that our supervisory framework keeps pace with evolution in the industry and remains relevant to banking in the twenty-first century. This is, of course, a constant challenge for supervisors in an industry as innovative as the banking sector. Yet we must furthermore look beyond the immediate issues to consider more broadly the many changes in our markets and practices that are relevant to banks’ safety and soundness. In recent years, one of the most important reforms that affects not just banking, but in fact nearly all businesses, is the drive toward harmonised accounting standards globally. It is impossible for us to improve transparency and promote stability without examining the changes underway to the mechanics that define how financial data are recorded and reported. I’d like to conclude my remarks this morning with some preliminary thoughts on accounting and supervision and on our responsibilities in this field as supervisors. I mentioned earlier that the application of sound accounting and provisioning standards is a key element that we must build into the foundation for Basel II. When accounting rules are weak or poorly enforced, neither bankers, nor supervisors, nor marketplace participants can have much faith in their ability to evaluate the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations. No matter how sophisticated a bank’s risk management systems may be, they are ultimately worthless if we are unable to determine the worth of the bank’s assets and liabilities confidently. Even when standards are enforced nationally, substantial differences in accounting standards between jurisdictions can complicate the ability of global markets to exercise discipline effectively and to allocate capital efficiently across borders. In our efforts to strengthen financial stability, central banks and supervisors have a legitimate interest in the quality of accounting standards and their effective implementation. We believe that, in order to contribute to strengthening the banking system, accounting standards should support - or at least be consistent with - sound risk management and control practices in banks. In addition, they should BIS Review 52/2004 5 
facilitate market discipline by promoting transparent reporting of banks’ financial position and performance, risk exposures and risk management activities. Finally, accounting standards should facilitate the effective supervision of banks. Because of this view, the Committee has sought to participate actively and constructively in the international debates on accounting. Given our interest as well in promoting a more level playing field, ensuring the effectiveness of market discipline, and seeking the efficient allocation of capital across borders, we support the objective towards convergence in accounting guidelines. During tomorrow’s discussions, Dr. Arnold Schilder, Executive Director of the Bank of the Netherlands and Chairman of the Committee’s Accounting Task Force, will share some of the Committee’s thinking and most recent work on emerging issues related to accounting, Basel II and supervision. After his remarks, we will have an opportunity to meet in smaller groups to discuss issues and the work ahead for supervisors to help promote sound practices with regard to loan accounting, regulatory capital, and fair value accounting, as well as to incorporate the role of external auditors and accountants effectively in the supervisory process. But these discussions mark only the beginning. Our focus on accounting from the supervisory perspective, and our dialogue with the accounting profession, must continue to grow in the years to come. 5. Conclusion In my remarks today, I have tried to make clear that, in our new journey, challenging work remains ahead to ready our banks, to build our skills as supervisors, and to promote greater transparency in our markets. As we consider the preparations we must make, we might recall the words of the Spanish author, Miguel de Cervantes. In his world-renowned novel Don Quixote de la Mancha, he wrote nearly 400 years ago that, “To be prepared is half the victory.” The other half, I think, will be cooperation. Likewise, the preparations and hard work that we undertake today to prepare for Basel II will, at the same time, strengthen the financial and supervisory infrastructures in our countries more generally, even before we implement Basel II. These preparations are important in helping to ensure the effectiveness of our supervisory systems, to enhance the transparency of our markets, and to develop the sense of a risk management culture in the industry. Together, they will contribute to the promise of greater financial stability in our markets. That is surely a goal worthy of the preparations we will demand of our banks, of our markets, and of our own agencies. We must recognise that, just as banking is becoming an increasingly complex business, the job of bank supervisors will only become more challenging in the coming years. To promote sound banking and risk management practices on a national, regional, or global level, we will need to work together and cooperate even more in the future. Your participation in this conference speaks to your interest in finding ways to deepen our cooperation as we move into this next journey for supervisors. “El trabajo compartido es mas llevadero,” as we say in Spanish: “Many hands make light work” - and, looking around this hall, you will see many hands ready to cooperate. And so, in closing, I encourage you to make the most of this unique opportunity to build contacts and working relationships and to share views on how we can work together toward greater financial stability in the future. 6 BIS Review 52/2004 
Eva Srejber: New EU countries - opportunities and risks Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the students of the Blekinge Institute of Technology in Karlskrona, Ronneby, 20 September 2004. *      *      * It is almost six months now since 10 countries became new EU members, eight of which were central European nations that once were under the control of communist dictatorship. It is said that when Henry Kissinger asked Zhou Enlai, Mao’s right-hand man, to comment on the significance of the French revolution, he replied “too early to say”. As regards the enlargement of the EU, which is one of the biggest events in Europe in our time, it is likely to be many decades before we can take stock of the full consequences, even in the limited area I intend to discuss here today - the economic situation.  Nonetheless there is much to say about the dynamics that have been created by the enlargement, changes that were initiated as soon as the EU opened the door to membership in the 1990s and that are now continuing following entry: In the short term the immediate problem for the new member states is to govern their economic policy in the right way, given their objective of not simply becoming members of the EU but also joining the eurozone. In the long term there are the opportunities that the free movement of goods, capital and not least people provide for economic growth in both the “old” and “new” parts of the EU. Finally, I intend to touch upon how the discussions in the EU have changed now that the 10 new member states have joined the debate. I will deliberately try to avoid using the words “west” and “east”. Partly because it is quite simply geographically misleading; we say “eastern Europe” even though Prague and Ljubljana are situated west of Stockholm, not to mention Vienna or Athens. We forget that Riga and Tallinn are closer to Stockholm than Gothenburg is. But partly also because it is historically misleading since the new member states do not constitute a cultural or political bloc. Besides their fifty years of oppression, Hungary, Latvia and Slovenia have less in common with each other historically than with Austria, Sweden and Italian, respectively, and belong moreover to three completely different language groups. I prefer instead “new” and “old” as a way of referring to the situation that the 10 new member states find themselves in.  The short term: the path to EMU In connection with the EU enlargement there has been an intense discussion in recent years, both in the old and new EU countries, about what requirements should be imposed on the new member states’ economic policy. The discussion has not dealt with entry to the EU, for which the key issues have already been settled, but the next step: the euro. Nine of the ten new member states have announced their intention to introduce the euro as quickly as possible. For some of them the changeover would be entirely undramatic and opportune. For example, Estonia and Lithuania have long had currency boards anchored to the euro, whereby the currency is only issued against a certain statutorily established quantity of euro - in practice a kind of “shadow euro”. The currency boards anchored to the euro are considered to have contributed to falling inflation and a stable investment climate. Their economies have been highly flexible in terms of wages and prices and their government finances have been in order, and they have thereby been able to manage situations where developments in the Baltic countries have deviated from those in the euro area. The fact that they now also have the opportunity to introduce the euro is expected to provide further advantages for trade and price comparisons.  But for some of the other new member states a hurried transition to the euro could give rise to problems. To qualify for participation in the eurozone the countries must meet the convergence criteria which lay down various requirements for inflation, interest rates, the exchange rate and government finances. The Baltic States are very close to meeting these criteria today, or have already fulfilled them. But the largest new member states have bigger difficulties.  One of the criteria for introducing the euro is that a country keeps its exchange rate stable within the bands set by the exchange rate mechanism ERM2, which allows a maximum movement in the exchange rate of 15 per cent up or down. The largest of the new member states - Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary - today have a floating exchange rate.  BIS Review 51/2004 1 
In this regard there is a more theoretical and more immediate danger for the countries. The theoretical problem has to do with the pressures that high growth exerts on a country's economy and that, according to the Balassa-Samuelsson theorem, either leads to a rise in the exchange rate (nominal appreciation) or to a higher inflation rate than in other countries (real appreciation). If the new member states peg their exchange rates to the euro and at the same time have higher growth than the euro area countries, which they should, then according to the theory they will have higher inflation than the euro area. The problem is that one of the convergence criteria for introducing the euro is that inflation must not be more than 1.5 percentage points higher than in the three countries in the EU with the lowest inflation. This appears to be a potential catch-22 situation. The variation in the exchange rate is limited for two years, while inflation cannot rise too much; but that is what will happen if growth in the new member states is considerably higher than in the euro area, which is what everybody wants. However, I would say that this is mainly a theoretical problem - in practice it has proven possible to keep inflation reasonably low despite a fixed exchange rate and high growth; this has been the case in the Baltic region, for example, where Lithuania has even experienced deflation and high growth. This is because inflation is also affected by a number of other variables (competitive pressures, the productivity of the domestic services sector, taxes and foreign demand). Countries such as Ireland and Spain have shown that inflation can be driven lower ahead of joining the euro despite high economic growth, at least during the years when the convergence criteria are to be assessed.  The other problem is more palpable. A currency peg must be credible at all times if it is to last (unlike, for example, a single currency, which is credible since it quite simply cannot be changed). As Sweden experienced at the beginning of the 1990s, unhealthy government finances can erode credibility and give rise to expectations that the politicians will abandon the currency peg and devalue so as to pull through the crisis. Should the expectations be strong enough they can become self-fulfilling, as they did in Sweden in 1992. The problem in several central European countries is that their government finances deteriorated drastically at the beginning of this decade. Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary are all, despite spending cuts, still running public deficits over 5 per cent of GDP this year. Should they peg their currencies so as to meet the convergence criteria, they could in other words risk speculation. In addition, they risk remaining in that precarious situation for a long time before gaining approval to introduce the euro; another of the criteria for joining the euro is, as we know, a maximum public deficit of 3 per cent. The worst scenario would therefore be if the countries, in their euphoria over EU entry, were to peg their currencies at a high exchange rate in order to quickly proceed to EMU. In such a situation, the problems in the countries’ government finances would put downward pressure on their currencies, while the euro introduction would be postponed further into the future for the very reason that the criterion for the government finances was not met as quickly as anticipated. It now appears that the risk of such a scenario has been averted. The four largest new member states, spearheaded by the Czech Republic, have made clear that their government finances must be in order before the process to enter the euro-zone begins. New spending cuts have been planned to consolidate the government finances so that the countries after a few years can take the next step and peg their currencies at the prospect of euro entry. However, this does not allay all concerns on the path to the euro. It is not sufficient either, for instance, to simply save so that a deficit during a boom exactly meets the criterion of 3 per cent of GDP. Firstly, the Stability and Growth Pact contains a requirement to keep budgets at least close to balance over an economic cycle. But most of all there must be margins in the budget to cope with situations when developments in a country are weaker than in the euro area as a whole (which was pointed out in the Swedish official report before the euro referendum, Stabilisation Policy in the Monetary Union (SOU 2002:16), and in the Riksbank’s statement on this). Otherwise there is a risk that the new member states will end up in Germany’s or France’s current situation - saving despite the fact that the slowing economy has needed stimulation. For this reason deficits during a boom should be considerably lower than 3 per cent so that a margin exists when the economy is put to a harder test during slowdowns. On the whole there is concern that the pressure to put government finances in order will lessen when the objective of joining the euro is postponed. The future will tell whether the saving plans are really implemented as intended. The long term: mobility and prosperity Although much of the debate necessarily focuses on the short term, the key issues are those that concern the long run. On the one hand, how can the new member states catch up sustainably on the EU average in terms of prosperity and productivity? On the other hand, how can the “old” EU countries benefit from the enlarged EU in order to boost growth, which in many cases has left much to be desired? 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
Firstly, let me point out where we stand today. According to the EU’s statistical agency, Eurostat, the purchasing power adjusted GDP per capita of the eight new eastern and central European member states ranges from 77.3 per cent of the EU average in Slovenia to 42.6 per cent in Latvia. The richer new member states - Slovenia, the Czech Republic and Hungary - are in terms of purchasing power closer to the EU average than Spain and Portugal were when they joined in 1986 (Slovenia is actually on a par with Portugal and Greece today). The other countries are all just under the relative level that Portugal had in 1986. Sometimes the GDP curves are extended up to the beginning of the 1990s and the fall in output that followed the liberation from communism. These figures are in many ways misleading, however. Firstly, there was considerable manipulation of statistics under the dictatorship, making correct data difficult to reconstruct. Secondly, output in 1989, at the end of the communist era, comprised a very large component of heavy military material and moreover inferior equipment and consumption goods that never came close to being sold or valued in a market, the majority of which were most likely unsellable in a market economy, and many of which were unusable even in a planned economy. The convergence towards the EU average went on during the entire period from 1992-1993 when we had reliable statistics. GDP has grown faster than in the EU and more rapidly in the poorest countries in the group than in the richer ones. This is exactly what we can expect from theories on international economics and long-term convergence in productivity and prosperity.  Behind these figures lies a revolutionary change that makes structural change in EU countries pale by comparison. For each component of GDP that has shrank, another component has grown; for each day that an old heavy industry has closed its gates, dozens of new small enterprises have started up. Allow me to give some examples: In 1991 the private sector constituted 10 per cent of GDP in Estonia; today it is over 80 per cent. Manufacturing, which accounted for 47 per cent of GDP in the Czech Republic in 1992, now comprises 38 per cent, while services at the same time have risen from 44 to 58 per cent.  Nevertheless, economic growth in the new member states is not high enough. Ireland and the dynamic Asian economies grew 9-10 per cent a year during their most intense catch-up phase. But the largest of the new member states - Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic - are only growing a few percentage points faster than the average for the old countries; an average that furthermore is being pulled down by the poor performances of Germany, France and Italy. From this we can come to at least two conclusions: Firstly, Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, which already have fairly substantial public expenditures for their income level, should take care not to end up in the same situation as Germany, France and Italy, with high expenditures, large deficits and considerable needs for reform. Secondly, both new and old countries need a broader injection from the enlargement for their economic performance.  Mobility for goods has been one of the key factors behind the new member states' growth. When the process towards EU entry was initiated in the mid-1990s, the majority of the EU’s barriers to trade for the future member states were abandoned through the Europe agreements. This resulted in one of the most dramatic and least publicised changes in trade in modern time - far more significant for most EU countries than, for instance, trade with China today. The future member states, which previously had been among Europe’s most closed economies, were transformed in a few years to the most open economies in Europe - foreign trade corresponds to more than 130 per cent of GDP in Hungary and the Czech Republic, more than countries of an equivalent size in the EU, such as Austria and Sweden. The EU became completely dominant in trade, while Russia and the former Soviet republics shrank to become a relatively small trading partner. The countries’ share of the old EU countries’ trade rose quickly. For Sweden the eight new member states have been the trading partners that have always increased their share steadily from the beginning of the 1990s - through the Asian crisis and the bursting of the IT bubble - and that today comprise 5 per cent of Sweden’s foreign trade, i.e. on a par with France and more than double China’s share. All indications suggest that the trend will both continue and deepen. The proportion of intermediate goods (components) produced in the new member states on behalf of Western companies is becoming an increasingly large part of trade, as is the proportion of goods with higher technological content from the new member states. Mobility for goods has gone hand in hand with mobility for capital. Several studies of the balance of earnings and costs associated with enlargement (e.g. from the European Commission and the independent institution CEPR) have high-lighted increased investment as one of the most significant advantages of EU entry. When a country has received a timetable for EU entry, investors know that, despite political and economic upheaval, there is a certain fundamental security in its institutions. They know the rules that apply to membership in the shape of democracy, a market economy and the EU's BIS Review 51/2004 3 
acquis - all the regulations agreed so far that each new member state adopts. This has very much been the case with the eight new member states that became free from communism. Between 1993 and 2003 more than EUR 130 billion (SEK 1150 billion or almost half of Sweden’s current GDP) was invested in the eight countries, of which large parts were capital from old EU countries. The investment was mainly channelled into capital in industry and into infrastructure such as energy and telecommunications.  A significant Swedish example is the large-scale investment undertaken by Swedbank and SEB in the Baltic banking system. From 1998 both of these Swedish banks have each acquired a part of the Baltic banking system, comprising a total ownership of almost 90 per cent. The Baltic banking system, which previously has been hit by several banking crises, has since then grown very fast, with an annual credit growth of 20-30 per cent, giving increased opportunities for both large and small firms, but also mortgages for individuals. A number of new services, including Internet banking, have been introduced and become widespread. Competition has been relatively tough, with decreasing margins on ordinary financial services and other foreign banks that have gradually tried to gain entry. It is likely that the banking system’s fast development has contributed to the continuous growth in the entire Baltic region during the current decade.  Investment flows can also help strengthen the complementariness between industrial structures in different parts of Europe. Outsourcing of labour-intensive stages to low-wage countries has recently taken the blame for the weak jobs growth in the United States. In reality the data indicate something else: that the integration with the fast-growing countries in Latin America and the Pacific Rim have been a crucial factor for the United States’ capacity to raise its productivity and prosperity increasingly faster during the 1990s and the 2000s. One study carried out by independent researchers at the institutes NBER in the United States, CEPR in Europe and the IMF show that outsourcing to low-wage countries even strengthens employment growth in the long term. The consultancy firm McKinsey has estimated that each dollar invested in outsourcing to India gives the United States an economic gain of USD 1.12-1.14 and a gain of USD 0.33 in India. In this regard the enlargement affords a similar opportunity for the EU and Europe. There are innumerable examples of how investment in companies in the new member states results in sophisticated cooperation with Western firms. Hungary is now competing with Ireland to attract computer assembly, and Slovakia is on the way to becoming one of Europe’s major car manufacturers, while Estonia is a subcontractor of both Swedish clothing firms and Ericsson. Perhaps the most interesting consequence of EU membership is mobility for people, or, as its known, labour. A common premise in that discussion is that labour from the new member states threatens to invade the labour markets of the old EU countries and that this will be a problem for the old countries even if it benefits the new member states’ inhabitants. I would argue instead that it is quite the reverse: Unfortunately not enough people from the new member states will work in the old countries, which is a disadvantage for us, but which possibly benefits them.  Allow me to begin with what the studies say about the potential migration from the new member states. According to a number of studies by independent academics, the flow of people to the old countries if no country had introduced transition rules would not have been larger than after Spain’s and Portugal’s entry to the EU, amounting to 40 000-670 000, in other words less than 2 per thousand of the population in the old countries. The reasons for the modest forecast is partly that such a move is associated with costs, that the same rules apply for immigrants and domestic workers in the labour market, and last but not least that mobility is fairly low in the new member states, for cultural and housing reasons among others. A big problem in countries with very high regional unemployment, such as Poland, is that people are not even moving within the country, in spite of vacant jobs and wage differentials of over 50 per cent. Even though six months is undeniably too short a time for assessment, it has been recorded in Swedish media that not a single person from the new member states to date has applied for social welfare or other form of benefit for living in Sweden. Looking for work or applying for benefits in another EU country is both associated with more bureaucracy and rules and is more costly in terms of living and housing than what many people who have never been in that situation know.  This is a problem because the labour in the new member states is needed in the old ones. The old countries in the EU have presently a highly unfavourable demographic situation, as previously broad age groups are retiring and the base of active people to support them is being reduced. In Sweden today, each person in the active population supports 0.29 people over 65; by 2030 this ratio is estimated to have risen to 0.42. The corresponding figures for Italy and Belgium are even more alarming. One way to reduce the dependency burden and increase the labour force is to try to get 4 BIS Review 51/2004 
people that are unemployed, sick or in early retirement back to work. Historically, however, the most reliable way to steadily boost the labour force has been immigration, as has been the case in the United States, for example. Experiences and studies also show that people with the most advanced qualifications and best training most often have the greatest incentive to move, partly because the wage differential is bigger and partly because they find linguistic and cultural barriers easier to overcome. So to consolidate the welfare in the old countries, an increase inflow of highly qualified labour from the new member states would be desirable. The question is whether this is not correspondingly a disadvantage to the new member states. They have a somewhat different demographic situation, their dependency burden is lower today, but will later rise sharply and in several countries exceed Italy’s or Sweden's in 20-30 years. There is also a risk that it would be the best-qualified labour that would emigrate first.  Meetings in a broader circle Having considered these prospects, I would like to provide an insight into how the enlargement changes the functioning of the EU. The Riksbank participates in a large number of EU committees. I myself am a member of the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC), where senior officials from the finance ministries and deputy governors of the central banks in the EU discuss economic issues. The fact that there are now 25 countries instead of 15 and therefore considerably more at the table implies changes, of course. On the one hand, there is less scope for each country - the central banks, for example, don’t participate as often in the EFC after the enlargement and the speaking time per person places greater demands on concise, brief contributions. On the other hand the discussion has been vitalised by the new countries, which in some ways are less bound by tradition and which have new angles of approach, sometimes for the simple reason that many leading decision-makers in the new member states are much younger than their colleagues in the old countries.  An important point is that it is not just the new member states that have to learn from the old ones; they can also give the old countries something to think about. For example, several of the former planned economies today are in some areas better adapted for EMU than the present EU countries. Their wages and prices have been more in line with their economic performance, which could be one reason, for example, that the Baltic States have been able to pull through the Russian crisis and the breakdown of the Russian market with only a brief loss of growth. The flexibility of their wages and prices makes them therefore unusually well-suited to a currency union like EMU. At the same time, these countries have not shied away from reforms that many leading EU countries have not yet been able to bring about. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary and Poland have, for example, carried out comprehensive reforms of their pension systems, which now resemble the Swedish model with savings partly invested in funds. In these areas in particular, it is rather the EU that has something to learn from the candidate countries than the other way around.  It is as Pope John Paul II said, that now finally can “Europe breathe with both lungs”. The new member states enrich the EU, not just economically but also intellectually, and of course also culturally and in human terms. The enlargement puts the EU in motion; not just the trade and investment, but also the institutions and the ideas. BIS Review 51/2004 5 
T T Mboweni: Developments in the foreign exchange markets during the last couple of years  Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the cocktail function in honour of the ACI South Africa, Pretoria, 20 September 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the South African Reserve Bank. We thank you for being here this evening, and we feel honoured that you should have accepted our invitation. As most of you are engaged in the foreign exchange markets, we thought that it might be useful to make a few remarks on our involvement in the markets and refer to recent developments in this regard. We think that you are an important and critical constituency as far as our work is concerned, and it is only correct and proper that from time to time we should come together to exchange views and interact with one another. Allow me to congratulate ACI South Africa for being selected to host the ACI Council Meeting in Sandton from the 23rd to 27th November this year. It will be the first time that this prestigious event will be held in South Africa. We wish you good luck with the organisation of that event and we are certain that you will do us proud! We have also noted from your website that you are also taking this opportunity to draw attention to the "sights and sounds" of our beautiful country.  We are also aware of the important role, which the ACI is playing in actively promoting the educational and professional interests of the financial markets. In particular, the active role in the education of dealers with a view to establishing an accreditation standard and developing the technical skills and knowledge of financial market dealers in South Africa and Africa as a whole is to be appreciated. It is assumed here that as an organisation you are also an active participant in the financial services charter process.  We also admire your efforts in compelling your members to maintain the professional level of competence and the ethical best practices of loyalty as set out in your Model Code. We strongly support all your attempts to promote professional and ethical behaviour in South Africa as these are essential in building credible international trading relations, and in establishing, maintaining and enhancing the reputation of our financial markets. Our remarks this evening will focus on developments in the foreign exchange markets during the last couple of years. A good starting point appears to be the last time we met with you as an organisation here at the central bank.  What were the big issues at the time of the last ACI cocktail? Just to touch on a few issues: If my memory serves me well, we met in May 2001, at a time when the currency markets were dominated by a strong US$ on the back of strong flows into the USA, although at the time the strong economic growth seen in 2000 was already giving way to a somewhat less favourable growth prospect in the USA. We were all surprised that the US$ was still showing some resilience and continued to be generally strong. As we all now know, things did not stay that way. In the year 2000, the Rand lost 22% of its value against the US$ and during the first five months of 2001 the Rand lost about 5.5% against the US$, which did not seem too strange based on economic fundamentals at the time. Little did we know, of course, that at the end of the year 2001 we would be talking about a 37% depreciation and that there would have been the attacks on the United States, which would precipitate more conflicts and wars, and change risk perceptions in financial markets. We talked then about volatility in the financial markets and acknowledged that it was becoming a constant feature as the processes of deregulation, liberalisation and globalisation continued to gather momentum.  Trading in our foreign exchange markets and in the Rand was very much influenced by the existence of the NOFP and the Forward Book, with the NOFP still registering a negative balance of US$9bn, in spite of significant progress that had been made in reducing it from the precarious levels of over US$23bn in 1998. This was seen as a negative factor by rating agencies and investors, and we were constantly called upon to explain how we were going to deal with that situation. BIS Review 51/2004 1 
Where did the journey take us after that? As you all know, the period after our last meeting brought with it some major challenges for the world economy, which South Africa as a small open economy got its fair share of. However, we also had to face serious challenges that were more related to our own situation. The second half of 2001, especially the fourth quarter saw a steep depreciation of the Rand, not only against the US$, but on a broad base. The situation got to a point where the two-way risk inherent in trading the currency was temporarily dislodged, and a perception existed in the market that the Rand was a one-way downward bet. Our observation of the existence of large speculative positions at the time compelled us to issue the now famous statement of October 16, 2001, in which we reminded market participants to adhere to existing rules and regulations covering currency trading. It is worth noting at this stage that we very much valued the cooperation we received from the ACI when we attempted to clarify certain issues to market players at the time. Whilst many reasons have been advanced, and even a commission of enquiry established, to some extent those developments still remain unexplained. That massive depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand led to a deterioration in inflation, which represented a serious setback for us in the early stages of South Africa's implementation of a formal inflation targeting monetary policy framework. Having registered some success since the introduction of formal inflation targeting, and even managing to steer CPIX into the target range in September and October 2001, the knock-on effects of the currency depreciation resulted in a sharp increase in inflation during 2002, with CPIX peaking at 11.3% in November 2002. These developments necessitated a tighter monetary policy stance, which was delivered by way of repo rate increases totalling 400 basis points during 2002. But we are now back on track… We are, however, pleased to say that the pressures that we faced then were relatively short-lived. Our policy responses, whilst admittedly painful at the time, together with global and domestic developments allowed us to resume the positive path we had been travelling on before the interruption of 2001. The currency has recovered very well, and contributed to better inflation outcomes as well as a much improved inflation outlook. This in turn has allowed the Monetary Policy Committee to reduce the repo rate by as much as 600 basis points between June 2003 and August 2004. It is indeed pleasing to note that the CPIX inflation measure, which is the one that our policy is judged against, has now been within the specified target range of 6 - 3 % for almost a year. As you are well aware, owing to the combined efforts of the SA Reserve Bank and the National Treasury (NT), the net open foreign currency position (NOFP) was finally eliminated in May 2003, and the oversold forward book of the Bank was closed out, in February 2004. We are glad to say that these developments, resulted in fully transferring the function of forward cover provision back from the Bank to the authorised dealers. Those positions also had major consequences for liquidity management in the money market. In fact they complicated our lives very badly! Whereas previously the huge losses from the forward book led to a structural liquidity surplus in the money markets, which had to be mopped up by using expensive instruments such as the so called special money markets swaps, our operations in the money markets now follow what one may refer to as normal central banking patterns.  Moreover, all these achievements also enabled the Bank to focus more on increasing the official reserves to more internationally acceptable levels. What that level is, is rather difficult to say, and there appears to be no universally agreed upon international benchmark in this regard. The appropriate level may need to be evaluated against a country's specific circumstances such as the size of its economy and degree of openness, its exchange rate regime, credit rating, risk of capital flight, and many other factors. Extensive research on the subject continues to be undertaken here and internationally. As stated previously, whilst not working toward a specific target for reserves within a specific time frame, the Bank is strengthening its reserves mainly by means of purchasing, in a reponsible manner, moderate amounts of foreign exchange in the market, as and when, in our opinion, market conditions permit such purchases without unduly influencing the exchange rate and introducing unnecessary volatility in the market. We continue to accept that the exchange rate is set in the market. From time to time the Bank was also supported by the National Treasury in the process of accumulating reserves, when the proceeds of foreign bond issuances were sold to the Bank in exchange for Rand. In addition 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
to "creaming-off" and foreign borrowing by government, the Bank also borrows foreign currency in its own name mainly through the syndicated loan market, which increases the level of gross reserves. The international liquidity position has increased to $8,6 billion as at 31 August 2004 and the gross reserves (including gold reserves of approximately 4 million fine ounces) increased to slightly more than $12 billion at the end of last month. This is indeed a remarkable achievement, when one considers that at the time of our meeting in 2001, the negative NOFP stood at US$9bn, as indicated earlier. Some observers at times blame the Bank for not increasing the pace at which it is accumulating foreign exchange reserves. These well 'educated and informed' folks sometimes forget that converting a negative NOFP position of $23,2 billion in September 1998 into a positive net reserve position of $8,6 billion in August 2004, implies that over this six-year period, the Bank has acquired a staggering amount of almost $32 billion, most of which was obtained from the forex markets.  After a steady appreciation in the exchange rate of the Rand since 2003, the currency depreciated moderately after the reduction in the repo rate on 12 August this year and appears to have settled between R6,50 and R6,70 per dollar - approximately the same level as at the end of 2003. Various factors are in one way or the other responsible for the Rand's general appreciation so far this year. Firstly, the US dollar has depreciated against major currencies, benefiting the currencies of many emerging-market countries. Secondly, high commodity prices in international markets supported commodity-based currencies like the Rand. Thirdly, accommodative policy stances in some developed countries resulted in positive interest-rate differentials for emerging market countries compared with their counterparties within the industrialised countries. This is still the case with respect to South Africa despite the overall reduction of 600 basis points in the repo rate since June 2003. Fourthly, a number of significant corporate transactions resulted in an increased supply of foreign exchange and fifthly, momentum and technical trading may also have contributed to some of the Rand strengthening in recent months. Another important factor generally supporting the above mentioned has to do with the fact that the overall perception, or sentiment as you like to call it in the markets, of South Africa has been improving, with international investors making positive assessments of the political, fiscal and monetary management process in the country over recent years. It is also interesting to note that the volatility conditions in the domestic foreign exchange market seem to have normalised during the course of 2004. For example, the one-month historical volatility of the Rand declined from a most recent high of 28,4 percent in January 2004 to 12,2 per cent in June 2004, before picking up again to just below 20 per cent. Another measure of volatility, namely the difference between the highest and lowest exchange rate recorded during a month, declined from R1,36 in January 2004 to around 50 cents during the last few months. Although by some standards this still represents a fair degree of volatility, one should see this in the context that South Africa is an open economy exposed to international foreign exchange markets that have been fairly volatile recently. Our efforts with regard to strengthening our reserves level should over time contribute to a less volatile exchange rate. The average daily turnover against the Rand in the domestic foreign exchange market declined to just below US$6 billion in 2002, and remained fairly subdued at US$7,7 billion in 2003. In 2004 to the end of September, the average daily turnover against the Rand increased to above US$8 billion, and reached levels last recorded in 1999. We continue to see active participation by non-residents in our forex markets, especially in the swap market, where the share of non-residents currently amounts to around 65%. Non-residents accounted for about 60% of total turnover in the foreign exchange market.  Higher turnover generally correlates positively with market activity and also provides a good measure of market liquidity. Liquidity in the Rand market usually increases when the currency behaves in a predictable manner. However, in an uncertain trading environment, bid-offer spreads widen and the market loses its depth as market participants become reluctant to quote prices, which was the case in 2001. During the latter part of 2001, bid-offer spreads widened to approximately ten cents (from only three cents earlier in that year) on regular trading amounts. Conditions have improved drastically since then and spreads have narrowed back to approximately three cents currently. The price discovery mechanism in our forex markets now follows a much more normal pattern of two-way-risk. Given that you are forex dealers, there is no need to elaborate. Many of you have lived to be able to tell the story of the Rand much better. One thing seems to be confirmed now: the Rand is no longer a one-way downward bet. Hopefully some of the lessons learnt in this regard, in the dealing rooms, were not too expensive! BIS Review 51/2004 3 
Conclusion As you can deduct from the above, there are many areas where the Bank has daily contact with yourselves in the market place. We value these relationships dearly. It is through yourselves, the banking industry and financial markets in South Africa, that the Bank is able to implement monetary policy. You are an essential pillar in our monetary policy transmission mechanism. We wish you well as an organisation. We hope that you may grow from strength to strength. Once again thank you for the role you play in enhancing the reputation of our financial markets. Enjoy the evening with us and have a safe journey home. Thank you.  4 BIS Review 51/2004 
Lars Heikensten: The economic situation and monetary policy Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish embassy, London, 20 September 2004. *      *      * Thank you for the invitation to the Swedish embassy and for the opportunity to speak about the economic situation and Swedish monetary policy. It is important for the Riksbank to come to London occasionally to meet the participants in the financial markets that regularly follow the Swedish economy and our work. My intention today is to give a broad picture of my views concerning the inflation outlook in the years ahead. The starting point will be the most recent Inflation Report in May and the assessments in the press releases that the Riksbank has published thereafter. I will also discuss particularly some issues that have recently been touched upon in the monetary policy debate: oil price developments and household indebtedness as well as developments in residential property prices. Following my introduction I look forward to a lively discussion. International developments  The Riksbank’s assessment in the latest Inflation Report in May was that international economic activity would continue to strengthen this year and during the coming two years. During the summer we concluded that there was reason to be somewhat more optimistic about economic growth this year. The high oil price was indeed judged to stifle growth somewhat, but not to such an extent that would derail the upswing.  Developments have differed somewhat between various regions. Our assessment in May was that economic growth in the United States would slow at the end of this year, chiefly due to the assumption that fiscal policy would be less expansionary. Coupled with gradually rising interest rates, it was judged that this would dampen private consumption and housing investment somewhat. Despite the slowdown, however, the economic outlook was expected to be mainly bright over the coming years. Data for the second quarter indicates that private consumption has slowed somewhat earlier than anticipated. It is possible that this is partly due to the high oil price, which has lowered households’ real incomes. Even though more recent data from the United States has given a mixed impression, I think there is reason to be somewhat less optimistic about developments in the United States in the period ahead than indicated in the assessment in May. Growth this year of almost 4½ per cent now appears likely. In 2005 and 2006 there is reason today to expect about 3½ per cent annual GDP growth.  Growth in the euro area was judged in the latest Inflation Report to increase gradually this year following a very weak development in 2003. New information during the summer broadly confirms this outlook. In Germany it is mainly net exports that are contributing positively to GDP growth, while in other countries, notably in France and Spain, it seems to be domestic demand that is growing relatively quickly. For the euro area, it now appears reasonable to expect growth of 2 per cent this year and a slightly higher figure in the next two years. For the Nordic region, the UK and the rest of Europe as well as for Latin America and Asia, many analysts have revised up their growth forecasts since the end of the spring. This is partly because of a number of new statistics releases from these areas which have been more robust than many had expected. Russia and some Latin American countries are also benefiting from the high prices of commodities. As regards Asia it is primarily the outlook for the Japanese economy that has become increasingly optimistic. At the end of last year economic growth there was at its highest in fifteen years. There are many indications that there has been a slowdown in the Japanese growth rate very recently but in relation to the developments of recent years it is still relatively strong. China has experienced a rapid industrial expansion with average annual growth of almost 10 per cent in the past ten years. This year, too, growth has been high. One contributory factor to the strong growth is that investment has increased sharply. Nevertheless, most analysts expect growth in China to be somewhat lower in the years ahead, owing to the measures now being taken to dampen demand.  Taken together it is possible that there now, as at the time of the monetary policy meeting in August, is reason to be somewhat more optimistic about economic growth abroad this year compared with the BIS Review 51/2004 1 
Riksbank’s assessment in May. The high oil price could indeed dampen the upswing somewhat and there have been some less positive signals over the summer from the United States, among other countries. But it appears that this will be countered by growth in other parts of the world, which seemingly will be more robust than forecast in May.  In this context it may be worth noting that Sweden’s trade with countries such as China and India is still relatively small, but that the countries outside the OECD area (OECD-19) together account for about 20 per cent of Swedish export markets. This can be compared, for example, with the United States, whose share of Swedish exports is just over 10 per cent. If the performance of these countries is strong, it is of course of great significance for Sweden.  Financial market developments during the summer have not entirely been in line with expectations. Equity price developments have been relatively weak. Both short-term and long-term interest rates have accordingly been weaker than we anticipated. The cause of this weaker development in interest rates has been uncertainty, primarily about the strength of the US economic upswing and the effect of the high oil price on global growth. However, the uncertainty seems again to have diminished somewhat recently, partly as a result of more robust labour market data in the United States. This has led to a recovery in the stock market.  When the Riksbank in its Inflation Reports looks ahead a couple of years, it is important not to be too influenced by the recent weeks’ movements in the financial markets, but rather to stick to our fundamental, longer-term assessment of economic developments. As long as we don’t markedly change our view of future economic prospects and the inflation outlook, there is, in my opinion, neither any reason to change the view from the early summer of future financial conditions. Interest rates today are low in an historical perspective and they can be expected to rise somewhat as global resource utilisation picks up. At the same time, the krona should appreciate somewhat, partly due to the continued substantial surpluses in Sweden’s trade with other countries.  The oil price and monetary policy In May, the Riksbank forecast international inflation to increase during the year, primarily as a result of rising global resource utilisation. Developments since then point to a somewhat stronger rise in prices than expected. To some extent this is due to the unexpectedly high price of oil. A couple of weeks ago the oil price reached record-high levels and is today roughly as high as during the oil crisis in1979-80.  An unexpectedly steep increase in global demand for oil, not least from the rapidly growing Chinese economy, seems to have been a significant driving force behind the rise in the oil price in 2004. This has led to a marked decrease in the idle capacity in the oil sector. Other relevant factors include unease over the situation in the Middle East and the various circumstances surrounding the Russian company Yukos. The rapid, short-term changes that have characterised the price formation in the oil market also point to a not insignificant element of speculation. Exactly what weight should be attributed to different factors from time to time is difficult to establish. But it is clear that the overall price rise in 2004 has been demand-driven to a larger degree compared with other occasions when the oil price has risen sharply. The increases in the oil price in 1973-74, 1979-80 and 1990 were as we know essentially a result of reductions in the oil supply.  The demand for oil will of course play an important part for price developments in the period ahead as well. A key aspect is that more and more countries that previously were economically undeveloped will take the step towards more energy-intensive production. Even if new innovations can be put to use in a couple of years, the fast growth in many developing countries points to a relatively high oil price in the period ahead, too. Nevertheless, most analysts expect the supply to be so large that the oil price will fall back fairly sharply from current levels in the next few years, as geopolitical concerns diminish. Futures prices indicate that the oil price will fall by between USD 5 and 10 per barrel in the coming two years. In the long run it can also be expected that the oil price will be held back as more energy-efficient production methods are gradually introduced also in the recently industrialised countries, in the same way that happened in the West after the oil crises in the 1970s. But this is likely to be a process that takes a fairly long time.  An increase in the oil price is often problematic from a stabilisation policy perspective. This is because it tends to push up inflation at the same time as it has a dampening effect on the real economy. This makes it difficult to simultaneously stabilise inflation and output. The appropriate policy must quite simply be determined from case to case and is due in part to the persistence of the rise in the oil price, 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
how other prices in the economy are affected, and to what factors that otherwise drive the inflation process.  There are some aspects to the current situation that may be worth highlighting in this context. As I said earlier, the rise in the oil price in the past year has, more than previously sharp oil price increases, been due to a pickup in the demand for oil owing to world economic expansion. A rise in the price of oil that is largely a result of high international growth is likely to have less negative consequences for the real economy than a more outright supply shock.  In addition to this, of course, the economies in the West - and particularly the Swedish one - are far less dependent on oil than they were during the oil crises in the 1970s. This should mean that the impact of oil price rises on both the real economy and inflation would be considerably more limited than what proved to be the case at that time. The assessment of most analysts today seems also to be that the increase in the oil price in 2004 could indeed curtail somewhat the international economic upswing but that the recovery will not be derailed.  The impact of the oil price on inflation, too, should be less than before. Since the oil price shocks in the 1970s there has been a shift in the economic policy regime in many countries which has meant that low, stable inflation has become one of the central targets of economic policy. Today, low-inflation policies seem to enjoy high credibility in most countries, which is indicated in part by the fact that the rise in the oil price at least so far has had small effects on inflation expectations. The risk of an oil price rise spreading to wages and other prices in the economy is therefore also likely to be low. Furthermore, in the case of Sweden it should be added that inflation is rising from a low level and that agreements in the labour market have been settled for 2005 and 2006, further reducing the risk of contagion effects via the jobs market. To sum up: the fact that the increase in the oil price is partly a demand-driven phenomenon, that the dependency on oil has decreased and that inflation-targeting regimes enjoy high credibility suggests that the higher oil price should mainly be reflected in a temporary, limited rise in inflation and that the effects on the real economy should be fairly small. If this is correct, the general economic and inflationary developments are more significant for monetary policy than developments in the oil price. This brings me to a discussion of the broad outlook for the Swedish economy in the years ahead. Economic activity in Sweden   Despite the Riksbank’s relatively optimistic outlook for the Swedish economy compared with other forecasters, we have gradually revised up our forecasts in the past year. Our assessment in May was that economic activity in Sweden would continue to strengthen in the period ahead owing to both relatively loose monetary and fiscal policy and an expected economic upswing abroad. GDP growth was forecast to average almost 3 per cent from 2004 to 2006.  One reason that there now is cause to revise up the growth forecast is that exports once again have increased unexpectedly fast. Export growth has been robust because international demand in general has grown more rapidly than anticipated and because the relative price of Swedish exports has been unexpectedly low. As I pointed out earlier, some 20 per cent of Swedish exports go to countries outside the OECD area where economic growth has been vigorous. During the first half of this year exports of goods, measured in current prices, rose 9 per cent compared with the same period in 2003. Swedish exports have also benefited in part from the revival in the IT and telecommunications sectors. However, robust growth in exports is not unique to Sweden; average export growth in the EU has been roughly as strong during the first half of this year. Another positive signal is that a pickup in investment, which the Riksbank and other forecasters have been waiting a long time for, seems to have begun. This was a major contributory factor to our more positive outlook for the Swedish economy at the latest monetary policy meeting in August.  Since the monetary policy meeting in August, the government and its collaboration parties have announced proposals, intended to be presented in more detail in the budget bill, which may entail a more expansionary fiscal stance in the period ahead. These proposals include cutting income tax for households, abolishing inheritance and gift tax, lowering wealth tax and increasing support to local governments. In total, this is estimated to provide a stimulus of just over SEK 20 billion in 2005 and 2006. How large the impact of this will be on economic growth and inflation is not so easy to forecast. This is partly dependent on the extent to which households save their increased incomes. Using traditional rules of thumb it could entail a few tenths of one per cent higher GDP growth in both 2005 BIS Review 51/2004 3 
and 2006. As things stand, therefore, there is reason to expect growth to average above 3 per cent in the coming two years. In spite of the fact that the economy has performed fairly well for almost two years, developments in the labour market so far have been weak.  Even though the demand for labour is still low, the situation is nonetheless judged to have stabilised somewhat. The historical pattern is for employment to lag behind a change in output somewhat. It is common for economic upswings to begin in manufacturing, which then results in a rise in manufacturing employment. Gradually, there is also an increase in output in the services sector, which boosts employment in that sector. Our judgement is that this will also be the case this time. At the same time, it is important to remember that a process of structural change has been underway in the Swedish economy for some time, where jobs in the manufacturing sector have been replaced by jobs in the private services sector. This development, too, is likely to continue in the period ahead. Consequently, there is no reason to expect robust growth in manufacturing employment in the coming years. Furthermore, in the current economic upswing, it appears to be taking somewhat longer than usual for jobs to pick up. The number of hours worked, on the other hand, has risen more than normal for the current economic climate. Firms thus appear to have boosted production by making greater use of already employed staff instead of recruiting new employees. Although there is still considerable uncertainty about developments in the labour market, it is nevertheless likely that the number of employed will increase some time around the turn of the year. At roughly the same time unemployment should be able to begin to fall.  The other side of the coin of robust growth and a subdued jobs market is continued high productivity growth and low cost pressures in the Swedish economy. The extent to which this is temporary and due to economic activity, or is a result of longer-term factors, is hard to determine. It is therefore also difficult to judge how productivity will develop in the period ahead. Our assessment has been that the robust productivity partly reflects longer-term changes but that it is also due to the economic situation, and is thereby partly of a more transitory nature. We examine this assessment regularly, of course. In order to judge how demand in the economy will affect future inflation it is important to have a good picture of resource utilisation. There is no exact measure of this, however. In the latest Inflation Report, the assessment was that total resource utilisation in the economy was still relatively low but that it would rise gradually and in 2006 reach levels at which it no longer would restrain price and wage increases. New data from the National Institute of Economic Research, for example, suggest that resource utilisation is still relatively low, even though all indicators are not completely in accord. The indicators based on labour market conditions point consistently to low resource utilisation. The somewhat stronger GDP growth that there is now reason to expect suggests, however, that the idle resources will be employed at a somewhat faster rate than forecast both in May and August. House prices and debt levels  One issue that is of importance to the Riksbank for several reasons is household indebtedness and developments in residential property prices. The Riksbank is required to maintain price stability. In addition the Bank is required to promote an efficient, stable payment system. Furthermore, if these objectives are met, the Bank should also attempt to take account of the other targets of economic policy, e.g. economic growth and high employment. Developments in household indebtedness and house prices can be significant in all these respects.  When forecasting inflation, the Riksbank tries to take account of the connection between indebtedness and developments in house prices, on the one hand, and inflation on the other. For example, it may be a question of judging how large an impact rising house prices have on household wealth and, at the next stage, on demand in the economy. These relationships are in no way simple or straightforward, and even though statistical studies show a clear correlation between these different variables, it is entirely possible that there are underlying explanations, e.g. sentiment in the economy, that could affect the relationships. In any case, when producing our forecasts, we do our best to estimate the effects of house prices and indebtedness. The Riksbank also illustrates regularly the effects on the payment system of developments in house prices and household debt, mainly in the Bank’s reports on financial stability. Our assessment so far is that there are no signs that property prices are markedly out of balance. High growth in households’ disposable incomes, low interest rates and a low level of housing construction, coupled with increased demand for housing, may to a large extent justify the price rises seen in the housing market at national level, as well as current debt levels. It is also possible that the increase in debt is partly an adjustment 4 BIS Review 51/2004 
to an economy with - compared with before - better functioning financial markets, low inflation and expectations of relatively low interest rates in the future. Most indications also suggest that the majority of households would be able to service their debt even if interest rates were to rise sharply. Nor does it appear likely that banks and mortgage institutions would risk incurring losses that would appreciably affect their capital bases. This wasn’t the case either during the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s. While the banks’ losses during the crisis were largely propertyrelated, they did not stem from lending against collateral in housing but from loans secured by commercial properties. And prices of commercial properties have this time not at all shown the same development as prices of residential property. On the contrary, they have fallen during the economic decline and have still not recovered. What remains then are the effects on the economy in general. In this respect it is perhaps first a question of whether the build-up in debt and developments in house prices should prove unsustainable, that the prices therefore should fall and that this on the whole should result in a decline in the real economy in general. The risk of this happening is of course related to your view of residential property prices. If they seem to be highly elevated in relation to before, or are difficult to justify through established economic arguments, the risk is greater. The risk of problems is also connected to other economic developments. If these are stable, there is a smaller probability that those who have borrowed to buy a house will have made their decision on what later proves to be the wrong grounds.  An example can illustrate the latter form of reasoning. Interest rates are currently at an all-time low. This indicates that they will rise, which is an assumption that most households ought to have taken into account. However, many of them may also have been counting on rising income, as this is the normal situation; interest rates usually rise at the point when economic growth and thereby income in society increases. There is of course a risk here. A couple of decades ago we experienced a long period of both low growth and high inflation. If this should be repeated - although it does not at present appear likely - it is quite possible that many households would encounter difficulties. To sum up, one can say that the Riksbank in its normal work process does take into account, as far as is possible, the effects of indebtedness and house prices on inflation via effects on, for instance, consumption and general demand. These effects are taken into consideration in our inflation forecasts. In addition, we might choose to include effects on the payment system and on general economic performance if, for instance, we saw a significant risk of a future financial crisis. The clarification of our monetary policy that we published in 1999 states that we would explain clearly the reasoning behind our decision if this situation were to arise. Naturally, this question - of whether the risks are sufficiently large to require special consideration in the monetary policy decision - is not a simple one. It concerns weighing up difficult issues about which opinions may differ from time to time. So far, however, considerations with regard to the effects of house prices and household indebtedness on factors other than the inflation rate have only played a marginal role in interest rate policy.  Inflation and monetary policy Let me conclude with a summary of my current views on inflation and monetary policy. Since the early summer, inflation in Sweden has developed roughly in line with the Riksbank’s assessment in May. Inflation is low both by Swedish and international standards, at around 1 per cent. At the same time, it is important to emphasise that the decisive factor for monetary policy is not the present inflation rate, but our views regarding future inflationary pressures.  At our monetary policy meeting in May, the Riksbank judged that inflation would remain relatively stable over the coming year and then increase gradually as a result of rising international and domestic resource utilisation. Given the risks we saw before us - primarily a slightly stronger economic upturn - inflation was expected to be in line with the Riksbank's inflation target a couple of years ahead. This was why the repo rate was left unchanged. The outlook from May had not changed significantly at the meetings in June and August. However, we observed in August that economic growth appeared slightly stronger both in Sweden and abroad. This meant there was also reason to expect slightly higher resource utilisation. Moreover, the economic upturn had continued for a further couple of months.  What is the present outlook for inflation over the coming years? My own assessment is that the conclusions drawn by the Riksbank at the previous meeting in August remain valid on the whole. It is likely, however, that some upward revision of the inflation forecast may be warranted compared with BIS Review 51/2004 5 
the May assessment, and perhaps even compared with the August forecast. In the short term the high oil price points to such a scenario. It also appears reasonable to expect somewhat higher resource utilisation over the coming years compared with in May and August. Factors that support this are the strong data releases during the summer and the more expansionary fiscal policy that now appears likely. Another factor is international developments, which appear to be strong. Slightly higher resource utilisation should lead to a slight increase in inflationary pressures over the coming years, compared with previous assessments.  There are, of course, uncertainty factors. I have already mentioned the uncertainty surrounding international developments. Another uncertainty factor concerns developments in the labour market, which in turn are related to productivity growth. On the whole it is likely that there will be reason to revise up somewhat the inflation forecast compared with the May Inflation Report. Inflation a couple of years ahead can nevertheless be expected to be roughly in line with the Riksbank’s target. But as economy activity continues to strengthen, which is likely to imply less idle resources in the economy, there is reason to expect gradually rising inflationary pressures. Thank you! 6 BIS Review 51/2004 
Bandid Nijathaworn: Thailand’s economic conditions and prospects - a mid-year update Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a luncheon organised by the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce, Bangkok, 27 August 2004. *      *      * Let me begin first by thanking the Australian-Thai Chamber of Commerce for the invitation to speak to you today. For the Australian-Thai Chamber, this is the first for me and I am very pleased to be here. Today, I plan to cover the evolving economic pictures both at home and abroad. For the global economy, a number of interesting new themes are now emerging and I will try to put these developments into the perspective as we understand it at the Bank of Thailand. As for the domestic economy, despite a number of risks and challenges, this year the economy has managed well under the circumstances. Growth momentum remains firm and economic stability remains intact. Today, I will not open up any new kind of inquiry on the Thai economy, but will simply update you on the recent economic outturn and explain the rationale behind this week's decision by the Monetary Policy Committee to increase the policy interest rate. This decision, which is the first increase in three years, has been expected by the market following signs of increased pressure on domestic prices and following our own assessment and communication to the market that low interest rates have become less necessary given the changed outlook on inflation. Let me begin with the global economy. At present, it is still very much the case of a firm recovery in the global economy continuing into the first half of this year. Growth of the G3 economies for first half of the year is estimated at 4.9 percent for the US, 5.2 percent for Japan, and 1.9 percent for the EU, all accelerating from the rates of growth observed in the second half of last year. For the whole of this year, even allowing for the recent higher oil prices, market still anticipates a continued recovery in the global economy driven by the economic expansion in the US, Japan, and Asia. The latest consensus forecast now puts global economic growth this year at about 4 percent, significantly higher than the average of the past three years. To put these numbers into perspective, it is worthwhile to note that sentiment on the global economy at this time is less robust than the perception we had six months ago. This change has been driven in part by the recognition that the reversal of several important factors that had been supporting global growth since the second half of last year is now beginning to impact the global economy. The key factors I am referring to here include the higher oil prices, the rising global interest rates, and the slowing of the Chinese economy. While the outlook for the global economy remains firm, the persistently higher oil prices and some softness in the recent US data have shifted the balance of risks more to the downside. The key issue at this time is thus the oil prices, and the key question is how the higher oil prices will affect the global economy going forward. Ladies and Gentlemen, This year prices of oil have gone up by more than 40 percent. The Dubai price, which is the key reference price for Thailand, went up from last year’s average of US$ 27 per barrel to now about US$ 39 per barrel. Domestic retail oil prices, however, have gone up by less because of the price support scheme that the Government has been running. This has helped limit the immediate effects of the high global oil prices on the economy. But notwithstanding the subsidies, domestic inflation has been rising. Headline CPI inflation, for example, rose to 3.1 percent in July. At this time, we believe there is substantial price pressure building up in the economy that could eventually translate into higher consumer prices once the proft margin is adequately squeezed. This pent - up price pressure is linked not only to the higher global oil prices that have yet to be passed through to the consumer prices, but also to the continued high level of capacity utilization and to the reported tightening in some segments of the labour market. The risk to global growth from higher oil prices is now an issue that captures the attention of financial markets. Compared to the previous episodes of high oil prices, this time the high oil prices could very well persist longer because the increase has been driven by the rise in global energy demand as well as by supply disruptions. But because the oil prices in real terms are still lower than the peak levels during the oil crisis of the 1980’s, while the global economy has also become less dependent on oil, BIS Review 50/2004 1 
common wisdom at this time is that the higher oil prices will put pressure on global growth and inflation but will not in itself derail the ongoing momentum of global recovery. As for the rise in interest rates, the risk to global growth coming from higher global interest rates so far looks less threatening. This is because interest rates especially in the US are being increased from very low levels and are being done gradually. In the case of the US, the increase is more of an indication that the Fed is regarding the current recovery as being solid. Moreover, because the increase in rates is good for maintaining economic stability as well as for addressing global imbalances, the increase in interest rates should be seen as a good thing and should be welcomed. Against this background, we at the Bank of Thailand see the global recovery continuing firmly in the short term despite the higher oil prices. This year, Thailand’s export market - as measured by GDP growth of our major trading partners - is expected to grow by about 5 percent. This growth will be the key factor supporting our exports this year. At the same time, Thailand’s exports to China continues to expand, though at a lower rate compared to last year’s. Hence, the effect of the slowing Chinese economy on our exports is a factor that should be monitored closely. For the first half of this year, I am happy to report that Thailand’s exports to Australia grew by 16.6 percent while imports from Australia grew by 38 percent. Australia is now Thailand’s 11th and 12th largest trading partner on exports and imports, respectively, claiming a share of 2.3 percent of Thailand’s total trade. And with the recent conclusion of the bilateral free trade agreement between our two countries, trade between our two economies is likely to grow and grow. As for the global financial markets, let me just say briefly that this year global financial markets have been dominated by the changing expectations about the pace and the timing of monetary policy tightening in the US. And this has led to a global repricing of financial assets and some reversal of international capital fows, especially away from emerging markets. So far, the repricing of assets and the unwinding of positions have been quite orderly and the financing of the US current account deficit continues to be smooth. In broad terms, bond yields have increased, equity prices have declined, and the US dollar has appreciated in nominal effective terms. In terms of policy, the key issue in the global economy now is how to manage the transition to a higher interest rates environment so as to safeguard economic stability in view of the continued firm growth. Another is the management of the risk that higher oil prices might affect the global recovery. And the third is the issue of addressing the major global imbalances without creating serious volatilities to the financial markets. Let me turn now to the domestic economy. This year a theme that has kept recurring in my presentation of the Thai economy is that of risks and adjustment. This is to say that, for Thailand, this year has been a year of greater risks and the key theme has been adjusting to risks as the global economic and financial environment has become less helpful. The key external pressure an the Thai economy throughout this year has been the higher oil prices, the higher global interest rates, and the potential impact an our exports of a slowing Chinese economy.  This year, we also have our own domestic challenges. These include the two episodes of bird flu that have affected production and exports of poultry, and the uncertainty linked to the situations in the south which has importantly affected consumer confidence and business sentiment. So, for the most part, the performance of the Thai economy this year is essentially a story of how the domestic economy has been adjusting to the risks that emerged. This includes adjustments in the domestic financial markets and the real economy, as well as the implications for economic and financial stability. Let me go through each of these points in turn. As for the domestic financial markets, the adjustment has been led by the repricing of financial assets that has been underway since the second quarter. Yields on long bonds have been rising. Equity prices have declined. There have been some outflows of short - term capital, and the Baht has weakened from last year. In all, the adjustment has been smooth and orderly, and has benefited from the flexible market mechanism that underpins the movements of the economy’s key prices. And for the real economy, the adjustment has been accompanied by a moderation in growth in the first quarter to 6.5 percent, led by the slowdown in agriculture because of drought and the bird flu. Output of manufacturing and services, however, has continued to expand robustly. On the demand side, the 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
dampened consumer confidence has moderated the momentum of private consumption in the first half of the year, but private investment and exports have expanded well and have been the key drivers of growth so far this year. On this point, it is comforting to note that domestic demand expansion has benefited increasingly more from the pick-up in credit extension, driven by ample liquidity in the system. Private credit growth was a high 9 percent at end-June. Turning to economic stability, with continued growth, pressure on resources has become more visible this year with output gap continuing to close, inflation rising, the trade surplus narrowing and some tightening in the labour market reported. Overall external stability, on the other hand, remains strong with continued current account surpluses, falling external debt, and higher international reserves. But the higher oil prices and the rebound in investment have evidently put greater pressure on imports and the trade balance. One thing that we have been monitoring more closely this year is financial stability. Some indicators of financial fragilities are rising. These include rising household indebtedness and a very active real estate sector. Although there are no signs of overheating as yet in these two sectors, their developments need to be monitored closely especially with the credit cycle now turning. This is because they have the potential to become a source of financial fragility if their growths are left unchecked. In all, the domestic economy seems to have adjusted well to the greater risks and challenges that have emerged. The pace of growth has moderated from last year’s but the overall growth momentum still looks firm and economic stability remains sound. The key issue going forward is the risk posed by the higher oil prices to the outlook on domestic growth and inflation. And under a more pessimistic scenario, an important question is how resilient is the domestic economy to absorb a much larger shock, this is to say persistently higher oil prices. In the meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee last Wednesday, members of the Monetary Policy Committee spent considerable time discussing this type of questions based an preliminary analyses prepared by our staffs at the Bank of Thailand. While the numbers are still preliminary, the results seem to suggest a greater trade-off between growth and inflation going forward. In particular, higher oil prices will adversely affect both growth and inflation, but the effects on inflation is projected to be more pronounced because of the pent-up pressure on prices as mentioned earlier. Reflecting this, the Committee felt that the risks to economic stability have increased with higher oil prices and it is only proper that monetary policy should be vigilant on inflation. So, with the recovery momentum remaining firm but the risks to economic stability rising, the Monetary Policy Committee saw less need for maintaining low interest rates and felt that the monetary policy stance should be adjusted to give priority to economic stability, with the adjustment being gradually paced. This is essentially the rationale behind the decision on Wednesday by the Monetary Policy Committee to raise the policy interest rate by 25 basis points. At this juncture, many of you may wonder whether higher oil prices together with higher domestic interest rates might be too punitive to the health of the domestic economy. Let me say that we have looked carefully at this issue and are of the opinion that the growth momentum at this time is quite firm. Although the adverse effects an growth from higher domestic interest rates will be there, the effects will not be large to the extent that they will derail the ongoing momentum of recovery. This is because the fundamentals of the economy at present are quite good, and with a strong fiscal position, these two factors should allow the economy to flexibly adjust to the negative shocks without interrupting the momentum of growth. On the contrary, the early rise in domestic interest rates will help maintain macroeconomic stability which is cruial for sustaining economic growth in the medium term.  Ladies and Gentlemen, A few weeks ago, I had the good fortune of visiting both Melbourne and Sydney and came across this concept of a cleanskin wine. For those of you who have not been home for a while, cleanskin wine is quality wine that is sold more cheaply because it is unlabeled. So, you are getting something good but you don’t know why because you don’t know what it is. Half an hour ago, the Thai economy this year to many of you was like cleanskin wine. You know the economy is doing better but you don’t know why. BIS Review 50/2004 3 
In this brief space of time, I hope I have given you an adequate account of how we at the Bank of Thailand see the Thai economy evolving this year, and hopefully have helped improve your understandings of the economy. As with the cleanskin wine, I will definitely go back for more. I only hope you will do the same by continuing to have confidence in the Thai economy and remain a trusted friend and a dependable partner of Thailand for many many years to come. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 50/2004 
Edward M Gramlich: Oil shocks and monetary policy  Remarks by Mr Edward M Gramlich, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Annual Economic Luncheon, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, 16 September 2004. *      *      * Oil shocks have confounded macroeconomists since they first arose on the scene in the 1970s. The oil price spikes of that time clearly had significant macroeconomic implications, representing one of the rare times that higher prices in an individual industry have importantly affected the overall macroeconomy. To account for these effects, structural-model builders had to disaggregate their systems into oil and non-oil, or energy and non-energy, sectors, dealing with effects on both the demand and the supply sides of the economy. The need to make such distinctions has greatly complicated the task of economic-model builders ever since.  The challenges are even more pronounced for policymakers - fiscal or monetary. In a world where all shocks are on the demand side, policymaking boils down to finding the optimal balance between inflation and unemployment, or in modern parlance, finding the strategy that hits the optimal point on the frontier relating the variances of inflation and unemployment around their target values. Such an exercise can be quite complicated, building in all sorts of lags and expectation effects; but the basic analytical model has been around for a long time, and the reasoning is familiar. With oil shocks, policymakers are confronted with a new dilemma. Policy must then balance competing objectives in the presence of a shock that normally implies more inflation, more unemployment, or a combination thereof. In this environment, the choices become more difficult, and the public perceptions of how well stabilization policy is doing will inevitably decline.  However, it is possible to distinguish between good and bad policy choices, even when no choice looks especially desirable. My remarks address these choices and how to make them. I will first review the evidence on the seriousness of oil shocks for the macroeconomy and then discuss how I think monetary policy should generally respond. I will follow this with a brief discussion of the current situation in the United States.  How serious are oil shocks? Oil shocks have serious effects on the economy because they immediately raise prices for an important production input - oil - and important consumer goods - gasoline and heating oil. They are also likely to push up prices in other energy markets. These price increases are significant enough that they typically show up as temporary bursts in the overall rate of inflation. They may even get passed through to continuing rates of inflation if they become incorporated into price- and wage-setting behavior. Increases in oil prices also reduce consumer spending power, in much the same way as when a new excise tax is passed along by oil producers. To the extent that these producers are foreign, there should be a corresponding drop in domestic demand. Even if the oil producers are domestic, a drop in domestic demand could still occur if the producers do not spend as much of their new income as consumers would have or if they do not recycle their profits to shareholders.  Estimating the impact of these oil shocks on the real economy can be done in at least two ways. One approach, often associated with James Hamilton, measures the reduced-form correlation between oil price movements and subsequent movements in unemployment, or output gaps.1 Such an analysis is shown in figure 1, which compares aggregate real oil prices with a measure of the overall output gap.2 The figure shows that since 1973 every upward spike in real oil prices has been followed by a jump in the output gap. However, some of these jumps seem much larger than can be accounted for by oil prices alone, and there appears not to be a symmetric macro response to downward oil price shocks. But this result is still impressive because most of these oil price shocks have been perceived as                                                       1  James D. Hamilton (1983), "Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91, (April), pp. 228-48. 2  Specifically, from a Hodrick-Prescott filter with a standard tuning parameter. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
temporary, as measured by the difference between the oil spot price and far futures price (discussed further below). Presumably, the macroeconomic impact would have been even more powerful for price shocks that were perceived as permanent. Hamilton and others have run a series of causality tests to these macro data and do find significant causal effects for oil prices.  One can also analyze oil price shocks by using structural econometric models. These models would typically build in some sort of price-responsiveness behavior to measure pass-through effects. They would account for the effects of higher energy prices on the real disposable income and spending demands of the household sector. They would make similar calculations for business investment, working out the impact of oil prices on the cost of capital and business-cash flows, to the extent that these influence overall investment spending. When one does all this, as many economists are doing these days, one sees effects of about one-third of 1 percent on unemployment and slightly more for core inflation rates for a permanent shock in the price of oil of $10 a barrel.3 With appropriate transformations, these structural effects appear to be a good bit smaller than the implications of the reduced-form correlations.  Why the difference? Many sources of discrepancy between the reduced form effects and the structural effects are possible. One involves consumers - perhaps a serious oil price shock could affect consumers’ confidence or spending plans in a way that would not be captured by working out the effect of normal income and price elasticities. Capital investment may also be affected if the oil price shock encourages producers to substitute less-energy-intensive capital for more-energy-intensive capital. Of course, such a substitution will not necessarily lower aggregate demand if it requires more investment demand for new energy-saving equipment. Oil is a pervasive commodity, and other types of non-model effects are possible, but these consumption and investment effects seem the most obvious.  How should monetary policy respond to oil price shocks? Monetary policy makers in this country have a dual mandate, to stabilize prices and to maximize sustainable employment in the long run. Their response to oil price increases should focus on these two objectives.  At one extreme, monetary policy makers might focus exclusively on the demand-reducing effect of oil shocks and try to stabilize unemployment rates. The risk from this approach is that prices would rise the full amount implied by the shock and would more likely be passed through into further wage and price increases. Continuing inflation rates could bump up the full amount of the initial boost in inflation. The continuing inflationary potential from the oil price shock would, in effect, be maximized.  At the other extreme, monetary policy makers could focus exclusively on neutralizing the initial impact of the shock on inflation. Given the initial oil price shock, this approach would entail reducing demand enough to stabilize overall, or core, inflation rates. If prices were at all sluggish in their response to changes in unemployment, this approach could entail large increases in unemployment from the shock.  Most observers would choose a policymaking approach somewhere between these two extremes. If, for example, monetary policy makers tried to keep overall nominal income on a steady path, the direct rise in nominal income from the oil price shock would be met by a fall in real income from somewhat higher unemployment. The result would be a temporary rise in both inflation and unemployment. Because the temporary rise in unemployment would damp price pressures, the chances that the initial oil price inflation would pass through into continuing inflation would be reduced. Most likely, the initial inflationary boost would prove temporary, permitting the rise in unemployment to be temporary as well.  But nominal income targeting has its own deficiencies. First, since a large share of U.S. oil is imported, a significant difference could exist between the value-added price deflator comprising nominal income and more-appropriate measures of true consumer price inflation. Monetary policy makers would be better off focusing directly on these more-appropriate measures. Second, as before, if prices were highly sensitive to supply shocks but not sensitive to output movements, even nominal income targeting could imply substantial increases in unemployment.                                                        3  Core consumer price inflation is defined to exclude direct energy and food prices and hence more accurately measures the continuing effect of an oil price shock. 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
A better approach would be to follow a policy rule based directly on target values of unemployment and some appropriate measure of inflation. One example is a Taylor rule, under which monetary policy makers would move the short-term target interest rate - the federal funds rate in the United States - up or down to respond to deviations in core inflation and unemployment from their target values.4 The results would be qualitatively similar to those of the nominal income targeting rule, with a temporary rise in both inflation and unemployment, though the increases would now be more keyed to underlying monetary policy objectives. Because of the offsetting policy reactions, the real federal funds rate would be likely to remain approximately constant during this chain of events. If it did, the nominal funds rate would first rise and then fall with the inflation rate itself.  While not a perfect outcome, this targeted intermediate approach is probably about the best that can be done. Were policy to try to avoid any rise in unemployment, the initial oil price shock might get passed through to continuing inflation. Were policy to try to avoid any rise in inflation, the movement in unemployment would be substantial. The best approach is likely to be to accept some temporary rise in both inflation and unemployment, with the increases being based on underlying objectives. The rises would be temporary so long as inflation did not persistently deviate from its long-term price-stability target. But even in this preferred approach, the widely watched nominal federal funds rate would likely rise for a time.  Current events With that backdrop, I will now turn to the current situation. As shown in figure 2, the spot price of oil (solid line) has recently spiked up, as it has several times since 1985.5 But in contrast to most other oil-price-spike episodes, this time the far futures price of oil - that is, the price for contracts seven years out - has also risen sharply. This correlation seems to indicate that the present oil price increase is not viewed as a purely temporary shock. At the same time, as shown in figure 3, which plots the difference between the spot price and the futures price, the current price is still greater than the far futures price, representing a phenomenon known as backwardation.6 Because of such backwardation, this oil price shock still seems to have an important temporary component.  One question that arises immediately is whether the source of the shock matters. In the 1970s and 1980s, most oil shocks seemed clearly to be on the supply side in that international producers withheld production from the world market, either because of attempts to gain more oil revenue or because of other supply interruptions, such as the Iranian Revolution. Today, the high price of oil is much more likely to be due to demand growth in the United States, China, India, and other countries. Does the source matter when trying to determine how monetary policy should respond?  If the demand growth that caused the oil price increases is domestic, it could mean that the price shock might be less permanent. The high oil prices would themselves cut into demand growth and tend to stabilize the system. If the demand growth is foreign, say from China and India, this feedback effect is still present but damped. Even foreign demand for oil might be influenced by reduced demand growth in the United States and its trading partners. It is certainly possible that oil shocks partially motivated by demand may be less permanent than true supply shocks, though that reasoning is contradicted by current-day oil futures prices. This whole issue, however, is new and imperfectly understood. It is not much of a silver lining, but the present price burst might provide some information on the qualitative difference between domestic and international demand and supply shocks.  A second question is whether the present shock is large enough to cause macroeconomic ripples. As figure 1 shows, even the present high real price of oil is only about half the real price in 1980, and the importance of energy in the overall economy is also less than half what it was then. At the same time, figure 2 suggests that the permanent oil price rise is on the order of $15 a barrel. Since the United States now imports 4.5 billion barrels of oil per year, this price rise makes for an effective reduction in                                                       4  Named after John B. Taylor (1983), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. 5  Astute chart-gazers will note that the commonly quoted price in figure 2, for a barrel of west Texas intermediate crude oil, is higher than the current price of oil in gross domestic product shown in figure 1. That is because, on average, the United States uses a lower quality of oil in its production of total output. 6  A stock exchange term for a percentage paid by a seller of stock for the privilege of delaying its delivery until some agreed on future date. In effect, the futures price is less than the spot price. BIS Review 50/2004 3 
domestic income of $68 billion. To the extent that dollars going to domestic oil producers are not fully recycled, the effective demand reduction could be even greater. There could also be important parallel effects in natural gas and other markets. The rise in consumer prices from all these sources, as well as the reduction in aggregate demand, could be noticeable. All things considered, although the present oil shock may not be as significant as the shocks we remember from the 1970s and 1980s, it will definitely register.  A final issue involves the initial position of the economy and monetary policy. In the usual exercise, one analyzes the economy in some sort of equilibrium position and posits an oil price shock, which normally results in the temporary increases in inflation and unemployment described earlier. When monetary policy begins with inordinately low nominal interest rates, the reasoning becomes more complicated. Now the response to the oil shock is, in effect, superimposed on any re-equilibration process built in for monetary policy. The ultimate response of the economy will blend the two responses, though not additively because of the complicated nonlinear structure of the economy.  The net effect of these factors is difficult to perceive in any more than broad outline. Without the oil shock, policymakers beginning from a period of low interest rates would try to keep the economy on an even growth path as they gradually raised nominal interest rates. With the shocks, nominal rates would still likely follow an upward path, though the economic reactions would be bumpier, with temporary rises in both inflation and unemployment.  Conclusion As a new economic event of the 1970s, oil price shocks forced monetary policy makers to rethink all their rules and added new chapters to macroeconomic textbooks. Today the question of how to respond to oil price spikes is better understood, but the outcomes are no more pleasant. It is virtually inevitable that shocks will result in some combination of higher inflation and higher unemployment for a time. But I must stress that the worst possible outcome is not these temporary increases in inflation and unemployment. The worst possible outcome is for monetary policy makers to let inflation come loose from its moorings.   4 BIS Review 50/2004 
  BIS Review 50/2004 5 
Sunil Mendis: Is it time for a common currency in the SAARC region? Inauguration speech by Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 15th Forex Conference of the Forex Association of India, Colombo, 20 August 2004. *      *      * It is with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation from the Forex Association of India to inaugurate its 15th Annual Forex Conference here in Colombo. I would like to extend a warm welcome to this distinguished gathering of forex professionals from Sri Lanka as well as from many of our neighboring countries. I am sure that this is an excellent opportunity for all of us to promote goodwill among ourselves. It also gives us an opportunity for sharing our thoughts on the way forward for South Asia’s currency and financial markets, which is the theme of this year’s conference. Forex, as you very well know, is the largest financial market in the world. Unlike many other markets, the international forex market is open 24 hours a day. Its daily turnover is well over US$ 1.2 trillion. This turnover is more than the combined turnover of the world’s major stock markets on any given day. Hence, the international forex market is a very liquid, and thus, a desirable market for trading. As with any other market, technology has also contributed immensely towards its expansion. Now trades are executed increasingly through the internet. It has allowed even smaller investors the access to the market.  As conservative central banks, our involvement in the forex markets is limited to strategic investments and stabilising the exchange rate. Following this role, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka does not get involved in speculative type of trading. However, it plays a major role in the development of the country’s forex as well as other financial markets. We know that in a market-oriented economy, all financial market segments, namely, the foreign exchange market, money market, government debt securities market and the stock market are inter-linked. The Central Bank, while watching the operations of each market segment individually, needs to take a macro view of all the market segments to ensure financial market stability. The focus today, however, should be on the foreign exchange market.  In the exchange rate area, it is appropriate to mention at this juncture, Sri Lankan authorities made a fundamental change to its policy on 23rd January, 2001 by moving to a freely floating exchange rate arrangement. This was necessitated by the inability of the then prevailing exchange rate system and the crawling band regime to sustain themselves. Immediately after the float, the market experienced some volatility as is usually expected. However, this volatility has been contained overall since then. This, not only brought confidence to the market, as evidenced by increased foreign exchange inflows, but also allowed greater flexibility and market opportunities to foreign exchange dealers of commercial banks. Subsequent to the float, the Central Bank became a net buyer of foreign exchange from the market, in sharp contrast to its experience in the period prior to that. Our objective with regard to the foreign exchange market is to ensure an orderly adjustment of the exchange rate, without excessive volatility. Such adjustment should reflect the emerging economic fundamentals of the country. We should ensure that demand and supply mismatches are addressed on time so that there is no excessive volatility in the exchange rate.  Turning to the theme of this year’s conference, i.e. “Is it time for a common currency in the SAARC region?”, I believe that it would give rise to much interesting and thought provoking discussion and debate. We know that the SAARC was established in 1985, with the objective to provide a platform for the peoples of South Asia to work together in a spirit of solidarity, trust and understanding. It aims at accelerating the process of economic and social development of member countries. I believe the considerations of the timeliness to introduce a common currency for the region will be supportive towards the objectives and aims of SAARC as well.  While taking note that deliberations such as these would definitely lay the foundation for future developments in the SAARC region, I take great pleasure in inaugurating this conference today and wish you all success with the conference. And I would also like to urge you to take a little time off to visit some places of interest, while you are in this beautiful country, Sri Lanka. Thank you. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Ishrat Husain: Future challenges facing South Asian economies  Speech by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Central Bank Anniversary Lecture 2004, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 26 August 2004. *      *      * The first decade of the 21st century is bringing about several fundamental structural changes in the economies around the world. South Asian economies have to accelerate the pace of internal transformation of their economies if they choose to benefit from the opportunities presented by these structural changes. There is a need to shift from the old paradigm of dependence upon official aid and putting blame on the unjust international economic order for their woes to the new paradigm of becoming an active participant in the emerging globalized economy. What are the key characteristics of this new globalized economy? First and foremost is an open trading environment in which low cost and reliable producers of quality goods and services are able to deliver them just in time will derive maximum gains. The countries in this environment will have to compete for market shares in their quest for selling goods and services to the rest of the world. Second, the integration of financial markets and liberal flows of cross border capital particularly foreign direct investment provide ample scope for supplementing domestic savings and raising investment levels to accelerate the pace of growth and poverty reduction. In South Asia, the earnings and remittances of workers employed overseas do play a key role in accumulation of net foreign assets. Third, rapid changes in information technology and communications can lead to efficiency improvement in the utilization of capital and labour and thereby to total productivity increase. But, at the same time, it places severe burden on the prospects of employment for unskilled labour. Fourth, a silent revolution in expectations of the so far voiceless voters is taking place due to a perceptible impact of electronic media and skilful management of these expectations and delivery of tangible results against promises is assuming a new dimension in good governance. This evening I would like to address the following question: To what extent are the South Asian Economies prepared to face these four major challenges and what is the agenda that they should follow in the next ten years or so? Before I share my views on this question, let me offer a few thoughts on the process of decision-making that should be followed by the leaders of South Asia in order to bring about the paradigm shift I have talked about.  Each country must begin by preparing a long-term vision and the road map to translate this vision into action with milestones and timelines. This vision and road map must have a non-partisan and national consensus and all political parties must be agreed and committed to the broad thrust and the direction of the economy. Of course, there will be many nuances and approaches to implementation and the road map will be altered in light of experience gained but, at least, the investors and economic actors will be assured that there will be no abrupt reversals and significant derailments. China offers an excellent example of this process where the vision and the road map adopted by Deng XaoPing has been followed, with some modifications and alterations, by successive governments. The skeptics may contest this conclusion by arguing that the same political party has remained in power since 1978. While this is true, but the point I wish to underscore is that in plural democratic societies when even the contesting political parties have a broad agreement on the vision and direction of the economy, the voters will judge their performance by their relative success in implementing the programs, policies and projects and bringing about an improvement in the living standards of their electorate during their respective tenures. It is the differentiation in their relative performance that will distinguish the record of one political party from the other and win and lose the support of the electorate. Past achievements and current status. Let me now turn to the substantive question that I have raised, i.e. the state of preparedness of the South Asian economies in meeting these future challenges.  South Asia has shown a remarkable growth about at 5.6 percent in the last ten years which is above the average of developing countries. Most countries have been able to achieve and maintained macroeconomic stability i.e. low inflation, low domestic interest rates, stable and flexible exchange rates. They have built up foreign exchange reserves to cushion themselves against external shocks. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Fiscal consolidation and discipline have begun to set in with fiscal deficits being brought down to manageable levels. Private sector has become the main vehicle for investment, production and distribution of goods and services while state intervention has been limited to provision of physical infrastructure, social services and other public goods in support of private investment and making markets function efficiently. Trade liberalization has proceeded quite rapidly and average tariff rates have declined drastically. Export promotion is being actively pursued and inward looking import substitution and protection of domestic industry have been abandoned as principles of public policy. Financial sector and capital market reforms have been stepped up in almost all the countries and are at various stages of implementation. New laws and regulatory mechanisms have been adopted to strengthen the banking sector and securities markets. Directed credit and credit ceilings, administered and subsidized interest rates have gradually given way to market-based allocation of credit and determination of prices. India has become a leader in outsourcing of information technology enabled services. Low wages, large English speaking technical manpower, availability of venture capital and networking with the U.S. firms have brought about a major expansion in I.T. exports. Pharmaceuticals, health care, biotechnology, research and development are also beginning to attract attention from multinational companies. Indian firms are also beginning to acquire firms abroad and are integrating themselves in the global economy. However, other countries in the region are still way behind and have a lot of catching up to do. Services sectors account for 60 percent of the output of developed countries and many services are becoming mobile across border due to breakthrough in technology and communication. Thus the outsourcing of services is a sensible strategy. These improvements in macroeconomic fundamentals have led to up gradation of credit worthiness of India and more recently Pakistan. Both the countries have established access to international bond market at fine pricing. It will, therefore, be fair to surmise that economic fundamentals have improved to a very large extent in all the South Asian countries in the last decade or so. Broad political consensus on the content and direction of economic policies and their credible and consistent pursuit should provide some signal to the markets that the South Asian economies can be relied upon in the exchange of goods and services and inflow of capital. Agenda for the future. However, the challenges ahead and tasks for economic managers in the region are simply daunting. Sri Lanka and India have almost one quarter of their population living below the poverty line. The estimates for Bangladesh are in the mid 40 percent, while Pakistan has one-third of its population living below the poverty line. Unemployment rates are quite high and Human Development indicators are dismally low. Moreover, these task have to be pursued in the context of a more volatile economic environment - both domestic, as well as, international. Capital inflows and outflows have much greater potential to destabilize markets, exchange rate and interest rates. Technological, communication and media revolution especially the satellite television and cable channels have raised the expectations of the common man through the demonstration effect of conspicuous consumption by powerful and affluent classes. These expectations are placing enormous pressures on the ruling classes for providing access to basic necessities of life to the majority of the population. At the same time, the state apparatus for delivery of these services in most South Asian countries has become largely dysfunctional due to induction of poor quality personnel, corruption, inertia, waste and institutional decay. How to narrow this widening gap between the rising expectations of the common man and the declining capacity of state institutions is one of the most difficult tasks for the leaders of South Asia. South Asia is lagging behind the East Asian economies and have a lot of catching up to do and, that too, in the shortest period of time. I do not wish to go into the details of all the comparative indicators of the two regions which are well known to all of us, but suffice to say that we are way behind China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines both in levels as well as the rate of improvement. What can be done to reduce poverty and unemployment and catch up with the East Asia? We should recognize this region is our benchmark against which we should evaluate our performance although it is our biggest competitor in the global markets, particularly China, which is becoming an industrial giant. Let me offer some thoughts on this issue but also hasten to add that these are by no mean 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
exhaustive and are being presented only in the spirit of provoking a broader debate and discussion in our countries on this important subject. (a) Between 1980 and 2001, South Asia received $17 billion as Official Development Assistance (ODA). However, between 1990 and 2001 ODA inflows have declined both in per capita terms as well as percent of GDP. There was a change in the composition of external capital inflows with a declining share of aid in relation to other types of inflows. This change in composition suggests that the influence of the official donors and particularly the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) is thus likely to wane in the future while that of the fund managers, rating agencies, equity research houses, investment banks and multinational companies is likely to gain ascendancy. Thus, credibility of economic policies pursued by the countries assumes a much important role than the relationships nurtured with donors and the IFIs. The market’s power to penalize imprudent policies and breach of commitment is more damaging to the economy than the slippages in the observance of IMF or World Bank conditionalities. If we recall Mexico had to suffer heavily when the incoming Zedillo regime reversed the pre-commitment made by the Salinas regime to the markets on the exchange rate. The country witnessed huge and sudden capital outflows, depreciation of currency, inflation and economic recession. To keep access to the international financial markets the South Asian Countries will have to maintain not only open and liberal foreign exchange regimes, sound and robust financial sector but pursue consistent, credible and transparent economic policies. (b) Along with sound economic policies there is growing evidence about the critical role of good governance and institutional quality in the growth-poverty reduction nexus. The features of weak governance that is normally associated with South Asia are corruption, political patronage, lack of transparency, low observance of rule of law, absence of level playing field, heavy tilt in delivery of scarce of public goods and services towards the privileged and elite classes.  The political leaders are now beginning to realize that the disenchantment of the electorate with these poor governance practices increases the burden of incumbency and puts their survival at serious risk. Thus, improved governance should be on the top of the agenda of all political parties in South Asia if they are interested in assuring their electoral sustenance. Bureaucratic hassles, long drawn procedures, un-even application of rules and regulations, excessive discretionary powers in the hands of lower level bureaucracy, shortages of essential infrastructure facilities and low productivity of labor force have made the region not such an attractive place for foreign investors. Consequently, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has not yet made any significant impact on the economies of the region. FDI accounts for 0.5% of GDP with India receiving $3-4 billion annually and Pakistan about $1 billion. Portfolio investment to India had taken an upward trend but suffered a set back in the aftermath of the recent elections. A major overhaul of the structure of Civil Service, Judiciary, Police and Local Government Institutions, Business process re-engineering and inculcation of modern management practices will be required in all the countries of the region. (c) Political and geopolitical risks in the region are still quite elevated. The long standing hostility between India and Pakistan, the acquisition of nuclear and missile capability by the two countries and the consequential sanctions imposed upon them, the active frontline status of Pakistan in the war against terrorism, the prolonged civil war between Tamil Tigers and the government in Sri Lanka, and the frequent strikes called by the opposition parties against the government in power in Bangladesh have added risks to doing business and locating investment in these countries. The external perceptions about our region are, therefore, heavily biased due to these risks. The sooner we can overcome these problems, the better off the region will be a reliable trading partner, active participant in the international capital markets and a choice location for foreign investment. (d) Investment in education and human development in countries other than Sri Lanka has been inadequate in volume, deficient in quality and lacking in relevance. The most recent census data for 2001 shows that India’s literacy rate has gone up to 64 percent but female literacy rate is less than 50 percent. It also demonstrates that at least one third of its population and labor force is not fully equipped to take up the ever changing and more complex tasks of the economy trying to outclass other competing countries. In Pakistan and Bangladesh almost BIS Review 50/2004 3 
half of their population and two-third of female population are illiterate. This large proportion of women among illiterates is a cause for serious concern. Sri Lanka is the only country in the region with almost one hundred percent literacy. But this full literacy level raises another stark fact in our face i.e., the growing imbalance between the demand for skills imposed by market economic forces and the supply of skills produced by our educational institutions. There is a surfeit of highly educated graduates who are not employable and there is a shortage of workers who can carry out routine technical jobs in production and service. India produces good quality Science and Engineering graduates every year who can cater to the high end of the job market but lack of attention to non-University technical education and its quality have created wide gaps at the middle end of the job market. This situation is much aggravated in Pakistan and Bangladesh where the issues of quality, relevance and numbers are all intertwined. Sri Lanka has no problem with the numbers but high level of unemployment among University graduates testifies to this mismatch in the skills. The widespread frustration among the parents and graduates on one hand and a high level of dissatisfaction among the employers in finding the right persons for the right jobs are further evidence of the imbalance in labor market. (e) This skill imbalance and lack of employability has serious repercussions for the composition and growth of the basket of goods that can be exported. The most dynamic and rapid growing sectors of exports in the world market today and in the medium term are those associated with high technology and to some extent medium technology. While India is making some headway in increasing its penetration of high technology exports the record of other countries in the region is not very promising. They are still stuck in the low technology exports particularly textiles and clothing which have a declining shares in the world trade. Thus the need to overcome the skill obsolescence and turn towards medium and high technology exports was never as apparent as it is today. One particular means through which this change in the composition of exports can be accelerated is by removing the barriers and constraints in the way of foreign investors and Multinational Corporations (MNCs). FDI is an important force for integration for this as MNCs have set up supply chains and integrated production networks that tend to locate each stage of production in the country with the lowest cost. Affiliates of a MNC in one country often export to another for eventual sales in a third country market. These affiliates act as the on-the-job training grounds for the acquisition and dissemination of the skills needed for production and minimizing costs. These skills are then disseminated and multiplied throughout other firms in the country. (f) There is a very little intra-regional trade-taking place in South Asia. Intraregional trade has remained stagnant at less than 2% of the total trade in the last twenty-five years. A study carried out by the Pakistan Ministry of Commerce in 1996 concluded that due to low transportation costs, cultural similarities which influence taste and cause profitable complementarities to emerge and low transaction costs, the economic benefits of liberalizing trade with India outweigh costs. Despite this, the trade between the two neighbouring countries has remained negligible. Regional trading arrangements have made a huge difference in North America, Europe and East Asia, but they have been unsuccessful in South Asia. The recent attempt to revitalize SAARC is in the right direction and will stimulate trade and growth but only to the extent that it unleashes competition that lowers domestic prices, enables achieving economies of scale and acquiring new technology. SAFTA arrangements can be successful in the coming year but they require a number of important preparatory measures. These are described below: • Trade facilitation through expeditious border crossings, quick custom clearance, efficient port facilities, improved transport links should precede or take place simultaneously with the expansion of volume of cross border trade. • Domestic tax, tariff and subsidy policies that affect production and trade incentives should be harmonized to avoid recurrence of trade disputes and frequent use of anti dumping laws. As India provides a lot of subsidies to its producers in various forms and shapes the smaller countries are hesitant to allow MFN status to India. The recourse to a long negative list that restricts the volume of trade should be avoided at all costs. 4 BIS Review 50/2004 
• Macroeconomic policies such as fiscal and monetary policies should be harmonized to achieve a stable, non-discriminating macroeconomic environment for all the countries in the region • Supporting institutions to manage and facilitate integration, for example, setting standards, establishing regional development funds and for dispute resolution should be created. • Communication and transport infrastructure between the bordering countries should be improved and upgraded to facilitate increased trade and factor mobility. • Legal regulations for investor protection, intellectual property rights enforcement, anti-trust law, commercial law, labor relations, financial institutions should be harmonized. • Financial markets should be widened and regulatory changes introduced to promote cross-border investment, listings, syndication, bond issues, etc. (g) South Asian countries should tap the enormous potential of their large expatriate population in mobilizing investment capital, foreign exchange earnings, skilled manpower and exports of ethnic products and services. India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka together receive about $20 billion of remittances from their workers annually but their contribution in domestic capital formation is insignificant. Unlike overseas Chinese Community that has played a substantial role in foreign direct investment, nonresident Indians have been a source, to some extent, of professional, technical and managerial skills but not much in terms of large financial outlays. The non-resident deposits transferred to India account for only a miniscule proportion of their wealth holdings abroad. These flows are quite stable in nature and should be able to augment domestic savings for accelerating the pace of investment without creating future debt obligations. Innovative products and investment vehicles to attract the savings of nonresident South Asians should be encouraged with the help of regulatory agencies. South Asian countries have so far missed the boat by not becoming a part of global value chain and participating in international supplier chain arrangements. There is no single business model for participating in this chain and there can be many phases of transition and many modes of involvement. For example, joint ventures, franchising, purchasing by international firms, licensing, sub-contracting, fully owned firm, original equipment, manufacturing, original design and manufacturing, strategic partnerships for technology, overseas acquisition of equity are the diverse means whereby developing country enterprises can gain wide access to international markets at their own level of capability, climb the technology ladder and benefit from globalization. East Asia is a major participant in this global supply chain and produces parts and components for a variety of manufactures. It is time that South Asian countries do make an attempt to get engaged in this value chain. Finally, I turn to the impact of WTO. I wish to clear the confusion that as if something drastic or unexpected or unknown is going to hit us in the near future due to WTO. All the countries in the region are already members of this organization since 1995 and have made binding commitments to maximum tariffs. In some cases the applied tariffs are lower than the bound tariffs. In actual practice, the South Asian countries have liberalized their imports and have been flooded with cheaper imports from China in the recent years. There could be no greater threat to the survival of domestic industry than competition from Chinese goods. Some industrial firms could not face the onslaught of this invasion and have died. Others have taken up by the challenge by cutting the fat, taking up the slack, becoming cost efficient, improving quality are competing with the new entrants. Thus the process of restructuring and transition is ongoing and should not pose any systematic threat to the industries of the region. What we all seem to be focusing upon is the abolition of the textile quotas under the Multi-fiber agreement and the adoption of new agreement on Clothing and Textiles in January 2005. The impact of this new pattern of textile trade on the economies of South Asia region is highly varied and differentiated. Most simulation studies and modeling exercises carried by the World Bank, USITC and independent consulting firms give credence to the view that China followed by India and Pakistan will be the main beneficiaries of the abolition of quotas. These countries are all vertically integrated i.e., from producing cotton all the way to finishing, dyeing, stitching, etc. and enjoy low wage costs and low raw material costs. Pakistan, for example, has invested $3 to 4 billion during the past five years to modernize and acquire state-of-the-art machinery that can produce quality goods according to the varying specifications and changing demand patterns of the buyers. On the other hand it is not BIS Review 50/2004 5 
obvious if all the ready made garment exporting firms in Bangladesh and Sri Lanka will be able to survive in the post 2005 markets. Both countries are seized of this problem and are taking measures to assist their firms and their workers. Whatever the benefits of regional trading blocks they are no substitute for participation in multilateral trade arrangements. Multilateral arrangements provide a much larger market to exploit which is several times the size of any regional block, enlarge the market access substantially and permit wider competition, larger scale of operation and greater specialization all of which increase productivity and growth. Thus the successful completion of Doha Development Round is very much in the interests of South Asian countries but the deferential impact on the various countries in the region has to be handled carefully, imaginatively and expeditiously. Short-term adjustment costs to the workers and business have to be absorbed in the long run interest of expansion in those activities in which these countries have dynamic comparative advantage. Conclusion South Asian countries have undergone remarkable improvement in their economic landscape during the last ten years or so and despite many vicissitudes and shocks have been able to maintain positive growth momentum. The challenges for the coming decade are however, of different nature. While the policy reform and good management of the past will certainly help the internal transformation of these economies the task facing the leaders of these countries are formidable. To maximize the benefits from globalisation and thus help reduce the incidence of poverty the future agenda should focus on good governance and institutional reform, investment in skilled manpower, shift away from low technology exports, aligning with international value chain of production, attracting foreign private capital flows including that from expatiate nationals, promoting intra-regional trade and mitigating political and geopolitical risks. 6 BIS Review 50/2004 
M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Consumer finance  Opening address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the “FITCH Rating’s Annual Conference 2004 an Consumer Finance”, Bangkok, 16 September 2004. *      *      * Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentleman I would like to welcome all of you to this highly relevant conference an consumer finance and securitization appropriately organized by FITCH Ratings Thailand. I would also like to show my appreciation to FITCH for inviting me to give today’s opening remarks. Ladies and Gentleman Although consumer finance has long been a staple of banking in the west and developed economies, it is still a relatively new and open frontier for Thailand. As I thought of my opening remarks, I am reminded of two stories that can capture the reality and the impact of this new world in the context of Thailand’s dual economy. It is not all from my memory since as you may agree I am still too young for historical anecdotes. As a university student some 30 ycars ago, I met two fellow classmates that came from completely opposite family backgrounds. The first came from a well-off family that supplied him with cars, expensive clothes and a lot of disposable income. Tbe second one was from a poor family and had just enough money for food and public transportation. The wealthy friend did not graduate from college and was later sent to the US to finish his bachelor’s degree, while the second successfully earned his bachelor’s degree and won a scholarship for graduate school also in the US. Neither man changed his ways while living abroad. The first continued his unencumbered spending spree with cars, expensive apartment, and credit cards. The second, more studious and frugal of the two, worked long and hard and was able to bring home his Masters degree on time. His hard work ethic stuck with him as he got older, and today he is one of Thailand’s successful business entrepreneurs. The other person however, left the States without any degrees but with a trail of unpaid credit card bills for his parents to repay. He started working in Bangkok but could not stay in any place for long. He started his own small business which loss money and ultimately failed. Unable to change his spending habits, he had to sell his assets and house in order to make good on his debts. To this day, he has no stable income, and must rely on the kindness of people around him for help. One of the lessons that 1 have drawn from the story is that immature adults, when presented with easy access to credit, may form the habit of spending beyond their means until they themselves become a burden on their community and society. A more recent story that comes to mind involves two factory workers who earn approximately 6,000 baht per month. Both were invited to apply for a credit card but only one signed up for the offer. This worker first used his credit card to purchase a TV set, which he could easily finance with his salary. Nevertheless, the TV was followed by a washing machine and a motorcycle, which eventually pushed his monthly debt payment to exceed his income. As he exhausted all of his savings, and could no longer borrow from family and friends, his belongings were repossessed by the creditors, and finally he had to quit his job in hopes of running away from his remaining creditors. The story highlights a dangerous combination in the fabric of Thai society and that is low-income earners who lack financial literacy, or the ability to effectively manage their finances, but yet have very high marginal propensity consume. They in turn are more susceptible to unknowingly consume beyond their means, and like my previous story, become a burden an society. That burden is further intensified by the difficulty in finding and obtaining new employment. This probable risk demands that stakeholders take a more cautious approach to ensure quality growth in Thailand’s consumer finance market. Ladies and Gentleman, In reality there are more than one type of savings behavior in the world, but most importantly the savings behavior should be appropriate for the developmental needs of each country. In a developing economy such as Thailand, the customary savings behavior is to save first and spend later. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Developing economies can and should benefit from this type of behavior since it allows for vital investments to be madc using domestic savings, thereby lessening reliance on extemal capital inflow, while at the same time promoting an economically viable savings-investment gap. On the other hand, the savings behavior of the west and developed economies tend to lean toward spend now save later. This type of behavior is practicable in western countrics due to many factors that can be summed up under the heading of high level of economic development. The existence of social welfare systems, mature capital markets, diversified economy, and highly educated workforce are a few factors that allow such countries to be able to grow under a relatively low savings environment. Without such factors, a country could find it difficult to grow and develop without straining its finances. Coming back to Thailand, it is possible to say that with more widespread usage of credit cards and other types of consumer loans, we can expcct Thailand’s savings behavior to become more in line with those of the developed economies. This trend is a double-edge sword that if not managed carefully can cause a severe negative savings-investment gap. Such predicament will worsen Thailand’s dependence an extcrnal capital inflow that historically has shown its ability to change direction rapidly and jeopardize macroeconomic stability. It is thus with the need for further economic and social development that consumer finance should expand in line with domestic savings.  Ladies and Gentleman, Once again we are back at the regulator’s dilemma of regulating without dampening the exuberance and vitality of the market. Consumer finance need not be damaging as long as we can be sure that the individual or household have the prerequisite responsibility, maturity and financial literacy to manage their finances. Both the service provider and regulator must share the task of addressing these concerns and issues. lt is hoped that service providers will not only focus on improving their bottom line but to also consider the social impact of their business model. Through the use of gimmicks, service providers risk enticing under-qualified and immature applicants whose inability to manage their finances will only exacerbate social costs and NPLs. As such, if social impact considerations become embedded in the process of determining business strategy for consumer finance, service providers could easily address the social concerns previously mentioned, while at the same time securing quality growth in the consumer finance market. However, it is understood that competition may pressure service providers to leave behind these social concerns. Thus it is the duty of the regulators to issue rules and guidelines that will level the playing field in order to prevent consumer finance from causing an unsustainable bubble. The industry has already seen the Bank of Thailand’s forays into the credit card market with rules governing minimum monthly incomc, interest rate ceiling, fees etc. Going forward, we may come out with social impact rules such as minimum age, or rules to limit the number and types of gimmicks currently being used by somc service providers to attract new customers. Maintaining Thailand’s cconomic growth and vitality is a goal that all of us in this room share, and it is my hope that we all will work together towards preserving Thailand’s existing savings culture, in order to keep it an integral part of Thailand’s economic development for tomorrow and beyond. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
Kishori J Udeshi: Development of forex markets in India - review and prospects Keynote address by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 15th Forex Assembly organised by Forex Association of India, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 20 August 2004. Grateful acknowledgement for inputs provided by Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Executive Director and Shri. G. Mahalingam, General Manager, Department of External Investments and Operations. *      *      * I am delighted to be in Colombo today to address the 15th National Forex Assembly. India and Sri Lanka have had very close and friendly neighbourly relations especially culturally, for centuries - indeed millennia. On behalf of Reserve Bank of India, I bring greetings to you all and express appreciation of the warm hospitality of the host country. RBI has always actively participated in the meetings of national Forex Assembly at Governor or Deputy Governor level. I am delighted to carry forward the tradition. Being an exclusive gathering of Forex Market participants in the region, I thought I would use this forum to share some of my thoughts on fora market developments in India. I am aware that each country has unique situations and policies. But in forex such as these, we could exchange experiences for mutual benefit.  My brief address has been structured as follows: First, I will trace the important landmarks in the evolution of forex market in India spanning over roughly three decades. Thereafter, I will proceed to dwell on measures for market liberalization and development including disclosure and transparency initiatives. Thereafter there would be a coverage of institutional development. I will conclude this address outlining the tasks that lie ahead of us and scope for further interaction among the participants.  Evolution of foreign exchange market in India The Indian forex market owes its origin to the important step that RBI took in 1978 to allow banks to undertake intra-day trading in foreign exchange. As a consequence, the stipulation of maintaining “square” or “near square” position was to be complied with only at the close of business each day. During the period 1975-1992, the exchange rate of rupee was officially determined by the RBI in terms of a weighted basket of currencies of India’s major trading partners and there were significant restrictions on the current account transactions. The initiation of economic reforms in July 1991 saw significant two-step downward adjustment in the exchange rate of the rupee on July 1 and 3, 1991 with a view to placing it at an appropriate level in line with the inflation differential to maintain the competitiveness of exports. Subsequently, following the recommendations of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman:Dr C. Rangarajan) the Liberalised Exchange Rate Management System(LERMS) involving dual exchange rate mechanism was instituted in March 1992 which was followed by the ultimate convergence of the dual rates effective from March 1, 1993(christened modified LERMS). The unification of the exchange rate of the rupee marks the beginning of the era of market determined exchange rate regime of rupee, based on demand and supply in the forex market. It is also an important step in the progress towards current account convertibility, which was finally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund. The appointment of an Expert Group on Foreign Exchange (popularly known as Sodhani Committee) in November 1994 is a landmark in the design of foreign exchange market in India. The Group studied the market in great detail and came up with far reaching recommendations to develop, deepen and widen the forex market. In the process of development of forex markets, banks have been accorded significant initiative and freedom to operate in the market. To quote a few important measures relating to market development and liberalisation, banks were allowed freedom to fix their trading limits, permitted to borrow and invest funds in the overseas markets up to specified limits, accorded freedom to determine interest rates on FCNR deposits within ceilings and allowed to use derivative products for asset-liability management purposes. Similarly, corporates were given flexibility to book forward cover based on past turnover and allowed to use a variety of instruments like interest rates and currency swaps, caps/collars and forward rate agreements in the international forex market. Rupee-foreign currency swap market for hedging longer term exposure has developed substantially in the last few years.  BIS Review 49/2004 1 
Market profile The Indian forex market is predominantly a transaction based market with the existence of underlying forex exposure generally being an essential requirement for market users. Similarly, regulations in most cases require end users to repatriate and surrender foreign exchange in the Indian forex market. All forex transactions of Government of India are routed through the market except for aid transactions.  The forex market is made up of Authorised Dealers (generally banks), some intermediaries with limited authorisation and end users viz., individuals, corporates, institutional investors and others. Market making banks (generally foreign banks and new private sector banks) account for a significant percentage of the overall turnover in the market.  The average monthly turnover in the merchant segment of the forex market increased to US$ 40.5 billion in 2003-2004 from US$ 27.0 billion in 2002-2003. In the inter-bank segment, the turnover has moved up from US$ 103 billion in 2002-2003 to US$ 134.2 billion in 2003-2004. Consequently, the average monthly total turnover increased sharply to US$ 174.7 billion in 2003-2004 from US$ 130 billion in the previous year. The inter-bank to merchant turnover ratio hovered in the range of 2.9 –3.9 during the year.  Trade and financial liberalisation There is large empirical literature suggesting that trade integration benefits a larger number and helps promote economic growth. In contrast, recent empirical research is unable to establish a clear link between financial integration and growth. There is therefore now a consensus among academicians and policy makers that trade liberalisation should take precedence over financial liberalisation. The RBI approach makes a distinction among the different participants in order to assess, on an ongoing basis, the gains as well as the vulnerabilities of foreign currency exposures to the system. In the capital account, apart from the Government’s, there are three balance sheets that we take into account whether for residents or for non-residents : the balance sheet of the households, the corporates and the financial intermediaries. Although in theory, everything may be integrated, in our phase of development, definitely these three are distinct in terms of their immediate reactions to market forces. In particular, this approach recognises the need to put in place appropriate prudential regulation in regard to the financial intermediaries in so far as foreign currency transactions are concerned. There is virtual unanimity that the currency mismatches of financial intermediaries is a major source of risks of financial integration which has to be mitigated by monitoring and regulations and furthermore, that currency mismatches in the corporate sector can also be a source of risk to the financial sector. Hence the advice to banks to monitor unhedged exposures of borrowers. I would rejig your memory a bit - at the Ninth Forex Assembly at Goa, the then Deputy Governor Dr.S.S. Tarapore had alluded to these risks saying “banks and FIs cannot distance themselves from the risks taken by corporates as these risks can involuntarily devolve on the banks as their lendings to corporates can easily turn into NPAs”. Prudential regulations in the financial sector should not therefore be construed as capital controls. This approach has been reflected in the recent liberalisation of the policy on external commercial borrowings. The whole process of permitting such external debt may be either through the automatic route or non-automatic route, but slowly the automatic route is being expanded and the non-automatic route reduced. The recent External Commercial Borrowing(ECB) policy makes clear distinction between corporates and financial intermediaries. Therefore, while corporates have been given freedom to borrow under automatic route up to $500 million per year subject to certain conditions, a different approach has been adopted for financial intermediaries in the interest of financial stability by regulating access to overseas borrowings and issue of guarantees.  Another example is in regard to overseas investments. To enable corporates to become global companies overseas investments up to their net worth is permitted under the automatic route. They can also access ECBs under automatic route to invest overseas. In regard to resident individuals, in order to provide a hassle-free facility to make remittances overseas to meet both current and capital account requirements, they have been allowed to remit on an annual basis US$ 25000/- on a mere declaration of the purpose.  2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Disclosure and transparency initiatives RBI has been transparent in making available, in public domain, appropriate data relating to forex market and those resulting from RBI operations in the foreign exchange market. RBI disseminates the daily reference rate which is an indicative rate for market observers through its website. The movements in foreign exchange reserves of the RBI are published on a weekly basis in the Weekly Statistical Supplement(WSS). WSS also carries data on exchange rates of rupee against some major currencies. The monthly Bulletin of RBI gives data regarding purchases and sales of foreign currency undertaken by RBI against the rupee. The data regarding the Balance of Payments and the External Debt profile of the country is put out on a quarterly basis. RBI has already achieved full disclosure of information pertaining to international reserves and foreign currency liquidity position under the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) of IMF.  With the concurrence of Government of India, RBI decided to compile and make public half-yearly reports on management of foreign exchange reserves for bringing about more transparency and also for enhancing the level of disclosure in this regard. The first such report with reference to September 30, 2003 was put in public domain through websites of both the Government of India and RBI in February 2004. The second report on foreign exchange reserves with reference to March 31, 2004 is now available at RBI website. Institutional development It has been well documented that the vast size of daily foreign exchange trading, combined with the global interdependencies of the forex market and payment systems involves risks stemming from settlement of forex trades on gross basis. Settlement of forex transactions spans different time zones and payment systems. As a result, counterparties assume various types of risks in the course of settlement. As suggested by the Sodhani Committee, RBI took the initiative to establish CCIL in 2001 to mitigate risks in the Indian financial markets. As India’s first centralised clearing and settlement system for the financial sector, CCIL’s role in facilitating settlement of both debt and forex transactions is perhaps unique.  CCIL undertakes settlement of forex trades on a multilateral net basis through a process of novation and all trades accepted are guaranteed for settlement. On an average, CCIL daily settles over 3500 deals covering an average gross volume of around US$3.5 billion, representing over 80% of the market. CCIL has been able to offer netting advantage consistently. In addition to benefits of risk mitigation, CCIL’s intermediation also provides to its members other tangible benefits such as improved efficiency, lower operational cost and easier reconciliation of accounts with correspondents. CCIL has improved operational efficiency with a zero failure rate. We will be happy to share our experience with our Asian friends.  Since it started its operations, CCIL has consistently endeavoured to add value to the services, and has gradually brought the entire gamut of forex transactions under its purview. It has also, over time, added more and more functionalities enhancing the value of its product. Similarly, CCIL has also launched a Forex Trading Platform to facilitate US Dollar /Rupee deals by banks in India. This platform has been given to members free of cost. The platform offers both Order Matching and Negotiation modes for dealing. The USP of the platform is its offer of Straight-Through Processing capabilities as it is linked to CCIL’s settlement platform. RBI encourages the authorised dealers to take full advantage of this and intends monitoring the use of this platform to make it more user friendly and widely used.  In India, the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India as a self-regulatory organisation formed by authorised dealers plays a constructive role in market development by initiating debates on important issues, organising training programmes and providing technical expertise on various matters. We expect the FEDAI to enhance its catalytic role in market development in the years ahead.  To further the participatory process in a more holistic manner by taking into account all segments of the financial markets, the ambit of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on Money and Securities Markets set up by RBI in 1999 has been expanded in 2004 to include forex markets and the Committee has been renamed as TAC on Money, Securities and Forex Markets. BIS Review 49/2004 3 
Tasks ahead The Reserve Bank will continue to adopt an approach characterised by gradualism in respect of future liberalisation of forex markets. In terms of sequencing, forex markets have to be aligned to external sector reforms and development of financial markets as part of overall reform. There are several aspects of reform in external sector and forex markets is one of them. Therefore, further liberalisation in forex markets have to be harmonised with progress in other areas.  As you are aware, all major reforms in the market have been brought about after soliciting the opinions of market participants and thus the system of participatory process in market development is very much in place and will continue. In order to further the participatory process, I am happy to inform you that yesterday I had discussions with my colleague Dr. Rakesh Mohan and Governor Dr. Reddy. It has been decided that RBI will immediately set up a Committee to undertake a comprehensive review of the liberalisation process set in motion in the last decade, study recent international experience and identify various options for future forex market development in India. The Committee will interact with market participants and experts for this purpose. The Committee will prepare a report within three months which will be placed before TAC. The report will then be placed in the public domain for nviting suggestions. On the basis of the suggestions received, a road map will be drawn up for further liberalisation to reach global standards. No doubt we will be associating, as usual, the Forex Association to assist us in this endeavour. Let me conclude by thanking the Assembly for giving this opportunity. Our officers are also participating in the deliberations and we will get a feedback from them. Wish you all the best in your endeavours.  4 BIS Review 49/2004 
Rakesh Mohan: Ownership and governance in private sector banks in India Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference on Ownership and Governance in Private Sector Banking organised by the Confederation of Indian Industries, Mumbai, 9 September 2004. *      *      * I am grateful to the Confederation of Indian Industries to arrange a seminar on a subject of great importance today. This gives me an opportunity to discuss the issues with various stakeholders. On July 2, 2004, RBI issued draft guidelines on ownership and governance in private sector banks in India. These guidelines were placed in the public domain for wider debate and feedback. The RBI is to put out a second draft and then finalise the policy taking into account the feedback received. The intention is to continue strengthening the Indian Banking System and keep moving towards international best practice through a consultative process.  If the importance of the issue of ownership and governance in banks is to be gauged by the number of responses received to any public document issued by RBI then I would say that it is overwhelmingly important!  We had said in the guidelines that banks are special. Several responses have been received asking us what we mean by ‘special’. Banks are financial intermediaries critical for mobilising public savings and for deploying them to provide safety and return to the savers. They thus have fiduciary responsibility. The deployment of funds mobilized through deposits involves banks in financing economic activity and providing the lifeline for the payments system. The banking system is something that is central to a nation’s economy; and that applies whether the banks are locally- or foreign-owned.  The owners or shareholders of the banks have only a minor stake and considering the leveraging capacity of banks ( more than ten to one) it puts them in control of very large volume of public funds of which their own stake is miniscule. In a sense, therefore, they act as trustees and as such must be fit and proper for the deployment of funds entrusted to them. The sustained stable and continuing operations depend on the public confidence in individual banks and the banking system. The speed with which a bank under a run can collapse is incomparable with any other organisation. For a developing economy like ours there is also much less tolerance for downside risk among depositors many of whom place their life savings in the banks. Hence from a moral , social, political and human angle, there is a more onerous responsibility on the regulator. Millions of depositors of the banks whose funds are entrusted with the bank are not in control of their management.  Thus, concentrated shareholding in banks controlling huge public funds does pose issues related to the risk of concentration of ownership because of the moral hazard problem and linkages of owners with businesses. Hence diversification of ownership is desirable as also ensuring fit and proper status of such owners and directors. At the same time with diversified ownership, there is, perhaps, even greater concern over corporate governance and professional management, in view of this, apart from ensuring fit and proper considerations, in order to safeguard depositors interest and ensure systemic stability, the regulatory and supervisory framework has to ensure that banks have adequate capital to cushion risks that are inevitable in their operations, follow prudent and transparent accounting practices and are managed in accordance with the best practices for risk management. Seen from this standpoint, great responsibility is imposed on the regulator. The issue has been raised as to why now- what is new that these concerns are being raised now? After nationalisation of major banks in 1969 and in 1980, in a sense, being government owned the issue did not arise till recently. As part of financial sector reform and keeping in view the growth needs of the economy it is expected that the significance and share of the private sector banks will increase as also public shareholding in the public sector banks within the current policy framework. The banks are expected to grow with the economy. There is also opening up of the economy and increasing integration with the global economy. As this happens, the regulator has to ensure that the banking system is strong, healthy and resilient to withstand shocks. We also want to ensure that transparency improves and want to move to international best practices in regulation, supervision, risk management while at same time calibrating the suitability to the domestic conditions and needs at the current stage of development BIS Review 49/2004 1 
Key features of the guidelines To begin with, let me enumerate the salient features of the guidelines.  1. All shareholding of 5 per cent and above representing important shareholding will have to meet the ‘fit and proper’ tests of competence, reputation, track record, integrity, satisfactory outcome of financial vetting, source of funds and so on. Where the applicant is a body corporate, fit and proper would include good corporate governance, financial strength and integrity in addition to the assessment of individuals and other entities associated with the body corporate as enumerated above.  2. In the interest of diversified ownership of banks, the objective will be to ensure that no single entity or group of related entities have shareholding or control, directly or indirectly, in any bank in excess of 10 per cent of the paid up capital of the private sector bank. Any higher level of acquisition will be with the prior approval of RBI and in accordance with the guidelines of February 3, 2004. These guidelines state that where acquisition or investment takes the shareholding of the applicant to a level of 10 percent or more and up to 30 percent, the RBI will also take into account other factors including but not limited to the following: (a) source and stability of the funds for the acquisition and the ability to access financial markets as a source of continuing financial support for the bank, (b) the business record and experience of the applicant including any experience of acquisition of companies, (c) the extent to which the corporate structure of the applicant will be in consonance with effective supervision and regulation of the bank; and (d) in case the applicant is a financial entity, whether the applicant is a widely held entity, publicly listed and a well established regulated financial entity in good standing in the financial community. In addition as indicated in the July draft, where the investing entity is a corporate entity, it will be seen whether there is diversified shareholding of the investing entity. For acquisition or investment exceeding the level of 30 percent the criteria will also take into account but will not be limited to whether (a) the acquisition is in public interest, (b) the desirability of diversified ownership of banks, (c) the soundness and feasibility of the plans of the applicant for the future conduct and development of the business of the bank; and (d) shareholder agreements and their impact on control and management of the bank. 3. The main difference between the February guidelines and the July draft is that the latter requires prior approval for shareholding above 10 per cent and is also applicable for existing shareholding above such level. The criteria laid down in the guidelines will be applicable equally for higher level of acquisitions as also for time bound plan for continuance or reduction in cases where the limits exceed those indicated. 4. Minimum of Rs 300 crore of net worth is perceived as being desirable on grounds of optimal operations and systemic stability. Banks with net worth lower than Rs 300 crore will be encouraged to increase it to this level through organic or inorganic growth within a reasonable period.  5. In case of new licenses, promoter’s shareholding will normally be expected to be brought down to 10 per cent in a period of three years even if higher to begin with.  6. Large industrial houses as per existing policy will be permitted strategic investment in banks up to 10 per cent subject to fulfilling the other criteria. 7. While guidelines have already been issued to banks and Fis in India to minimize cross holding to 5 per cent, symmetrically, the draft guidelines require foreign banks operating in India to restrict their acquisition (either directly or through any entity in the group) of shareholding in Indian banks to 5 per cent .  8. The maximum limits for portfolio investment through stock exchanges by individual NRIs and FIIs at 5 per cent and 10 per cent respectively and aggregate limits at 10 per cent (can be raised to 24 per cent through special resolution of general body) and 24 per cent (can be raised to 49 per cent through special resolution of general body) respectively, currently permissible, as reiterated in the GOI press note of March 5, 2004, have been retained in the draft guidelines. These will be subject to government’s policy in this regard. All cases of acquisition or holding of 5 per cent and above, in case of FIIs, will require acknowledgment by RBI as per February 3, 2004 guidelines. Where the investing entity is a ‘sub account’, full details of the investor/s and other particulars required for due diligence will be called for.  2 BIS Review 49/2004 
9. While most of the elements of the draft guidelines in case of directors have been implemented already, the provision relating to the desirable practice of having not more than one member of family close relative or associate on the Board of a bank is yet to be introduced. 10. All transition arrangements for compliance with the guidelines for existing holdings will be subject to submission of time bound action plans by the concerned banks. The intention as already indicated will be to move towards the desired objectives in as non-disruptive a manner as possible.  11. Continuing compliance of ‘fit and proper’ criteria for shareholders and directors will have to be ensured by the bank on an ongoing basis subject to independent verification by RBI where felt necessary.  How did we come to devise these guidelines? Apart from an internal review, we scanned international practice. International approaches Internationally, the regulatory/supervisory approach has been evolving into cohesive and inclusive regulatory paradigm involving three different monitoring perspectives on the overall functioning of banks -  • an enabling and proactive regulatory and supervisory oversight, • internal control through a vibrant and professional Board and  • market discipline  All three in isolation have their limitations and are effective differentially based on the overall systemic contexts such as the level of maturity of the economy, and hence the markets, the efficacy of the legal system and the resolution mechanisms in place, the prevalent business culture etc. Market discipline may not be very effective till transparent disclosure requirements are put in place. Even then the ability of the market to discipline the constituents would depend on its own structural strength as well as the economic setting in which it operates. Therefore a significant level of reliance has to be placed on internal control effected through Board oversight. An important factor, in this context, that defines the business culture is what has come to be termed as “corporate governance”. It is a nebulous concept whose essential elements were part of the business ethos in all societies but which has in recent times come under sharp focus and acquired a heightened significance partly due to the process of globalization and the increasingly overarching role of business on the society at large.  From a banking industry perspective, corporate governance involves the manner in which the business and affairs of individual institutions are governed by their boards of directors and senior management, affecting how banks1: • set corporate objectives (including generating economic returns to owners); • run the day-to-day operations of the business; • consider the interests of recognised stakeholders; • align corporate activities and behaviours with the expectation that banks will operate in a safe and sound manner, and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations; • protect the interests of depositors. The two major concerns that arise in context of corporate governance in banks and need to be addressed are (i) the concentration of ownership and (ii) the type of people who control the bank. Diversified ownership becomes a necessary postulate as it provides balancing stakes which may not be possible otherwise, even in the case of voting right limits. A related concern is the ‘quality’ of control over the functioning of banks manifest in the credentials of the various stakeholders.                                                        1  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, ‘Enhancing Corporate Governance in Banking Organisations’, 1999.  BIS Review 49/2004 3 
A survey of the regulatory regimes in major countries brings out that most of the regimes address these two concerns through a set of restrictions on the ownership of bank stock on the following parameters: • quantum of ownership by single person/associated persons • ownership restrictions for domestic entities based on nature of entity • non-bank financial firms • non-financial entities • other banks • ownership restrictions for foreign entities Major inferences that can be drawn from the international practices are as follows : In most of the countries, ownership concentration is regulated through a layered threshold structure as per which any person wishing to acquire/increase shareholding in a bank beyond those thresholds would be required to seek regulatory approval . The qualifying threshold level in most countries is 10%. Most of the countries though do not have an explicit cap on the maximum shareholding by a single person/entity. The above structure applies to direct as well as indirect control by a person singly or jointly through a group of associates or related parties. The regulators give approvals on a case to case basis subject to a number of considerations including the overall sectoral impact of the transaction and the satisfaction of ‘fit and proper’ principles by the person(s) acquiring the stake. Acquirers of shares beyond thresholds need to provide comprehensive information to the authorities for their approval including the intent of purchase, terms and conditions, if any, manner of acquisition, source of funds etc. In terms of the nature of the entity, non-banking financial firms and non-financial firms are permitted to acquire shares in banks subject to the overall ceilings in respect of single entity in most countries albeit with regulatory approval in most cases. The non-discriminative treatment of the two classes of entities is reflected in dovetailing of the restrictive clauses, wherever applicable, with the norms on ownership by single entity.  Crossholding amongst banks i.e., acquiring shares in a bank by another bank, directly or indirectly, is subject to regulatory approval in most of the regimes and the thresholds, in some cases, are lower than those for non-bank entities.  Background for the draft guidelines Having dealt with the international approaches , I would like to highlight some facts and developments which should serve as a background information for this seminar. • Unlike in many other countries, the various laws relating to banking in India [Banking Regulation Act 1949, Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings Act, 1970 and 1980, the State Bank of India Act 1955, the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act 1959] do not provide for prior approval of the regulator for acquisition of significant ownership in banks - either in the public sector or in the private sector. There is, therefore, a need for an articulation of policy in public interest and depositor’s interest.  • On February 3, 2004, the Reserve Bank came out with the guidelines for acknowledgment for acquisition and transfer of shares in private sector banks. These guidelines took into account the emerging trends in banking and international practices. For the first time, it was spelt out that the term ‘holding’ will refer to both direct and indirect, beneficial or otherwise and will be computed with reference to the holding of the applicant, relatives and associates.  • On 5 March 2004, press note 4 was issued by Government of India covering foreign investment in banking. The operational guidelines are yet to be issued. Hence the draft guidelines do not cover the policy in regard to investment by foreign banks or form of presence of foreign banks for which there will be separate guidelines. Before issuing these, it 4 BIS Review 49/2004 
is felt necessary to streamline the national policy for ownership, domestic and foreign, and governance. • On June 25 2004, ‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of private sector banks were spelt out by RBI based on qualification, expertise, track record and integrity of persons to be appointed as directors of banks. The process of due diligence is to be undertaken by the bank at time of appointment and renewal.  • On July 6 2004, banks / FIs were advised that they should not acquire any fresh stake in a bank’s equity shares, if by such acquisition, the investing bank’s/FI’s holding exceeds 5 per cent of the investee bank’s equity capital. Why are the guidelines being made applicable for existing banks? The banking sector is already quite large and widespread. There are several banks of varying sizes, composition of shareholding and directors. The issues of size and governance are extremely important from point of view of financial stability. This draft policy is in consonance of treating banks as special and is setting upfront a road map in a transparent manner for the existing investors to align their policies and potential investors to make informed decisions. The intention of the policy is to ensure adequate capital and consolidation in the banking industry with the regulator being aware of the intention of existing and potential shareholders. Since one of the fundamental presumption in the policy is that any shareholding above 10 per cent would have to satisfy the regulator of the fit and proper status and sound governance principles on a continuing basis, it is necessary that the same principles are applicable to existing owners but done so in a non-disruptive and consultative fashion. In regard to banks permitted recently or rehabilitated recently on the basis of specific approvals, the commitments made as part of the approval process would undoubtedly be taken into account as also continuing compliance with ‘fit and proper’ and sound governance. The same criteria as applicable for higher level of ownership as articulated in the February 3, 2004 would form the basis for dealing with the cases under transition as well.  The discussion paper is an illustration to the consultative process that has been increasingly adopted in the policy making by the Reserve Bank. As far as banking business is concerned, we appreciate the role of promoters in general and strategic investors in particular; although the distinction between them is often blurred in practice. The comments on the first draft of this discussion paper will definitely enable us to fine tune the policy for the better.  BIS Review 49/2004 5 
Tom Alweendo: The exchange rate Speech by Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, during a breakfast meeting of the Namibia Economic Society, Windhoek, 17 August 2004. *      *      * I have been asked to talk to you this morning about ‘the exchange rate’ and against my better judgment I agreed to do so. Specifically, the question everyone is asking is whether it is not high time that the monetary authorities do something to depreciate the exchange rate through monetary policy operations. At the center of the argument for action to depreciate the exchange rate is the negative effect a high exchange rate has on the export sectors of the real sectors.  At the risk of stating the obvious, let’s all establish and agreement that an exchange rate is a price of one currency in terms of another currency. Therefore, like other prices, exchange rates are determined by the interaction of supply and demand. This interaction will sometimes results into a depreciation or appreciation of a currency. Intervening in this process is in itself an interference with the free market concept, where the market is supposed to be efficient, guided by an invisible hand. I am, however, happy that there are now a number of market players who understand that the market is not always perfect and that there is sometimes a justifiable need to intervene in order to correct the market. In order for us to appreciate the exchange rate today, let us look at the movement in the exchange rate over the last fourteen years. In 1990, the average NAD/US$ exchange rate was NAD2.59 and the average inflation was about 15%. By 2000 the exchange rate has depreciated by more than 100% to NAD6.87. In 2002 the exchange rate reached a record low of NAD10.52. During 2003 the exchange rate started to appreciate and most people were not expecting an appreciation, but were expecting depreciation. Because of this mismatch in expectation and what transpired, the effect of the appreciating exchange rate is made to sound much worse than it really is. Those who argue that the monetary authority should do something to depreciate the currency, suggest two methods. Firstly they say that the central bank should reduce interest rate and secondly the central bank could buy US$. With the first method, the local currency will become less attractive and there will be less funds flowing into the local economy and hopefully this will translate into a weaker exchange rate. This all sounds well but may only work as long as the inflation is kept in check. The last think you want to do is to reduce interest rate without reference to the inflation, and to be forced to hike interest rates soon afterwards. We have also noticed that last year the monetary authorities reduced the interest rate, but capital continued to flow into the South African capital market and the exchange rate continued to appreciate. Clearly, cutting interest rates is not in itself an effective way to move the exchange rate. The option to buy foreign currency is also appealing but it has its own downside if not handled properly. When buying foreign currency, the ultimate effect is that you would have injected into the local market an equivalent amount in local currency. Given the prevailing liquidity position in the market, such injection of liquidity into the market might have to be removed at a cost, and given the current interest rate differential, that cost could be as high as 8%. You are also probably aware of experiences where central banks wasted huge amount of financial resources trying to defend a desired exchange rate. The result in most cases was speculation on the currencies. It is therefore not a cost-free exercise to say that the central bank must buy US$. An important issue is therefore whether policymakers should respond to exchange rate movements when they formulate monetary policy. There is ample evidence that suggest that for central banks to respond to either an appreciation or depreciation will transmit unnecessary volatility into inflation and therefore the real economy. In my view, we should recognize the fact that the exchange rate is not mechanically related to the interest rate. The exchange rate is subject to shocks and these shocks are an indication that the exchange rate conveys information in its own right. It will also mean that the exchange rate will have an impact on the economy apart from what comes through its response to shifts in the monetary policy instrument. Here I am not suggesting that the exchange rate is not an important factor when considering monetary policy actions. Indeed, the exchange rate is important price information in the economy and policymakers should form a view about the movement in the exchange rate as part of the holistic BIS Review 49/2004 1 
approach in policy setting. However, we must avoid the oversimplification of the linkage between the exchange rate and the interest rate. A related question that is being asked now and then is whether a country should prefer a weaker or stronger exchange rate. The general answer usually goes like this: if you are a mostly exporting country, you should prefer a weaker exchange rate because you will be competitive in terms of price. On the other hand, if you are mostly an importing country, you should prefer a stronger exchange rate, again on the account of price competitiveness. To my mind, this is a generalized answer, at best, and it leaves out a number of realities. For example a weaker currency is generally associated with expectation of higher inflation. We are also well aware of the danger of inflation and to therefore rely on a weaker exchange rate for price competitiveness may only be beneficial in a very short term. For long term prosperity a country will be better off to rely on its total factor productivity levels. Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, I now want to answer the questions I was asked: “Are there economic reasons to celebrate the strong NAD?” My short answer to that question is maybe and maybe not. I thank you. 2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Shkëlqim Cani: Review of the Albanian economy   Statement by Dr Shkëlqim Cani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, for Euromoney Yearbooks, Global banking and financial policy review, Tirana, 9 August 2004. *      *      * The Albanian economy experienced a recovered pulse of economic growth over the year 2003. Positive developments are marked in respect of consolidating the country’s macroeconomic stability, economic growth and a sound development of the financial system. A recovery in economic activity and 6% growth of Gross Domestic Product in real terms was proved by all sectors of the economy, but was particularly evident in the construction, transport and services sectors, which are the most dynamic sectors of Albanian economy. The year 2003 was characterised by a low inflation rate, within 2%-4% of the targeted range. The inflation rate as of December was 3.3%, meeting the Bank of Albania (BoA) target. Despite the various factors this low rate emerged from a diligent management of the domestic demand as an outcome of appropriate fiscal and monetary policies. BoA’s monetary policy has been a moderate one throughout 2003. Such a trend will continue during 2004 and was recently reflected by the reduction of the core interest rate in the economy. Since April 2003 the REPO rate has been lowered by 2.5%. The 6% REPO rate, decided on May 12, 2004, is the lowest ever in the Albanian economy. The policy aims to reduce borrowing costs in the economy and maintain price and financial stability. At the end of 2003 the foreign reserves of BoA reached US$1.03bn covering 4.7 months of imports. BoA continues to maintain its view of a free exchange rate regime. This was reflected in the fewer episodes of BoA’s intervention in the foreign exchange market during the first half of 2003, when the purchase of foreign currency was almost four times that of the second half of the year.  Nonetheless, this did not hold back the domestic currency from appreciating against the euro and the US dollar, with a stronger appreciating trend in place in the second half of the year. The appreciation of the domestic currency was one of the factors behind BoA’s 2.0% interest rate cut during year 2003. Monetary indicators have generally been performed in compliance with the forecasts set out in the Bank’s monetary programme. The annual growth rate of lek deposits was 19.1% by the end of the year, which is significantly higher than the annual rates of the pervious years. The credit balance rose by L11.9bn or 30.9%. The new credit increased by 50% meanwhile 76% is in foreign currency. The loans/GDP ratio is still low, at about 7%. The banking system experienced important developments during 2003 and in the beginning of 2004. The entry of two new banks of Albanian capital was soon followed by the successful privatisation of the Savings Bank from the Raiffeisen Zentralbank (RZB) Austria. Now, all in all there are 16 banks in the Albanian Banking system. The BoA has progressed in reforming the banking system towards international standards, with the aim of the developing and refining the country’s banking infrastructure. AIPS, inaugurated in early March 2004, can be considered as the backbone of the whole banking system infrastructure. The BoA wishes to bring its central bank closer to that of the European Central Bank. Therefore, changes and amendments of the Bank’s regulations are aimed towards achieving this goal. BIS Review 49/2004 1 
Y V Reddy: Current concerns and some perspectives on inflation Concluding remarks by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Institute for Development Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, 27 August 2004. *      *      * Dear Shri Bajpaiji, Shri C. S. Rao garu, Shri Kamesam, Dr. Gulati and friends, At the outset, I am thankful to the Institute for inviting me to this function and giving the pleasure of being with you all. The programme clearly says that I have to give some concluding remarks. This makes it clear that my presence is essentially ceremonial - hand over the certificates to the bright young people and just give a few remarks, basically perhaps because the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) funds this Institute. I think it is a very wise thing for the Institute for Development Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT) to express thanks to those who fund and cultivate those who matter. I will, however, take the opportunity to make some comments on current concerns on inflation.  Financial regulation To begin with, there will be a few comments on the addresses delivered today and then some reference to the IDRBT. Shri C. S. Rao, Chairman, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) emphasised the synergy that is developing between banking and insurance. There are two elements here - one from the macro-side and the other from the operational or the micro-side. India’s contractual savings and long-term savings are rather low, which is why we are not able to invest heavily in infrastructure, and that is the macro part where insurance has a critical role. The second part is that much of business in our country is not really covered by insurance. The growth of economic activity requires risk-mitigation and the classic case is agriculture in India. So if we don’t have the risk mitigation measures, the capacity for increasing the economic activity gets constrained. We pride ourselves that financial sector reforms in India started early in the reform cycle, but within the financial sector, the insurance reforms came in rather late in the cycle. Hence, there is enormous scope for expansion in that area. Shri Rao’s focus on the linking of banks and insurance sector, taking advantage of the penetration that banks already have in the rural areas, is a remarkable approach and admittedly, it is extremely useful to use the technology in this process. We should work further on this and I am sure the banks, especially public sector banks, have great business potential too in bankassurance. Shri Bajpai, Chairman, Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has covered in his address both historical perspective and cross-country perspective. As compared to most other countries, the extent of progress that has been made by our securities regulator in terms of technology penetration and safety measures is impressive and currently, absolutely world class. SEBI should be proud of that. As we go along, there is a need to be abreast of the global developments and at the same time integrate it into our own unique socio-economic circumstances. There are two issues - one is at the operational level and the other is the overall stability issue in regard to the role of the financial regulators - and on both these counts, by and large, we have every reason to be proud of our achievements. We withstood the external and domestic challenges as well as economic and political ones in the last ten years. India emerges from the 1990s, as an island of financial stability in a sea of turbulence among the emerging markets and the credit goes to all who have been participants in this venture of improving the financial system.  On IDRBT As regards the activities of IDRBT, we are heralding a customer-centric national switch for ATMs. This, I believe, facilitates access to a large number of ATMs of different banks. IDRBT has taken major steps to herald an IT revolution in the financial sector in a brief span of about eight years. Another excellent initiative is the University-Industry collaboration and both the M.Tech. Programme and the PGPBTM Programme are significant contributions. Undoubtedly, the IDRBT will have a proper balance between research, training and IT infrastructure provisioning for the benefit of the financial sector as a whole. India boasts of excellence in the development of computer software, and the entire world’s financial sector sources its software from Bangalore, Hyderabad, Pune, etc. Perhaps, there is BIS Review 49/2004 1 
some merit in our trying to get advantage of this expertise being provided by various centres. IDRBT can play a role by creating a forum in which the software industry and the hardware industry that are setting global standards are able to serve the financial sector domestically also. And whatever we try to do, we have to be very careful about the quality of services and it is hoped that IDRBT will introduce, if it has not already introduced, and also upgrade the mechanisms by which there is an assessment of the quality of services IDRBT is providing.  RBI and technology Some mention of the RBI’s work with regard to technology will be in order in this forum. An important contribution of the RBI to the development of technology is indeed the establishment of this Institute. The major achievement in the last one-year is the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS). Between the timetable and making sure that it works right, we gave preference to making sure that it works right which resulted in some delay but by and large we are on track. Within three months of the introduction of the RTGS, the system has been able to settle almost 90% of the inter-bank funds transfer, which were being earlier routed through the net-settlement based inter-bank clearing at Mumbai. The year also witnessed the introduction of what is called the Special Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT), which provides for transfer of funds in the electronic mode on the same day basis with multiple daily settlements. The RTGS and SEFT are together able to cover about 2500 branches of banks in around 200 cities. No doubt, there is still lot of scope for further improvement.  It is appropriate to mention the items on the RBI’s agenda on technology matters. One of course is the expansion of the reach of the RTGS and what is most important is to make sure that it not only increases its reach but also works well. Secondly, the National Electronic Funds Transfer needs to connect almost all branches in the country using the SFMS and the INFINET. The third is enhancing the level of security in the Payment and Settlement System. We should accord the highest priority to security in all IT-related matters, particularly in the financial sector, because they are all inter-related and if security is breached in one place, it is quite possible that this spreads into the other areas. The fourth relates to the conduct of clearing and settlement at the national level through a national settlement system. Introduction of cheque truncation system on a pilot basis in the National Capital Region is an important task. There are also some proposals related to the risk mitigation schemes for deferred net settlements system. In this regard, we are also pursuing the idea of having a semi-autonomous Board for Payments and Settlements. Ultimately, there should be a separate legislation governing the Payments and Settlements System.  To provide a roadmap to attain these goals, the RBI has decided to start the preparation of a new vision document on technology. The new vision document will encompass the consolidation of progress made and also show the way forward. As soon as the preliminary draft is prepared, we will be able to submit it to a group of multi-disciplinary professionals, both from the user-side and the technology-side and it will invite your advice and guidance. This vision document will be put in the public domain in the draft stage itself.  On the current macroeconomic situation In view of the widespread interest in the current inflationary environment, I will make a brief presentation on the current macro-economic situation with particular reference to inflation.  If you recall, a few weeks ago I had made a brief statement on the concerns relating to inflation. At that stage, it was submitted that there were both global and domestic factors working, predominantly global but some domestic factors - which are driving the current inflation. I had also mentioned about both the supply and demand factors and that the rise in headline inflation was predominantly a result of supply-shock. In terms of policy response it was indicated that (a) we are monitoring the developments carefully; and (b) we respond to the development on an ongoing basis with a view to ensuring price stability. This is as good a statement today as it was a few weeks ago. But there are certain developments since then, and it is my duty to place them before you. First, a number of fiscal actions have been taken in particular relating to oil. The impact, you may not find the impact of these actions today or tomorrow, but it is very clear that there is a determined fiscal response which has been initiated and which will be continued as necessary. This should help contain inflationary expectations. 2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Second, there is a new development in Indian situation. It is that the corporate houses have taken upon themselves the importance of maintaining certain amount of price stability. The industry and trade have taken initiatives in terms of looking at what may be called the broader interest. In terms of pricing power, there are occasions when the corporate sector may not use the full pricing power in the short-run to gain immediate advantage keeping in view a longer term perspective. This realisation is evident among our corporates and I am sure it is happening among the larger trading community also. These attitudes and actions do contribute to moderating inflationary outcomes and, more importantly, expectations. Third, we had a series of discussions in the recent past with the financial industry associations and the leading bankers. We had extremely fruitful discussions and the major advice that came forward from the banking community and the financial sector is to try and reduce volatility. All of them agreed that it is in the interest of everybody that we minimise volatility in the financial markets and in public policy minimise knee-jerk reactions, while focussing on price stability and the underlying inflation. Fourth, in the domestic circumstance, there is a truckers’ strike and there are fears of strike adding to inflation. It must be recognised that there may be some increase in the numbers relating to headline inflation for those few weeks. I would, however, describe the truckers’ strike to be in the nature of a “temporary supply disruption in certain localities” rather than something that should influence the inflationary expectations or the approach to price stability. It is this distinction that is required when we are analysing the type of policy responses.  Fifth, as far as the financial markets are concerned, the money markets have been reasonably stable and the forex markets have also been stable. In the government securities market, however, there have been certain concerns. The RBI is aware of the situation and the market participants have made several suggestions to minimise volatility or adverse impact, and these are being examined at the operational level. We in RBI are trying to see that there are no avoidable uncertainties in policy, while mitigating undue pressures on the functioning of markets without undermining market efficiency. Positives getting more positive But in all this, while it is true that we should be concerned about the current rise in headline inflation, we should not forget the positive side, and in my view, the positive side seems to be getting a bit more positive in the last two-to-three weeks. How is that so? First and foremost, there is virtually a national consensus that high inflation is not good and that it should be brought down. Whether it is political leadership, whether it is economic agents, whether it is bankers, whether it is regulators - among everybody there is a national consensus that it is not good to have persistent highs in prices and that everybody should consider the common long-term interests in maintaining price stability. So, there is a national consensus on the issue and several actions have followed from all sections wherever it was warranted and there have been no knee-jerk reactions. Second, there is good news, in the sense that generally in India democratic pressures ensure that the inflation doesn’t go above the two-digit mark. But now, we find that inflation tolerance has come down. The society, the economic agents and the market participants are now reacting to a lower headline inflation, which is a good thing because if we want a sustained strong growth, it is necessary to rein in inflationary expectations. It is necessary to ensure price stability and what is the best way to ensure price stability? Everybody should work towards the same goal including the RBI and that is possible when there is a consensus in this regard. There is a virtual national consensus today that tolerance to inflation has come down and that definitely people are unhappy if it is higher and so it must be brought below that level as soon as possible. This indeed is good news because the economic agents are now factoring in this consensus as a possible factor governing future policies and expectations relating to price stability.  Third, the changing scenario on interest rates is also good news. For long, we had planned systems and we had administered interest rates with some amount of comfort for everyone. In the last five to six years, we had reduction in the interest rates. As the interest rates went down and down over the recent years, we were not fully sensitive to the fact that there is something known as interest rate cycles. So, for the first time, the market participants have got a feel of this interest rate cycle. No doubt, the RBI has been mentioning this in its analysis, but for many it looked like the usual central bank analysis and caution - like a grandfather always cautioning to be careful while crossing the road.  BIS Review 49/2004 3 
But the reality of the reform process is that there will be interest rate cycles even within an overall stable situation and consistent with overall macro-stability. That cycle is being experienced by the market participants for the first time, with the result that the market participants are now able to input these uncertainties more consciously and factor the type of risk they have to face in their conduct of business. So from the central bank’s point of view, it is our endeavour to facilitate - it is not our endeavour to say we told you so - the new environment by working together to see that the appropriate systems to withstand interest rate cycles are more consciously built. In a meeting with bankers a couple of days ago, we have more or less come round to the view that the system should be made to get accustomed to the interest rate cycles. Fourth, the prospects for real sector are looking better. In the current fiscal, in terms of the numbers, the investment activity is picking up whether one talks of capital goods imports, or one talks of capital goods production. The off-take in the non-food credit in this fiscal has been very impressive. These developments mean that the output should in the normal course grow. So, the output is likely to grow in the next few months and that is in many ways the time-frame which we have to look at in regard to the price levels. One should recognise that ultimately inflation is the result of interplay between the supply side such as productivity, quantum of output and investment activities, and the demand side. So, I would consider the supply side domestically being more positive. Fifth, as a positive, our exports are growing impressively. We are usually worried that the oil bill is going up but the exports are also going up and so, at least the impact on balance of payments is not as much as we would have apprehended. Hence, we are less uncomfortable in facing the oil price hikes.  Analytics for policy response In this background, it will be useful to look at the analytics that should govern the policy response.  As between the international and domestic factors that influence the current tendency for a rise in the headline inflation in our country, the international factors continue to be dominant. The international factors relate primarily to oil but also, to some extent, other commodities and financial markets, including interest rates and exchange rates. At the same time, there have been positive developments on the domestic front. These relate to improved outlook on monsoon and pick up in the investment activity. Clearly, therefore, the dominance of international factors in the current price rise and the importance of stability governing domestic economy continue to warrant a measured response to ensure price stability and contain inflationary expectations.  As between supply and demand factors, the evidence clearly continues to be that the increase in inflation is largely on account of supply shock. As regards demand factors, the growth in broad money as well as the reserve money has moderated. There is evidence of gradual unwinding of overhang of liquidity. There may be some transient impact of the truckers’ strike on inflation but this need not be treated as a lasting supply shock. In any case, there is no clear evidence that there has been any aggravation on the demand side. On balance, therefore, while the situation has to be watched carefully in terms of the balance between supply and demand factors, the current situation seems to be not much different than what it was diagnosed to be some time ago, viz., significantly a supply side shock.  As regards inflationary expectations, there is a new dimension to the understanding of inflation itself. There is recently a sophisticated debate on the issue of appropriate index of inflation. Analysts have pointed out that the wholesale price index (WPI) of India is similar to producers’ price index in other countries and that in other countries, the headline inflation is usually the consumer price index (CPI). More important, internationally, empirical evidence shows that wholesale price or producers’ index tends to be more volatile. It may be necessary to capture these nuances and their relationship with policy response in the context of inflationary expectations.  It will be interesting to recall the experience of rise in headline inflation and divergence between WPI and CPI in our country. Over the last five years average WPI inflation, on a weekly basis, was 4.6 per cent and CPI inflation was lower at 3.9 per cent, on a monthly basis. In the recent years, the year-on-year WPI inflation rate was higher in the range of 6.0-9.0 per cent during most parts of 2000-01. Again, inflation remained high in the range of 6.0-7.0 per cent for sometime during 2003-04. As these inflationary episodes were considered to be largely caused by supply side factors, the inflation rate reversed itself quickly once the supply situation stabilised. While the headline inflation responds to both supply shocks and demand pressures, the nature of response could be quite 4 BIS Review 49/2004 
different. The response of inflation to supply shocks is quick but transient. The response to demand shocks on the other hand, is more subtle but persistent. As indicated in the annual monetary and credit policy Statement for the year 2001-02, a factor which complicates the conduct of monetary policy during certain periods is the difficulty in correct assessment of the potential inflationary pressures based on the available data for the current period. While there are uncertainties, it is perhaps useful to look at the recent inflation history for an assessment of inflationary expectations.  The monetary policy stance in other countries is also trying to respond to the oil price shock. In many countries there has been a shift in monetary policy stance from easy to a more neutral one. In most countries, there is very little evidence of cognisable monetary policy response to the oil price hike per se. In view of the linkages between domestic and international economy, the monetary policy responses of other countries, particularly the developed ones, have also to be carefully watched.  Most important, there is a reassurance that in the context of current rise in inflation all are on the same side, viz., on the side of price stability. The fiscal authorities, monetary policy, the financial markets and corporates are committed to the objective of price stability and minimising volatility. In this background, therefore, RBI will continue its dialogue with market participants to fine tune its response to minimise volatility while emphasising the importance of Reserve Bank’s credibility in maintaining price stability consistent with the compulsions of the growth dynamics in our country at this juncture.  Thank you. BIS Review 49/2004 5 
Alan Greenspan: Economic outlook  Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on the Budget, US House of Representatives, Washington, 8 September 2004. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on the state of the U.S. economy and current fiscal issues. I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve.  As you know, economic activity hit a soft patch in late spring after having grown briskly in the second half of 2003 and the first part of 2004. Consumer spending slowed materially, and employment gains moderated notably after the marked step-up in early spring. That softness in activity no doubt is related, in large measure, to this year’s steep increase in energy prices. The most recent data suggest that, on the whole, the expansion has regained some traction. Consumer spending and housing starts bounced back in July after weak performances in June, although early readings on retail sales in August have been mixed. In addition, business investment remains on a solid upward trend. In the manufacturing sector, output has continued to move up in recent months, though part of that rise likely reflected an increase in inventory investment. In the labor market, though job gains were smaller than those of last spring, nonfarm payroll employment growth picked back up in August. Despite the rise in oil prices through mid-August, inflation and inflation expectations have eased in recent months. To be sure, unit labor costs rose in the second quarter as productivity growth slowed from its extraordinary pace of the past two years and employee compensation per hour remained on an upward trend. But, as best we can judge, the growth in profit margins of non-energy, nonfinancial, corporations, which, at least from an accounting perspective, had contributed significantly to price pressures earlier, has recently slowed. Moreover, increases in non-oil import prices have lessened - a development that, coupled with the slowing of profit-margin growth, has helped to lower core consumer price inflation in recent months. * * * Movements in energy prices have been a major influence on overall inflation this year. In the second quarter, gasoline prices rose rapidly as a marked pickup in gasoline demand strained refinery capacity and resulted in sharply higher profit margins. In May and June, refinery and marketing margins rose to levels that were 25 cents to 30 cents per gallon over typical spreads going into the summer driving season. As a consequence of the steep run-up in prices, demand for gasoline eased, and an accompanying increase in inventories helped to reverse the bulge that had occurred in refinery and marketing margins. That reduction in margins resulted in a decline in the price of regular gasoline of about 20 cents per gallon despite the concurrent sharp rise in the price of crude oil. With margins having returned to more-typical levels, prices of both gasoline and home heating oil are likely to reflect changes in crude oil prices more directly. * * * Evaluating the impact of rising oil prices on economic activity in the United States has long been a subject of dispute among economists. Most macroeconomic models treat an increase in oil prices as a tax on U.S. residents that saps the purchasing power of households and raises costs for businesses. But economists disagree about the size of the effects, in part because of differences in the key assumptions employed in the statistical models that underlie the analyses. Moreover, the models are typically based on average historical experience, which is dominated by periods of only moderate fluctuations in oil prices and thus may not adequately capture the adverse effects on the economy of oil price spikes. In addition to the difficulties of measuring the impact of oil prices on economic growth, the oil price outlook itself is uncertain. Growing concerns about the long-term security of oil production in the Middle East, along with heightened worries about the reliability of supply from other oil-producing regions, led to a pronounced increase in the demand to hold inventory at a time when the level of world commercial oil stocks was BIS Review 49/2004 1 
rising only modestly. Some of that increased demand came from investors and speculators who took on larger net long positions in crude oil futures, especially in distantly dated contracts. Crude oil prices accordingly rose sharply, which, in turn, brought forth increased production from OPEC and induced some investors to take profits on long inventory positions. The resulting reduction in the speculative demand for inventories has, at least temporarily, reduced pressures in these markets, and crude prices have come off from their highs of mid-August. Nevertheless, the outlook for oil prices remains uncertain. Higher prices have damped the consumption of oil - for example, U.S. gasoline consumption, seasonally adjusted, fell about 200,000 barrels a day between April and July. But the growing concerns about long-term supply, along with large prospective increases in demand from the rapidly growing economies of China and India, both of which are expanding in ways that are relatively energy intensive, have propelled prices of distant futures to levels well above their ranges of recent years. Meanwhile, despite the paucity of new discoveries of major oil fields, improving technology has significantly increased the ultimate recovery of oil from already existing fields. During the past decade, despite more than 250 billion barrels of oil extracted worldwide, net proved reserves rose well in excess of 100 billion barrels. That is, gross additions to reserves have significantly exceeded the extraction of oil the reserves replaced. Indeed, in fields where, two decades ago, roughly one-third of the oil in place ultimately could be extracted, almost half appears to be recoverable today. Gains in proved reserves have been concentrated among OPEC members, though proved reserves in the United States, essentially offshore, rose 3-1/2 percent during the past five years. The uptrend in proved reserves is likely to continue at least for awhile. Oil service firms continue to report significant involvement in reservoir extension and enhancement.  Nevertheless, future balances between supply and demand will remain precarious, and incentives for oil consumers in developed economies to decrease the oil intensity of their economies will doubtless continue. Presumably similar developments will emerge in the large oil-consuming developing economies. * * * The remainder of my remarks will address the federal budget, for which the incoming data suggest that the unified deficit has recently leveled out. With the economy continuing to improve, the deficit is more likely to decline than to increase in the year ahead. Nonetheless, the prospects for the federal budget over the longer term remain troubling. As yet, concerns about the budget do not appear to have left a noticeable imprint on the financial markets. In recent years, even as fiscal discipline has eroded, implied one-year forward Treasury rates at long horizons, which history suggests are sensitive to changes in the fiscal outlook, have held fairly steady. Various measures of long-term real interest rates have also remained at moderate levels over this period. These developments, however, do not warrant complacency about the fiscal outlook. With the baby boomers starting to retire in a few years and health spending continuing to soar, our budget position will almost surely deteriorate substantially in coming years if current policies remain in place. The enormous improvement of the federal budget balance in the second half of the 1990s and early in the current decade was due importantly to the rapid growth in labor productivity during that period, which led, both directly and indirectly, to a vast but, in retrospect, temporary increase in revenues. The Budget Enforcement Act (BEA) of 1990, and the later modifications and extensions of the act, almost surely contributed to the better budget outcomes as well, before the brief emergence of surpluses eroded the will to adhere to its deficit-containment rules. The key provisions of the BEA expired in 2002, and no replacement has been adopted.  Reinstatement of a structure like the BEA would signal a renewed commitment to fiscal restraint and would help restore discipline to the annual budgeting process. But it would be only a part of any meaningful endeavor to establish a framework for fiscal policy choices. The BEA was designed to constrain legislative actions on new initiatives. It contained no provisions for dealing with unanticipated budgetary outcomes over time. It was also not designed to be the centerpiece for longer-run budget policy; importantly, the BEA did not set a clear objective toward which fiscal policy should aim. Budget outcomes over the next decade will deviate, as they always have from projections - perhaps, significantly. Accordingly, it would be quite helpful to have mechanisms in place that assist the Congress in making mid-course corrections as needed. Four or five decades ago, such mechanisms 2 BIS Review 49/2004 
were unnecessary, in part because much of the budget was determined on an annual basis. Indeed, in the 1960s, discretionary spending, which is subject to the annual appropriations process and thus comes under regular review by the Congress, accounted for about two-thirds of total outlays. That share dropped markedly in the 1970s and 1980s as spending on retirement, medical, and other entitlement programs rose sharply. In the early 1990s, it fell below 40 percent, where it has remained over the past decade. The rise in the share of expenditures that is not subject to annual review complicates the task of making fiscal policy by effectively necessitating an extension of the budget planning horizon. In the 1960s and early 1970s, the President’s budgets provided information mainly for the upcoming fiscal year. The 1974 legislation that established a new budget process and created the Congressional Budget Office required that CBO provide five-year budget projections. By the mid-1990s, CBO’s projection horizon had been pushed out to ten years. Given the changing composition of outlays, these longer planning horizons and the associated budget projections were essential steps toward allowing the Congress to balance budget priorities sensibly. Among other things, this change has made the budget process more reliant on forecasting. To be sure, forecasting has become more sophisticated as statistical techniques and economic models have evolved. But because of the increasing complexity of our markets, the inaccuracy of forecasts - especially those that go beyond the near term - is a large problem. A well-designed set of measures for mid-course corrections would likely include regular assessments of existing programs to verify that they continue to meet their stated purposes and cost projections. Although the vast majority of existing programs would doubtless be extended routinely, some that face appreciable opposition and offer limited societal benefit might not clear hurdles set by the Congress unamended, if at all. More generally, mechanisms, such as triggers, to bring the budget back into line if it goes off track should be considered, particularly measures that force a mid-course correction when estimated future costs for a program or tax provision exceed a specified threshold. I do not mean to suggest that our budget problems will be solved simply by adopting a set of budget rules that restrain new legislation - even if those rules are augmented by effective mechanisms for making mid-course corrections. The fundamental challenge that we face is to come to grips with the adverse budgetary implications of an aging population and current health entitlements and with the limits on our ability to project the likely path of medical outlays. The rapid increase in revenues during the 1990s significantly muted the necessity of making choices between high-priority tax and spending initiatives. In the context of an unprecedented increase in retirees, the need to make stark choices among budget priorities will again become pressing. Federally funding access to advances in medical technology, for example, likely will have to be weighed against other spending programs as well as tax initiatives that foster increases in economic growth and the revenue base. Because the baby boomers have not yet started to retire in force and accordingly the ratio of retirees to workers remains relatively low, we are in a demographic lull. But short of an outsized acceleration of structural productivity or a major expansion of immigration, this state of relative tranquility will soon end. In 2008 - just four years from now - the leading edge of the baby-boom generation will reach 62, the earliest age at which Social Security retirement benefits may be claimed and the age at which about half of prospective beneficiaries have retired in recent years. In 2011, these individuals will reach 65 and will thus be eligible for Medicare. The pressures on the federal budget from these demographic changes will come on top of those stemming from the relentless upward trend in expenditures on medical care. Indeed, outlays for Medicare and Medicaid have grown much faster than has nominal GDP in recent years, and no significant slowing seems to be in the offing. In 2003, outlays for Social Security and Medicare amounted to about 7 percent of GDP; according to the programs’ trustees, by 2030 that ratio will nearly double. Moreover, such projections are subject to considerable uncertainty, especially those for Medicare. Unlike Social Security, where benefits are tied in a mechanical fashion to retirees’ wage histories and we have some useful tools for forecasting future benefits, the possible variance in medical spending rises dramatically as we move into the next decade and beyond. As with Social Security, forecasting the number of Medicare beneficiaries is reasonably straightforward. But we know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in some instances, reduce the costs of BIS Review 49/2004 3 
existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending - in some cases, by a great deal. Other sources of uncertainty - for example, about how longer life expectancies among the elderly will affect medical spending - may also turn out to be important. As a result, the range of future possible outlays per recipient is extremely wide.  Developing ways to deal with these uncertainties will be a major part of an effective budget strategy for the longer run. Critical to that evaluation is the possibility that, as a nation, we may have already made promises to coming generations of retirees that we will be unable to fulfill. If, on further study, that possibility turns out to be the case, it is imperative that we make clear what real resources will be available so that our citizens can properly plan their retirements. This problem raises a more-general principle of public policy prudence. If, as history strongly suggests, entitlement benefits and tax credits, once bestowed, are difficult to repeal, consideration should be given to developing a framework that recognizes that potential asymmetry. * * * Re-establishing an effective procedural framework for budgetary decisionmaking should be a high priority. But it is only a start. As we prepare for the retirement of the baby-boom generation and confront the implications of soaring expenditures for medical care, a major effort by policymakers to set priorities for tax and spending programs and to start making tradeoffs is long overdue. The significant improvement in the budget in the 1990s reflected persistent efforts on the part of this committee and others. If similar efforts are made now, they should assist in preparing our economy for the fiscal challenges that we will face in the years ahead. 4 BIS Review 49/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: European economy - current state and prospects Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual Dinner 2004 of Financial Services Ireland (FSI), Dublin, 23 September 2004. *      *      * I am very honoured to have been invited here today. I would like to thank you, Mr Chairman, and the Executive Board of Financial Services Ireland for your invitation, and for giving me this opportunity to share my views on the state of the European economy and the prospects for the future. I will like first to discuss the current economic and financial situation in the euro area and prospects for the future, and then I will focus on some of the conditions which need to be in place to ensure sustainable growth, including the role of fiscal policy. Current economic situation and future prospects Let me start by describing the current economic and financial situation. The latest data releases confirm that the economic recovery in the euro area is continuing. Real GDP grew by 0.5% quarter on quarter in the second quarter of this year, having recorded a 0.6% increase in the first quarter. Moreover, the latest indicators of output and demand remain consistent with ongoing growth in real activity. Looking ahead, the conditions for a continuation and broadening of the recovery remain in place. Economic growth outside the euro area continues to be robust, and should continue to support euro area export growth. On the domestic side, investment should benefit from the positive global environment and the very favourable financing conditions. Improvements in corporate efficiency and higher profits are also supporting business investment. Moreover, private consumption should continue its gradual recovery, broadly in line with growth in real disposable income which, with the usual lag, should be further underpinned by an increase in employment growth later on. Against this background, the economic recovery in the euro area is expected to continue and to become more broadly based over the coming quarters, leading to a somewhat stronger upswing in the course of 2005. I should note that this scenario of an ongoing and further progressing economic recovery is, as always, subject to some risks - in both directions. On the upside, the ongoing momentum of the recovery may again imply more positive developments for economic growth in the coming quarters. On the downside, there are still concerns about continuing economic imbalances in other parts of the world. These imbalances could affect the sustainability of the economic recovery. Another downside risk to the growth projections relates to oil prices. If these were to remain higher than currently expected by markets, this would dampen both foreign and domestic demand. In assessing the real risks stemming from the oil prices, one should nevertheless take into account that, when expressed in euro, the recent rise in oil prices has been significantly smaller than during previous oil shocks, for example, in 1973, 1979 and 2000 when oil price increases had a major impact on the world economy. In addition, in real terms, oil prices are significantly below the peaks they have reached in the past. Moreover, when compared with the 1970s and 1980s, the oil intensity of production in the euro area and elsewhere has fallen significantly. In 2001, the energy intensity of the euro area, measured as energy consumption in tonnes of oil equivalent, in relation to real GDP, decreased by around 50%, compared with its peak recovered in 1973. That being said, I will echo here the calls for oil producers to be as responsible as required by the situation in the present juncture of the global economy. Turning to price developments, the recent oil price developments have had a visible direct impact on euro area inflation. The annual HICP inflation in August was 2.3%, unchanged from July. On the basis of current market expectations for oil prices, it appears unlikely that annual inflation rates will return to levels below 2% in the remainder of this year, and in the very beginning of next year. Looking ahead, however, there are no indications at present of stronger underlying inflationary pressures building up domestically. Recent wage developments have been moderate, and this trend is expected to continue for some time to come in view of the continued high level of unemployment in the BIS Review 53/2004 1 
euro area. If this is the case, and provided that one-off shocks to prices from other sources such as those seen in 2004 are not repeated, annual inflation rates should drop below 2% in 2005. However, there are several upward risks to the projections for inflation. Concerns relate in particular to oil price developments, which may continue to have a visible impact on inflation. Oil price rises also imply the risk of second-round effects emerging in wage and price-setting, a risk which intensifies when the economic upswing strengthens. A further upward risk relates to the future evolution of indirect taxes and administered prices, as very little specific information is currently available about these in 2005 and beyond. All in all, while the available indicators are consistent with price stability being maintained over the medium-term, a number of upside risks need to be monitored closely. Cross-checking this with our regular monetary analysis indicates that there is substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This also supports the case for strong vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability. Having given you an overview of the current state of the euro area economy, and some prospects for the near future, I would like now to address some of the conditions that need to be in place to ensure sustainable growth. Conditions for sustainable growth The key to the achievement and maintenance of strong growth in Europe requires a perspective that extends beyond shorter-term cyclical developments. There is an urgent need to promote growth-orientated economics strategies, including the stimulation of productivity and employment rates, within a framework of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies. It is widely recognised that the accelerated implementation of structural reform, framed within the Lisbon agenda, is the key to making the EU economies more competitive and dynamic. Structural reforms that are designed to increase the flexibility of markets, open the path to achieving higher sustainable growth, increasing employment, promoting innovation and securing the sustainability of social security systems in the EU. Tackling structural problems in European labour markets is essential to this process. Particularly difficult challenges for Europe include reducing the high level of structural unemployment, including youth unemployment, and increasing the relatively low level of labour market participation, particularly of older workers, that persist in European labour markets. Overall, there is quite a distance to bridge before Europe reaches one of the key goals that has been set in the Lisbon agenda, namely an employment rate of 70%. Some countries have started to undertake the needed reform their social security systems to reduce the disincentives to work currently created within many European labour markets. Unemployment schemes have been amended and early retirement incentives have been reduced. But more progress of this type is necessary to attract more people into the labour market, particularly as Europe’s population becomes older in the face of demographic change. Here the remarkable experiences of Ireland provide a strongly positive example. Ireland’s economic success can be linked to the successful transformation of its labour market into a plentiful supply of competitively priced and quality labour resources. Its experiences demonstrate that policies to increase the flexibility of labour markets can bring with them the opportunity for long term positive effects on growth performance. Stronger product market competition is also a central instrument for boosting growth in Europe. EU countries, including Ireland, have made significant progress in product market reforms during the 1990s, having positive effects on the integration and level of competition in goods markets, but barriers to competition and innovation in Europe remain, which urgently need to be tackled. Ireland’s experiences have again shown that the further reduction of these barriers in the internal Market, in particular in services and network industries, are essential to promote effective competition across Europe. The further reduction of red-tape in order to enhance productivity, job creation and the better use of information technologies is another priority. Attention should also be paid to the share of EU Internal Market legislation not yet implemented in national laws. Finally much progress has been achieved in capital market reforms, not least due to the introduction of the euro. Whilst in most countries financial markets function well, there is still some market segregation. The completion of the Financial Services action plan is needed to promote pan-European competition and to further consolidate and restructure the financial sector. A recent study, for example, found that the overall level of EU-wide real GDP may increase by more than 1% over a decade as a 2 BIS Review 53/2004 
result of further integration, and that employment would also benefit. The further integration of national capital markets towards a truly European financial market could also make a more important contribution to safeguarding against country-specific shocks. Another of Ireland’s successes - as a premier host country for foreign investment - suggests that further efforts should also be made to promote foreign investment in the financial markets of the euro area, in order to attract additional capital and promote a greater transfer of technology. Let me explain why we, at the ECB, keep stressing the importance of implementing structural reform. Confidence among European citizens is vital for a stronger economic recovery and sustained growth. Successful structural reform that credibly reduces disincentives to work, invest and innovate could have significant confidence effects, even in the short run. The impetus from determined structural reforms in capital, labour and product markets would set in motion a virtuous circle of increasing confidence: the more credible the reforms are, the more confidence they will create, and the more confidence is created, the sooner positive results will be visible. To conclude on structural reforms, I think the key issue now is to put promised reforms into practice - to bridge the gap between strategy and implementation in Europe - to identify the best policy practices and make structural reform happen. We have a consensus on the “road map”. The issue today is to improve “navigation”, to streamline the decision making process and the effective delivery of the reforms. Convincing the people of Europe that our countries will be better off thanks to these reforms is absolutely key. It was clear that implementing effectively the necessary reforms would be a real challenge and this challenge requires that we win the heart and the trust of the people of Europe. Fiscal policy Implementing structural reforms to raise potential growth is a major challenge facing European governments. But it is not the only one. Achieving sustainable, non-inflationary growth also requires a strong commitment to fiscal discipline. In any economy, in the absence of fiscal discipline, price stability can only be maintained at a higher cost in terms of interest rates, and thereby growth and employment. By contrast, sound public finances facilitate the task of the central bank by strengthening the conditions for price stability, leading to a better ex post policy mix with more favourable financing conditions and thereby contributing to higher, non-inflationary growth. But it is all the more important in a monetary union, without a federal budget at the area-wide level. A credible and reliable framework ensuring fiscal discipline at the level of the monetary union is a key component for the consistency and the cohesion of this union. Sound fiscal policies are necessary to avoid the negative spill over effects in terms of interest rate increases that could be caused by one country or a group of countries running large budget deficits. Reaching a safe budgetary position in good times is necessary to ensure that fiscal policy has room to cope with asymmetric shocks, which can no longer be addressed by monetary policy. Not least for these reasons, it is a matter of concern to the ECB that a number of Member States are struggling to live up to their commitment to fiscal discipline. In view of recent difficulties, the Commission has tabled some proposals and a discussion has been launched to consider how to strengthen and clarify the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. Of course the ECB itself is not a party to the Pact and decisions in this area are the responsibility of governments not central banks. But since fiscal policies matter for monetary policy, we central bankers are affected and we consider it appropriate to give our advice. We can find common ground between some of the Commission’s proposals and our own thinking, namely, as regards the preventive arm of the Pact. We agree that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact should be improved. We agree that ownership and incentives for compliance need to be enhanced. And we agree that implementing the Pact in a way that best reflects its economic rationale should help to achieve this end. At the same time, we are wary of excessive complexity or of relaxation of the rules. In particular the so-called “corrective arm” of the Pact must fully preserve the nominal anchor of 3%. The Stability and Growth Pact requires simple and transparent rules in order to facilitate effective monitoring; to provide an effective deterrence against unsound policies; and at the end of the day, to provide an anchor for long-term expectations, which results from the clarity, simplicity and credibility of the framework. In this respect, we stick to our assessment that the wording of the Treaty and of the regulations of the Stability and Growth Pact is appropriate in its current form and should not be changed. BIS Review 53/2004 3 
Let me add one further word regarding the current discussions on the Stability and Growth Pact. Some proponents of reform - not all - argue that there is a need to focus more on growth, as if there was a contradiction between fiscal soundness and growth and job creation. On the contrary, economic theory and empirical observations support the idea that wise fiscal policies are fostering sustainable growth and job creation. There is no better example of this than here in Ireland where, in the second half of the 1980s, a vigorous fiscal consolidation was accompanied by an acceleration of economic activity. Indeed, the experience of Ireland suggests that, when needed, a credible and well designed fiscal consolidation can support economic growth not only in a medium and long term perspective but also in the short-run. Conclusion Ladies and Gentlemen, let me conclude with two remarks which could be summed up in two words : Confidence and Conviction. Confidence first. We all know that the euro area has a considerable potential, which will progressively materialize in the period to come. The present gradual recovery is underway and conditions are there for it to be progressively more broadly based. In the present juncture confidence is of the essence. The degree of confidence in all economic constituencies, households, savers, entrepreneurs and investors is a key factor to foster growth and job creation. A Central Bank is an anchor of confidence. We, in the ECB and in the Eurosystem, are doing all what is necessary to preserve and consolidate confidence: confidence in our currency, confidence in our capacity to deliver price stability, confidence in the stability of our monetary and financial environment. And then Conviction. We, in the ECB and the Eurosystem, are convinced that fully enhancing and expressing the growth potential of the euro area calls for reforms to be implemented. We support governments and Parliaments that have embarked on such structural reforms. I know that these reforms are neither easy to decide nor easy to put in place once decided. They need a great deal of courage and determination, particularly when the general public is not yet fully convinced that they are necessary. The sentiment of the public at large is decisive in any democracy. This is why I think that appropriate pedagogy and tireless explanations are more important than ever to convince our fellow citizens of Europe that reforms are paying off and that everyone would be better off, thanks to these reforms. We are part of this large, public explanation endeavour. The ultimate conviction of the people of Europe, of our fellow citizens, is of the essence. And Dublin is the best capital in Europe to stress this point, so visible and tangible are here the level of prosperity and the quantity of jobs that reforms can help delivering. I thank you for your attention. 4 BIS Review 53/2004 
Svein Gjedrem: The conduct of monetary policy Introductory statement by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 28 September 2004. The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The statement is based, among other things, on the assessments in Norges Bank’s Annual Report for 2003 and Inflation Report 2/2004. The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Storting for again inviting Norges Bank to appear before this Committee to report and answer questions on monetary policy in connection with the Storting’s deliberations on the Government’s credit report.  Inflation-targeting countries  Price stability, in the sense of low and stable inflation, is the objective of monetary policy in a number of countries. Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that high inflation has resulted in unstable output and employment. In addition, a fall in the price level will often accompany a period of decline.  The first inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK in 1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. In Norway, the government issued a regulation introducing an inflation target in 2001. Monetary policy in euro area countries and Switzerland is also aimed at price stability, even though this is not referred to as inflation targeting in these countries.  Inflation targeting has proved to be particularly appropriate in very open small and medium-sized economies. Commodity exports play a particularly important role in several of the countries that were the first to introduce inflation targeting.  Exchange rates fluctuate Over the past 10-15 years, many countries have made the transition from a fixed exchange rate regime to inflation targeting. In open economies with free capital movements, the exchange rate will be influenced by economic developments.  The krone fluctuates. This is not surprising because other countries’ currencies also fluctuate. The krone exchange rate does not stand out as particularly unstable compared with other countries’ currencies.  The krone exchange rate is the price of our currency measured in a foreign currency. Developments in other countries are just as important for the krone as developments in the Norwegian economy. Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest rates as well as output and employment.  There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is stable - but too strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - but too weak - is a source of high inflation.  Flexible inflation targeting The most important contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the long term is low and stable inflation. The inflation target provides an anchor for economic agents’ expectations concerning future inflation. We have a very open economy with free capital movements. Stable inflation expectations also contribute to more stable exchange rate expectations.  Inflation targeting means setting the interest rate so as to achieve a numerical target for inflation. Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to stabilising inflation at 2.5 per cent within a reasonable BIS Review 53/2004 1 
time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The more precise horizon will depend on the disturbances to which the economy is exposed, and how they affect the path for inflation and output.  The inflation target represents a framework for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to stabilising output and employment. We have chosen flexible inflation targeting. Variability in output and employment as well as inflation is given weight.  The objective of monetary policy is to safeguard the value of money in the long term, and seek to contribute to stabilising economic developments in the short and medium term.  Like other central banks, Norges Bank publishes reports about the economic situation, the inflation outlook and the conduct of monetary policy. The transparency of the basis for monetary policy decisions has increased. Norges Bank presents an account of both the main aspects of economic developments that influence interest rate decisions and of the Executive Board’s assessments. The alternatives considered by the Executive Board are made public. Interest rate decisions are taken on the basis of an interest-rate setting strategy drawn up by the Executive Board every four months. The strategy is now published as soon as it is adopted and prior to the relevant strategy period.  The interest rate affects the economy with a lag The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation. The instrument is the interest rate. The interest rates influences inflation with a lag and with varying intensity.  As interest rates fall, household and local government consumption and investment will tend to accelerate. Higher demand leads to higher output and employment. Wage growth may pick up. Higher wage growth combined with higher profit margins will result in higher inflation.  Lower interest rates will normally lead to a depreciation of the krone. Imported goods will then become more expensive and inflation will accelerate.  Expectations play a key role in price and wage formation, and they are influenced by the interest rate. Expectations concerning future inflation and economic stability have considerable impact, not least in the foreign exchange market.  More stable inflation Current inflation is low, but our recent history shows that without a nominal anchor inflation becomes high and variable with substantial effects on output and employment. In the 1970s and 1980s, average annual inflation in Norway was over eight per cent. The fixed exchange rate regime, which was introduced in 1986, reinstated monetary policy as an instrument of economic policy in Norway and laid the foundation for lower inflation and more stable economic developments. Like other small, open commodity economies, Norway also experienced that it was not possible to maintain a stable exchange rate as a nominal anchor. Inflation targeting was therefore introduced in 2001. High and variable inflation usually accompanies instability in output and employment. But inflation should not be too low over time either. This is partly because the structure of the economy evolves over time. Demand for labour with different qualifications changes. Restructuring requires changes in real wages and relative wages. Nominal wages do not readily fall. With some measure of inflation, real wages and relative wages can be changed without reducing nominal wages. Some degree of inflation will oil the economic machinery. In periods, it will be appropriate to stimulate the economy with low, or even negative, real interest rates. If inflation becomes entrenched at a very low level, the interest rate will be less effective as an instrument because it cannot be set below zero. If the economy is again exposed to unexpected negative disturbances, we will have little scope for manoeuvre. Stability in output and employment In the long term, output and employment are determined by the supply of labour, capital and technology and by the ability to adapt. Monetary policy can contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. Norges Bank weighs stable inflation against stable output and employment. 2 BIS Review 53/2004 
The output gap is a measure of the difference between the actual level of output and potential output. Potential output, which is the level of output that is consistent with inflation over time, is not directly observable and must be estimated. One simple method is to assume that potential output over time grows at trend because the labour force expands and productivity rises. Developments in the output gap provide a basis for assessing cyclical developments and can thus also shed light on domestic price and cost pressures in the economy. It is difficult to know how high capacity utilisation is at any given time. Output and employment figures are often revised and do not therefore always present an accurate picture of the current economic situation. Norges Bank therefore also uses a number of other indicators to take the temperature of the Norwegian economy. The period of strong expansion that began in 1997 came to an end in winter 2003. The Norwegian economy was hit by a pronounced downturn in the global economy. An economic turnaround has now occurred in Norway, with a soft landing after the long period of high domestic cost inflation and sluggish external activity. Output is showing a marked increase, but inflation is low. Monetary policy easing From spring 1999 to December 2002, the interest rate in Norway was fairly stable at between 5.5 per cent and 7 per cent. In other countries, the interest rate fell in 2000 and 2001 when the ICT and equity bubbles burst. The interest rate differential between Norway and other countries widened due to cyclical divergence. The expansion continued for a longer period in Norway, with strong wage and cost inflation. The 2002 wage settlement resulted in very high wage growth for the fifth consecutive year. A persistent downturn abroad, the likelihood of lower wage growth in Norway and a strong krone have led to reductions in the interest rate of 5 percentage points since December 2002. The sight deposit rate has been 1.75 per cent since March this year. Monetary policy easing has aimed to bring inflation up towards the target of 2.5 per cent and stabilise developments in output and employment. The decline in interest rates since December 2002 have contributed to weakening the krone. Measured by an index of 44 trading partners (I-44), the krone depreciated through 2003 by almost 11 per cent from its strongest level in January of the same year. In 2004, the krone has fluctuated moderately around its current level. High oil prices and low interest rates abroad have curbed the effect on the krone of the fall in Norwegian interest rates. The krone has stabilised - though at a high level from the point of view of the inflation outlook. Unexpected disturbances The Norwegian economy was exposed to substantial, unexpected disturbances from autumn 2002 and into 2003. Global economic developments were an important factor behind the appreciation of the krone. In 2003, growth in the global economy moved on a different path and was substantially weaker than Norges Bank and other observers had expected. Weak developments in the global economy resulted in lower interest rates abroad and a wider interest rate differential between Norway and other countries. Developments in international equity markets and the risk of higher oil prices also contributed to strengthening the krone. Activity in the world economy picked up in autumn 2003 from a very low level. After expanding sharply for several quarters, the US economy showed slower growth in the second quarter of this year. Economic growth has picked up from a low level in the euro area. Economic growth has also gained momentum in Sweden and the UK. Strong growth in the US and China exerted upward pressure on commodity prices in 2003 and the beginning of 2004. Oil prices have risen considerably during the summer. Several central banks have raised interest rates. Interest rate increases are expected in a number of countries. Inflation is low Consumer price inflation in Norway declined sharply through 2003. A number of factors appear to have contributed to the decline. The appreciation of the krone through 2002 pushed down import price inflation. At the same time, a change in trade patterns and external economic conditions have resulted in an unexpectedly sharp fall in import prices, even when measured in terms of what Norwegian BIS Review 53/2004 3 
importers pay in foreign currency. The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices for clothing, footwear and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological advances have also pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment. In Norway, competition has probably increased in retail trade and other service sectors in recent years. In the first round, heightened competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises will respond by reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the enterprise itself, but subcontractors will also be required to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. Increased competition therefore usually triggers higher productivity growth in the economy. Low inflation may thus be matched by higher productivity. Low inflation in the Nordic countries Norway is not the only country where inflation has been low. In Sweden, underlying inflation fell sharply. Excluding energy prices, core inflation stands at 0.8 per cent in Sweden. Inflation has also slowed in Finland and Denmark. One explanation for this, common to all these countries, appears to be intensified competition, which has led to high productivity growth. Real exchange rate and competitiveness High wage growth over several years as from 1998 has eroded the competitiveness of the Norwegian business sector. The nominal krone exchange rate, as measured by the trade-weighted index, has now reverted to around the level prevailing in the mid-1990s, while labour costs in manufacturing have risen considerably more than among our trading partners in the same period. However, the business sector is still feeling the effects of the loss in competitiveness that resulted from high wage increases. The exposed sector has been scaled back. Companies that are still in operation may be in a better position to cope with the high wage level. A more effective service sector may also have strengthened the export industry. Nevertheless, costs may limit activity and employment. The international division of labour is shifting, and when faced with major changes it is a disadvantage for Norwegian business and industry that costs are high. Credit growth Total credit is expanding broadly in line with growth in nominal GDP. However, the composition of credit growth has been giving mixed signals in terms of interest-rate setting over the past year. Household debt accumulation is high, while it is low in the enterprise sector. Household debt has increased sharply since 1994. The rise in the value of dwellings is one of the main factors behind growth in household debt. House prices have risen by an average of around 9 per cent over the past 10 years. High and persistent house price inflation may contribute to holding up credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a portion of the housing stock is sold each year, there will for a long period be some dwellings that are sold at a higher price than when they were last sold. This contributes to sustaining credit growth at a high level. This probably reflects a structural adjustment to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in the 1980s, after many households suffered financial distress in the wake of the relaxation. Homeowners with dwellings that have risen in value now have greater scope for taking up new mortgage-secured loans, using mortgage-equity withdrawal to finance consumption and other investments. A persistently high rate of increase in house prices can in isolation engender expectations of a further rise and can thus prove to be self-reinforcing for a period and push up credit demand. At the same time, the switch to a flexible inflation targeting regime reduces the possibility of exposing households to a double shock in the form of higher unemployment and higher interest rates, as was the case prior to the banking crisis in the beginning of the 1990s. If the economy is exposed to disturbances that may lead to higher unemployment, inflation will normally decline and interest rates will be lowered. High debt growth increases the vulnerability of households to economic disturbances. As a result of low interest rates, the household interest burden will remain fairly low in spite of high debt growth. It may prove to be particularly challenging for borrowers to assess their debt-servicing 4 BIS Review 53/2004 
capacity over time in a period when the interest rate is abnormally low. Such a low interest rate also places particular demands on banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with low interest rates abroad and a close link between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy would restrain credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced as a result of a stronger krone. Summary of the situation in the Norwegian economy A turnaround in the Norwegian economy has occurred. The economy has experienced a soft landing after the long period of high cost inflation in Norway and sluggish external activity. • Output has returned to trend and is now showing a marked rise. • Employment has returned to trend and is rising. • Unemployment is at the 1996-level, and is at the average for the 1990s. • Wage growth is broadly in line with a level that is consistent with the inflation target given nomal productivity growth.  • Overall credit growth is balanced. Credit is expanding broadly in line with trend growth in nominal GDP.  • Labour costs in Norway relative to our trading partners are now broadly in line with a long-term average. • The nominal krone exchange rate is in line with the average for the 1990s. • The interest rate level is near the level prevailing among our trading partners. • Inflation expectations are approximately consistent with the target. In that respect, there is equilibrium in the Norwegian economy. But the current inflation rate is low, and external and domestic interest rates are low. Lagged effects of the strong krone in 2002 are exerting downward pressure on inflation. At the same time, a change in trade patterns and external economic conditions are pushing down import prices, even when measured in terms of what Norwegian importers pay in foreign currency. In Norway, intensified competition appears to be resulting in high productivity growth, which is probably contributing to low inflation. The outlook for the Norwegian economy Last year, Norges Bank reported that inflation had declined to a low level, but we projected a gradual increase. We highlighted the uncertainty surrounding the inflation projection and indicated that inflation might remain low. Subsequently, inflation fell to an even lower level. Structural adjustments in goods and service markets may imply low inflation also for a period ahead. Growth is high in the Norwegian economy. Growth in the mainland economy primarily reflects higher activity in retail trade, the construction industry and the service sector. Imports are expanding at a brisk pace. There are prospects of continued strong growth in petroleum investment in 2005. Employment is rising, albeit still at a moderate pace. Monetary policy influences the economy with long and variable lags. There is always uncertainty surrounding inflation developments. A very high oil price may also have an impact on the krone exchange rate. Historical deviations between projected and actual developments in the CPI-ATE provide an illustration of the uncertainty surrounding the inflation projections. The fall in the value of the krone through 2003, low interest rates and solid growth in the real economy will gradually push up inflation. Price developments in recent months have, nevertheless, increased the risk that inflation will remain low for a longer period. Thank you for allowing me to make the introductory statement at this hearing. BIS Review 53/2004 5 
Nicholas Le Pan: Implementation of Basel II - the next steps Remarks by Mr Nicholas Le Pan, Superintendent, Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, Canada; Chairman of the Basel Accord Implementation Group; and Vice Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the XIII International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Madrid, 20-24 September 2004. *      *      * Introduction Thank you ladies and gentlemen. Basel II implementation is one of the most important challenges over the next few years - for banks and for bank supervisors. Adoption of the new framework in countries domestic rules is a matter for national processes. But, regardless of the approach countries take for adoption, implementing Basel II well has huge benefits, again for banks, for bank supervisors and for financial stability. A year ago, the questions I was asked the most frequently were, “When will the Accord be finished? Will it be finished on time?” Now the questions I get the most are, “How is implementation going? What are you going to do with implementation challenges? What are the next steps?” In talking about steps I am reminded of various sayings. “The longest journey begins with a single step.” “Don’t be afraid of a big step, you can´t cross a chasm in two steps.” “It is only by taking small steps that we can look back after a while and see how far we have come.” I think all of these are relevant to the Basel II journey. I believe that Basel II can be implemented well. What I want to talk about this morning is: • What I believe it takes for high quality implementation to occur. • Cross border issues. There are understandable worries in both home and host jurisdictions about how this will work in practise. There are also understandable worries in the banking community about the same thing. And I believe Basel II provides a unique opportunity for us to enhance cross border communications and cooperation in a way that will be beneficial to us and to financial stability. • The work of the Accord Implementation Group going forward. Background Recently, the Financial Stability Institute (FSI) released a paper that speaks to the preliminary views of the implementation of the new capital adequacy framework in non-Basel Committee member countries. The results of this survey are very interesting. 88 non-BCBS jurisdictions, including Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, Latin America, the Middle East and non-BCBS Europe intend to adopt Basel II - this represents about 87% of banking assets in those jurisdictions. Furthermore, the paper indicates that many of the countries have a preliminary plan to implement the new framework before 2009. Including the Basel member countries - that puts the total countries intending to adopt the new Accord at over 100. I think it's safe to say that implementation of the new Accord is in the forefront of the minds of the majority of supervisors and banks around the world. Even countries which have no immediate plans to implement Basel II are often highly interested in the current thinking and experience of others. They want to garner useful insights now that will help them in the decisions they will want to consider. Experience in implementing Basel II can be very useful for countries who want to make improvements in their regulation and supervision in advance of considering how to approach Basel II. We also must recognise that one of the strengths of Basel II is its flexibility. As supervisors we must ask ourselves what benefits the new framework will bring in the context of our own domestic banking system. Each jurisdiction must determine the possible impact of the new framework for their banking industry and supervisory resources. Each country must determine the conditions, scope and timing for implementation. Basel II contains a menu of options that allows differences in approaches in relationship to the nature of banks and the nature of markets in which they operate. Jaime Caruana commented on that in his opening address, but it deserves emphasising. BIS Review 52/2004 1 
Shortly we will have four panel sessions. The papers that have been prepared focus on very important issues in implementation. For each paper there are questions to kick start discussion. I believe this is a unique opportunity to share views and experiences to date. There are no jurisdictions nor banks that have all the answers. It is only through discussion, sharing of experiences and views that all concerned can proceed. We will have reports back from the leaders of each of the sessions. There is ample time for questions. In some cases there will undoubtedly be key questions or areas of discussion that will bear repeating and further discussing in the plenary session that follows. I encourage you to ask questions, raise concerns and make comments. So what does it take for Basel II to be implemented well? Within banks, it is highly important that Basel II not be treated as a compliance exercise. It has to become part of the management and governance of the bank with a greater focus on risks and how those relate to the capital the bank is holding. We also have to remember that Basel II is about judgement. Judgements made by banks and judgements made by supervisors. Despite the additional room for analytics inherent in the Basel II framework, we all have to remember that banking is not just arithmetic or higher mathematics. Neither is bank supervision. It is essential that banks adopt a disciplined approach to implementation with strong project management skills and high quality efforts to identify gaps between where they now are and where they would like to be under Basel II, together with a realistic plan for moving to eliminate those gaps. Many supervisors using the same approach to assess where they are, relative to where they want to be. Next, communication is necessary between supervisors, between supervisors and banks, within banks, and within the supervisory community. One of the things that is going on with supervisors represented on the BCBS is movement of the Basel II responsibility from policy development types to front line supervision staff. More and more supervisors are getting involved. That is occurring in Basel countries, with increasingly active involvement of non G-10 countries who are participating in the Core Principles Liason group (CPLG) and directly in a number of Basel working groups, through sessions run by regional groups, the FSI and so on. Communication is particularly important in the cross border challenge - something I will return to in a few minutes. A practical attitude is essential for effective implementation of Basel II, both within banks and by supervisors. I want to emphasize the need for an attitude of ongoing improvement and learning. That’s because there is not one way to implement Basel II and because Basel II calls for improvements in risk management practices and in focus of supervisors. Feedback is key from banks to supervisors and supervisors to banks. Lastly, so is realism about what can be achieved and the need for trust and respect for the judgements of others. I am concerned sometimes about the degree of realism I see within industry about what can be achieved. Some talk about close to uniform treatment across jurisdictions. That is not realistic. Again, I have seen circumstances recently when industry groups or certain individual banks have called for a resolution to the home/host issue by suggesting that banks ought to deal almost exclusively with their home jurisdiction. That’s not realistic. At the same time, within those organizations, local management and important local markets had virtually no knowledge of the implementation approach to be adopted by the bank. Imagine the situation of a host supervisor who communicates with the bank’s local management and is unable to get even the most rudimentary sense of what the bank’s approach to Basel II implementation will likely be. It would be natural in human nature for that supervisor to then start approaching the bank’s head office to try to understand what the bank’s plans were. Multiple detailed requests of that nature would clearly be an implementation problem and would not lead to cost effective implementation. But, banks that neglect to deal with host jurisdictions adequately, are part of the problem. What I am saying to you today I have also been saying to banking organizations because of their key role in effective implementation. 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
Let me say that I also believe that cost effective implementation is in the interest of not only banks but of supervisors. Supervisors don’t have unlimited resources, neither do banks. And so, in many ways we all need to try to find ways to economize on the use of resources in order to do an effective job. The workshops Workshop A is chaired by Enrique Marshal, Superintendent of Banks and Financial Institutions in Chile. It covers planning the transition to Basel II. It highlights the essential need for countries to take account of their situation in deciding on their approach to Basel II. We have emphasised that each country will determine the conditions, scope and timing for implementation. Assessment of national priorities is essential in deciding the way forward. But the material prepared for this workshop also emphasises that Basel II, implemented in a way that respects national conditions is an important opportunity to enhance national practises in regulation and supervision and to enhance risk management practises at banks. Some of the questions for discussion touch on factors to be considered in developing an implementation plan, challenges in taking account of local market conditions and the impact on supervisory resources. Workshop B, chaired by Jerry Hawke Comptroller of the currency in the U.S. focuses on implementation of advanced approaches. There are unique challenges for banks and supervisors getting ready for advanced approaches. While standards for advanced approaches for credit risk are reasonably well developed there is less of a current industry standard in the cases of the AMA for operational risk. Areas for discussion include approaches for assessing readiness of banks, validation issues and home host issues particularly in the cases of AMA. Workshop C, with Daniel Nouy, head of the Commission Bancaire in France chairing, covers the process for implementing pillar 2. That is a key part of the framework promoting better risk assessments by banks and more focussed analysis of those risk assessments by supervisors. Pillar 2 is also key to the expectation that internationally active banks ought to operate at capital levels above the pillar 1 minimum (without requiring a series of automatic capital add-ons). Pillar 2 is deliberately phrased in a general way as it is recognised that supervisory practises and approaches differ across countries. As well, Pillar 2 requirements of the new accord will undoubtedly be met differently by larger more sophisticated banks than by smaller less complex entities. Cross border aspects of Pillar 2 are important. These topics are the questions for discussion. Lastly Workshop D, with Ryozo Himino Secretary general of the BCBS chairing, covers the topic of home/host relationships. While home host relationships are nothing new, they take on a particular importance in implementing Basel II. Enhanced communication and cooperation will be required for effective implementation particularly in the case of complex major banking groups with material cross border operations. This workshop will review the Committee’s high level principles for cross border implementation, and the work in developing real case studies and practical implementation plans. Cross border issues I want to say a few more words about cross border issues. I know that it is on a lot of minds in this room. A paper on the lessons learned to date from the AIG work on cross border case studies has been made available. It is in draft because it is work in progress. These real case studies are the precursors, and can transition easily, into the kind of practical enhanced arrangements and supervisory plans between home and host jurisdictions that are crucial to the effective implementation of the Accord. We have some 17 of these started and we are broadening the scope and deepening the number. They cover both credit risk and operational risk. Many involve non-G10 countries in Asia, Europe and Latin America. Some non G-10 countries are starting these in addition. And what drives the need for enhanced cooperation and coordination? We have to realize that it’s not just Basel II. It flows from the fact that how banks manage themselves is changing. But it is not only the case that banks risk management operations are increasingly being managed centrally. Banks operate in a variety of different modes. For some portfolios there is an increasing degree to which the analytics and judgements are made centrally. For other portfolios local information and local inputs into modelling and analytics are hugely important. And we have to recall that countries don’t fall into neat categories as home’s or hosts. Members of the Basel Committee are both home countries and hosts. So are many non G-10 countries. And we have explicitly recognised that the significance of a bank to a host country is not just determined by how big BIS Review 52/2004 3 
the host country bank is relative to the total bank. What matters also is how important the bank in the host country is as a share of the host country market. Implementing Basel II well does not mean home country control and host countries blindly accepting in all cases capital calculations done elsewhere (no matter how much some banks would like that approach). Nor does implementing Basel II well mean a free-for-all with host countries acting totally independently in their jurisdiction regardless of how the bank is organised or regardless of what work is being done by the home supervisor. Neither of these extremes will work in my view. Because of the different ways banks are organised it’s not just the case that host countries need to think about how they can better rely on home jurisdictions. In many cases, home countries have the need to be able to get more information from host countries about the relevance of the banks’ models and analytics associated with that host country’s market. The AIG started these case studies because I believe that enhanced trust and communication is not built solely by talking about it, but by doing. My job, and the job of the AIG, is to push these kinds of efforts to happen, and to draw out and share some of the lessons learned. The AIG has recently prepared a paper on a framework for conducting real case studies. The paper I have referred to provides ideas on how to organise real case studies and enhanced cooperative arrangements. It emphasises that there is not one way to go about this. And it speaks to the need for communication and a practical attitude. Let me give you an example of some of the earlier lessons learned. These case studies are built on the concept that a relatively small group of supervisors, the home and significant hosts, should first start to try to work out and react to a bank’s plans, about how they can better coordinate their efforts. Well, the moment the other supervisors involved with the bank heard about this, they wanted to know what was going on, when would they be part of this? And in some cases they hadn’t been told - a very simple lesson in communication. Similarly we learned quite early on in some of these cases that bank’s plans were not well developed enough for supervisors to determine how best to coordinate their actions. My own conclusions of the progress to date draw out two essential points. First, host jurisdictions need to think more than they have to date of what information that they would need in order to be able to rely more on calculations, analytics and so forth developed outside of their jurisdiction. Second, home jurisdictions need to think more about effective ways to communicate the work that they will have done and the results of that work in assessing the use of these centrally driven risk management techniques so that hosts have a basis on which to rely. Let me also emphasise in no case should these enhanced home/host relationships follow a specific formula. I am aware of all kinds of forms of cooperation ranging from simple sharing of information to joint participations in examinations. And in no cases should these enhanced communications and co-operations lead to changes in the jurisdiction or the mandate of home or host supervisors. Work of the AIG Let me close by talking for a few moments about the work of the AIG. One of our main priorities is cross border issues. We have been instrumental in the Committee’s release of high level principles related to cross border issues generally and for operational risk. We will want to share experiences and course correct as necessary on how these principles are playing out in practise. We will continue to share experiences from the real case studies and from development of actual implementation plans. The AIG is not a rule setting body - it is not expected to produce rules or extensive guidance. We have created a group to go through validation issues for advanced approaches piece by piece, to take account of industry views and to produce a kind of cookbook of approaches to validation that can be used by supervisors. We have also recently created together with the Capital Task Force, which has been the main body that has produced the Accord itself, a joint group to consider the issue of downturn LGDs and the related issues of stress testing under Pillar 2 of the Accord. I anticipate that this group will produce some guidance on implementation of the Accord and will also interact extensively with industry on current practices and how those practices might evolve. 4 BIS Review 52/2004 
The AIG will be delving more into the Op Risk area, focussing on the AMA approaches and implementation challenges there. We will be involving and have involved non-G10 countries in both the validation and the AMA work. The AIG already completed earlier this year, a survey of preliminary intentions of national discretion items amongst Basel Committee countries. A number of non-G10 countries also chose to indicate their intentions and as a result, were provided information on G-10 countries intentions at that stage. The Committee has agreed in principle to publish this information and we will be updating it and sharing it among supervisors later this year. I think it helps supervisors to know the intentions of others as they make their decisions and information on country choices is also helpful in considering cross border implementation. We spent a fair amount of time on Pillar 2 in the AIG and will likely get back to that both during the course of this year and early next year. That resulted in some clarifications issued by the Committee. Our focus during the immediate future will be on the more specific elements of Pillar 2, such as how to assess concentration risk. The AIG is meeting regularly with the CPLG working group on capital. The discussion is productive and frank at times. We have cleared up some misunderstandings and we are having real dialogue on challenges and approaches to meet those challenges. Conclusion As we each approach issues of implementing Basel II - when, how and so on - I think it is important to keep in mind not only the challenges but also the benefits. Better relating capital to risk, promoting enhanced risk measurement and management practises in internationally active banks, and further enhancing supervisory focus, present huge opportunities. Opportunities for us as supervisors, for the constituencies we serve and for our banks, our markets and economies. While there are challenges and while implementation won’t be prefect, with goodwill, good feedback and ongoing communication, Basel II can be implemented well. I look forward to that result. Thank you. BIS Review 52/2004 5 
John Hurley: Financial Stability Report 2004 Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, at the presentation of the Financial Stability Report 2004, Dublin, 21 September 2004. *      *      * General introduction I would like to welcome you to the publication of the Central Bank’s first annual stand-alone report on the stability of the financial system in Ireland. The report is published in accordance with our mandate under the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland Act, 2003. Our mandate as a member of the European System of Central Banks also requires us, in conjunction with the various national central banks, to contribute to financial stability. Financial Stability Reports are an element in the discharge of this mandate. This is the fourth report that we have published on financial stability issues but up until now the analysis has been published as a chapter in our Annual Report. The publication of a stand-alone report has allowed us to expand greatly the depth of analysis on financial stability issues. For the first time, seven research articles complement this analysis with special attention being paid to the Irish housing market and the results of the recent exercise in stress-testing of the banking system which we undertook jointly with the Financial Services Regulator. What is financial stability? Financial stability exists where the various components of the financial system (financial markets, payment and settlement systems and financial intermediation) function smoothly and without interruption, with each component resilient to shock. If financial institutions run into difficulties then other banks, businesses and consumers could be very negatively affected. There have been many examples of financial crises in the past in various countries that proved to be very costly in terms of economic disruption and lost growth. The primary aim of financial stability analysis is to try to identify any factors that might lead to crises in the future. This is a major task as each crisis tends to be very different from the previous one. Background to the Report The publication of this report in itself is a contribution towards the promotion of financial stability. It is intended to increase awareness among all the players in the financial system of the various important issues at stake to ensure the continued health of that system. There are two distinct approaches adopted in this publication; first, to report on the current health of the Irish financial system and second, to highlight the possible shocks which could hit the system and simulate, to the extent possible, the likely impact of those shocks. The nature of the exercise involved in financial stability analysis is quite distinct from the type required for the other economic reports published by the Central Bank, such as our Quarterly Bulletins. We are not forecasting that all or any of these shocks will occur, and we are not limiting our analysis to those shocks that are most likely to occur, but we are looking at a broad range of possible shocks and forming a view on the robustness of the system to withstand these shocks. Key issues highlighted in the Report In this short address I will confine my remarks mostly to four areas, namely property prices, credit growth, stress-testing and the dimension of global risks. Frank Browne will provide further comments in his presentation that will follow. BIS Review 52/2004 1 
Property prices From our examination of financial stability issues, the risk of an unanticipated and sudden fall in residential property prices, accompanied by an increase in the default rate among mortgage holders, is the risk that poses the greatest threat to the health of the banking system. However, the shock absorption capacity of the banking system is currently adequate. Regarding the question of whether or not house prices are overvalued, the analyses in the report give quite mixed results. Some measures suggest that there is a significant overvaluation while others do not provide evidence of overvaluation. However, what is more certain is that if house prices were to continue to increase in double digit figures, the risk of a sharp correction would be more pronounced. In this context, the present tentative indications of a gradual slowdown in house price inflation are to be welcomed. This development is consistent with the large increase in supply and the decline in rental income that has been evident for some time. Of course, it should be noted that, even if there is no significant overvaluation in house prices, any sizeable deterioration in the fundamental determinants of the market could still mean that house prices could fall significantly and this also would have adverse implications for financial stability. Credit growth to the household sector As I said to you in July, credit growth continues to be a concern - especially credit for property-related purposes. The continuation of current rates of credit growth to the household sector, well in excess of the corresponding rates in other countries, will inevitably lead to a more highly indebted household sector in this country. This underlines the need for both lenders and borrowers to stress-test every borrower’s ability to repay these debts, not just in the economically favourable circumstances that exist today, but also in more challenging circumstances. In the context of credit growth, our focus has to be on the medium- to long-term where increasing indebtedness increases the vulnerability of borrowers to income and employment shocks in future years. In discussing vulnerability, it is important to bear in mind the current low level of interest rates. There is a danger that this may be causing some participants in the housing market to associate the adoption of the euro with permanently low interest rates. Since most new mortgages have periods in excess of twenty years, borrowers must take a long-term view of interest rates. Variable mortgage interest rates (which represent the bulk of outstanding mortgages) reflect where the euro area economy is in the short-term, but are unlikely to reflect where the economy will be in the medium to long term. We are continuing to work closely with our colleagues in the Regulatory Authority, both in developing our joint work on stress testing, and in following-up on the results of the mortgage lending study undertaken last year. Specifically, the Authority requested a tightening up in relation to client income verification and the funding of mortgage loan balances in order to ensure that loans are properly secured and will be repaid in full. They are monitoring lending practices on an ongoing basis. In addition, the Authority is, as part of a review of conduct of business rules, consulting with both industry and consumers on the benefit of a measure requiring each lending institution to obtain from the borrower, in writing, agreement of its assessment of the borrowers’ ability to repay. Stress-testing credit institutions A stress test of the banking system was completed during the last 12 months. This involved the banks simulating the impact on their financial positions of being hit by a severe recession. The outcome of the exercise was positive. The financial position of the banking system, and each of the twelve credit institution included in the test, proved very resilient to the simulated recession. However, these results have to be qualified because the stress-testing techniques used are still being developed and may be subject to a number of shortcomings. International dimension In any analysis of Irish financial stability, an assessment of international developments is a critical factor. The extreme openness of the Irish economy makes it exceptionally vulnerable to shocks emanating from abroad. Systemically threatening shocks are more likely to originate abroad than within the Irish economy. The interaction of such shocks with any vulnerabilities that might be present 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
in the domestic financial system could result in systemic weakness. Unemployment as well as interest rates, both crucial factors in an analysis of the financial health of the Irish economy, can rise as a result of developments from outside the economy. Currently, there are several international developments that have implications for the stability of the Irish economy and financial system. The most important concerns are the large global imbalances, commodity price pressures and expectations of monetary tightening globally. Conclusion Let me conclude this short address by stating what we hope to achieve by publishing our Annual Financial Stability Report. First, we hope to identify potential risks in the Irish financial system and second we will endeavour to raise the level of awareness of these risks by all economic agents, including households and businesses. Finally, we propose to continue our ongoing dialogue with the banks in the context of the findings of the report with the objective of arriving at a common understanding of any developments that might suggest a risk to financial stability. BIS Review 52/2004 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The transformation of the international financial architecture to meet the challenges of globalisation Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, organised by the Atlantik-Brücke e.V., Frankfurt, 20 September 2004. *      *      * It is with great pleasure that I have accepted the invitation of the Atlantik-Brücke to give this year’s Arthur Burns Memorial Lecture. This lecture series is not only dedicated to an outstanding central banker but it has also had a history of eminent speakers in past years. Therefore, I would like to thank the Atlantik-Brücke for inviting me, and I also greatly appreciate the hospitality of the Bundesbank. Tonight, I would like to offer some thoughts on transforming the international financial architecture to meet the challenges of globalisation. I will focus on developments over the last three decades, a period during which the international community has been confronted with tremendous and continual challenges arising from important structural changes in the global economic and financial system. During this period the international community has also learnt key lessons and has launched profound adjustments to what has been termed the international financial architecture, i.e. the policy framework of the global financial system. Let me first explain what I mean by structural changes in the global economic and financial system. The steady opening-up of goods and capital markets has led to growing integration of different countries around the globe, and we are still witnessing this process today with the opening-up of India and China. On average, trade has grown much more rapidly than GDP over the past decades. Especially from the mid-1980s onwards and during the 1990s, world trade expanded substantially more than world output growth in every year, with the difference reaching as much as 7 percentage points in some years. These different growth rates imply that over the last two decades, real GDP has doubled whereas the volume of world trade has more than tripled. Moreover, trade has increasingly expanded, and now includes the full spectrum of tradable goods from primary commodities to finished products, meaning that many production processes, such as automobiles or computers, today span not only several economies, but also several continents. Financial integration has also increased due to capital market liberalisation, rapid technological change and financial innovation, and we see its strength both in good times and in bad. This economic and financial globalisation has enormous benefits, but it also poses challenges and entails risks. One of the major benefits of globalisation is that emerging and also developing countries are increasingly involved in the exchange of goods and capital and can benefit from the transfer of know-how and technologies. Especially emerging markets have, over time, become major global trading partners as well as recipients of financial flows. Some of them, especially in Asia, have turned into nearly industrialised countries with decades of growth rates above those of high-income countries, and they have themselves become sources of international capital flows. Over the last four years, these roughly 20 emerging countries in Latin America, eastern Europe and Asia have accounted for about 30% of world exports and received about 20% of gross global foreign direct investment (FDI), a figure which is close to the FDI inflows into the United States. Greater integration also means greater economic and financial spillover effects from one country or one region to the rest of the world. Some of these effects are positive, while others are less so. The main positive spillover, as I see it, is that the global economy has benefited from the strong growth in many emerging market economies, especially in Asia. China has become one of the main growth engines, not only for the region, but worldwide, contributing to about one-third of world GDP growth on average over 2000-2003 (in PPP-terms). Moreover, capital mobility and financial integration allow savings to be invested on both the national and global scale, thereby increasing economic efficiency and promoting growth. What about the challenges? Globalisation and capital mobility also makes the international system more vulnerable to changes in investor sentiment. On several occasions we have witnessed contagion effects spreading from one country or one market to others. Some of these crises originated in the public sector, such as the debt crisis during the 1980s, which started with Poland and Mexico and spread to Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and the Soviet Union, the Mexican crisis in 1994, the Asian crisis in 1997/1998, the Russian crisis in 1998, and the more recent crises in Brazil, Argentina and Turkey. Others, by contrast, stemmed mainly from events in the private sector, such as the stock BIS Review 52/2004 1 
market collapse of 1987, the bond market crash of 1994, the near-failure of the large hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998, the stock exchange fall and the bursting of the technology bubble in 2000. Despite their differences in origin, nature and magnitude, all these events had one thing in common: they represented major threats to the stability of the international financial system. The international community has always managed to resolve such crises, but the costs incurred by the respective economies have been significant. In many instances, the level of output fell dramatically, sometimes even in double figures. For example, in Argentina and Turkey real GDP fell by as much as 10-11% in the worst year of their crises. These events highlighted the potential vulnerabilities of the globalised system and, in that way, underscored the need for systemic changes to the policy framework of the international economic and financial system. Policy-makers had to rethink how best to promote stability and achieve growth in an ever-changing environment characterised by globalisation. An impressive reform agenda was gradually launched to cope with the new challenges. Many of these reforms have focused on how to prevent financial crises from happening and - should they still occur - on how to manage and resolve them. This ongoing work is influenced considerably by the widespread recognition of two fundamental principles. First, there is general consensus on giving the private sector and markets a central role, while focusing on sound public policies and institutions to provide market participants with an appropriate environment. Given increasingly liberalised financial systems, the private sector is bound to play a key role not only in providing capital but also, and probably more importantly, in disciplining the overall economic policy. Second, increased international cooperation has been considered as key given the mismatch between globalised markets and national policy responsibilities. Indeed, the scope of international cooperation has widened, but also the forms of cooperation have evolved over time. Let me now expand on some key areas in which important lessons have been learnt and significant adjustments to the international financial architecture have been initiated and implemented. I will first talk about the main changes in the international monetary system and then comment on the institutional set-up of the international system, before touching upon reform efforts in the area of crisis prevention and resolution. 1.  International monetary system Looking at the international monetary system, some say that since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates in the early 1970s, there has basically been no system in place. The current situation of manifold monetary arrangements is sometimes characterised as a “non-system”. In my view, this is not true. It is correct that we are living in an increasingly complex world with a multitude of exchange rate regimes - about one-third of IMF countries have their currencies pegged to one major currency or currency basket, while others have various modalities of floating exchange rate systems from pure floating to more or less managed float. The role of the markets in determining exchange rates has become more important. And it had to be learnt - painfully - over the course of several crises that the economic fundamentals and policies of a country do play the decisive role in the development and stability of exchange rates. But a very important role attributed to the markets does not mean that there is no longer any role for exchange rate policy. Let me highlight two aspects. For one thing, country-specific characteristics have to be used to determine the most suitable regime for a country. While this holds true for every country, it is especially important for emerging market economies. Economies differ widely and evolve over time. The exchange rate regime needs to be compatible with economic fundamentals and the wider policy framework, including regional integration efforts as well as trade and financial links. From this perspective, all regimes are subject to change should the fundamentals evolve and if circumstances so dictate. It is not long since a consensus emerged that no single exchange rate system can insulate countries from financial crises. A few years ago, there was a widely held view that a move towards corner solutions, in the form of either very hard pegs or free floats, would help prevent crises. However, recent experience has shown that no currency regime is fully crisis-proof. Currency float does not suffice by itself to eliminate difficulties and crises. At the other end of the spectrum, the currency board of Argentina have delayed, but did not prevent, a fully-blown crisis. 2 BIS Review 52/2004 
Another aspect is that, while the leading currencies are indeed floating, exchange rate developments are certainly not ignored. The preference of the major countries and economic areas for exchange rate flexibility is the natural consequence of their trade openness, their dependence on capital movements and the necessity to pursue an independent monetary policy, geared towards domestic objectives. However, at the international level, there exist some mechanisms for policy cooperation, including on exchange rates. In particular, for the last 20 years the G7/G3 has proved a very effective forum where finance ministers and central bank governors can exchange views on a broad range of policy issues and where they can agree, if appropriate, on specific policy messages, including in foreign exchange markets in the case of exceptional situations. Only to take the most recent examples of such messages I think that the agreed G7 Communiqués of the Boca Raton and the Spring meetings this year were useful. 2. The institutional set-up The second area of major change that I would like to highlight is the institutional set-up of the international system. Since their establishment in 1944, the Bretton Woods institutions, the IMF and the World Bank, have maintained their central role in the system. But they have been - and still are - subject to profound change. This year’s sixtieth anniversary of the Bretton Woods institutions was an occasion for many observers to review the development of the two institutions against the background of a changing environment. The most dramatic change for the IMF was the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, which meant that it lost its previous role as guardian of the fixed but adjustable exchange rate system and that it had to fundamentally adapt its mandate. Moreover, the international debt crises in the 1980s also had a transforming impact on the Fund, as this was the first time that the IMF acted as an international crisis manager - a role that it is still performing today. It is interesting to note that the IMF refused at the time to approve standby arrangements for crisis-hit countries until it received assurances from bank creditors that they would share the burden by providing fresh money. Twenty years later, the involvement of the private sector is still on the agenda for better crisis management. All subsequent crises have reconfirmed the IMF’s central role as a crisis manager, in which it tries to coordinate reform policies in the countries concerned and temporary official financing with efforts to restore confidence and financial commitment on the part of private creditors. New challenges materialised for the IMF and the World Bank with the collapse of communism, which resulted in 20 new members needing specific policy advice for the transition from centrally planned economies. Since the Asian crises in the 1990s, the IMF and the World Bank have again been undergoing considerable changes. They have been pushed to become more transparent, sharpen their respective focus, and reinforce their policy advice and financial support. Discussions are also still ongoing about the appropriate representation of developing and emerging markets in the two institutions. In addition to the changes to the IMF and the World Bank, two other issues were addressed with significant consequences for the institutional set-up, namely the representation of emerging market economies and cooperation on financial sector issues: First, with the growing importance of emerging markets, ways had to be found to integrate them better into the international policy dialogue. The creation of the G20 in 1999 constituted in my view a decisive and highly welcome step to reflect adequately the newly globalised economy. The G20 is turning into the international forum for dialogue and consensus-building between all economies that have a systemic influence, whether industrialised or emerging. I am convinced that the discussions in the G20 have facilitated consensus on important elements of the international reform agenda. Second, equally important is the Financial Stability Forum, which was established in order to improve international cooperation on financial sector issues. The FSF is uniquely positioned to review the global financial system as a system, as it is the only informal forum which addresses issues from a cross-sectoral perspective, with the presence of global associations of banking, insurance and securities supervisors, of pertinent international institutions, IMF World Bank, BIS, and of treasuries and central banks having to deal with major financial market places. Since 2001, the FSF has also held regional meetings with non-member financial authorities in Latin America, the Asia-Pacific region and central and eastern Europe to broaden the dialogue on financial stability issues. BIS Review 52/2004 3 
Conceptually, I think that the Financial Stability Forum represents a major advance because for the first time the international community stresses that issues, challenges and risks must be examined in a comprehensive and complete fashion, through all their systemic implications, whether analysed from the standpoint of the International Financial Institutions, or of supervision authorities, or from the financial stability perspective of central banks. It also explicitly points out that optimising the functioning of each and all particular subcomponents of the global financial system, in their proper spheres, does not suffice. A cross-checking at the level of the overall system remains of the essence. The best banking supervision concept worked out in an isolated manner could have some counterproductive features from a global stability perspective. It would be the same for the best accounting concept or for the most creative and imaginative functioning of securities markets. This sense of the necessity of a global systemic “optimisation” on top of the “sub-optimisation” of each particular subcomponent is a very significant contribution of the Financial Stability Forum, even if a lot remains to be done in effective implementation. 3.  Crisis prevention Having talked about changes to the institutional set-up, I would like to discuss crisis prevention, which is a key area for all reform efforts. Given that crises are costly both for the countries concerned and for the international system, all emphasis must be placed on learning the lessons of the past and implementing those lessons rigorously. I am pleased to note that considerable progress has already been achieved in making countries and the whole system more resilient to shocks. In that context, I would like to highlight transparency and the promotion of best practices, two key elements of crisis prevention. Transparency is a precondition for well-functioning markets, since it facilitates better risk management and leads to strengthened market discipline. It is therefore welcome that significant changes have been introduced in a number of fields. For example, it was not long ago that the IMF itself started to disclose information on its policies and to encourage increased transparency by its member countries. It is also reassuring that a large number of international standards and codes of good practice have been agreed upon, covering such different fields as transparency in fiscal policy or in monetary and financial polices, banking supervision, corporate governance, accounting and auditing. Transparency in the private sector is also crucial, as recent corporate scandals have again highlighted the crucial role that accounting standards play in this respect. I consider that the progress made in the field of transparency after the Asian crisis is one of the main reasons for the absence of contagion in Latin America and the emerging world following the Argentine crisis. I believe that enhanced transparency helps investors to differentiate better between countries and that the countries’ efforts to adhere to international standards and codes are well reflected in the markets’ assessment of these countries. Transparency and standards and codes are not the only elements that have been implemented to improve domestic policy-making, especially in emerging market economies, and to make them more resilient to shocks. The debates about sustainable exchange rate regimes, prudent and sustainable debt management and well-sequenced capital account liberalisation are just some examples of areas where important lessons have been learnt. In addition, in response to the growing importance of financial markets, there is an increased focus in the policy advice given by the IMF and the World Bank on financial sector policies and on vulnerabilities in domestic financial systems. To sum up, I believe that the considerable progress made should help to reduce the frequency and severity of crises. However, we are still learning the lessons of the past, and more work will be needed in important areas. 4. Crisis management Despite all the efforts put in on the prevention side, it would be too optimistic to assume that there will be no further crises. However, experience has shown that timely, efficient and smooth management of financial problems and their underlying causes in a country can help to minimise losses. Therefore, I will now address some issues related to the management of financial crises. Every single crisis is different. Every case calls for an appropriate balance between domestic adjustment, private sector involvement and official support. Therefore, crisis management in practice has to struggle with the inherent tension between rules and clarity on the one hand and discretion and 4 BIS Review 52/2004 
flexibility on the other. However, we have learnt that the official sector needs to be more predictable and clearer. Only consistent behaviour by the IMF and the international community will provide the right incentives for countries and private sector investors. Some large financial packages granted by the IMF in the past might have led to a misperception that the IMF would always bail out private creditors. This, in turn, might have brought about an element of moral hazard, namely over-borrowing on the part of the countries and lenient risk management on the part of some private investors. Moral hazard concerns and the limited availability of official funds therefore have led to increasing calls for an appropriate involvement of the private sector in crisis management. In order to make official financing more predictable, specific criteria and procedures were set up last year for exceptional access to IMF resources. We in Europe have been very much in favour of setting such clear rules and clear limits to IMF financing in view of the substantial financing packages provided to countries in the 1990s and the early years of this decade. It is important that these rules are implemented clearly, not least in order to send out the right signals to the markets. With regard to an appropriate involvement of the private sector in crisis management, different proposals have been launched in the past ten years. In the wake of the Mexican crisis in 1994/95, the G10 recommended the increased use of so-called collective action clauses in sovereign bonds. It was argued that such clauses would help to overcome coordination problems between a sovereign debtor and the numerous bondholders since they enable a qualified majority of creditors to agree on the terms of a restructuring, which is also binding for the dissenting creditors. But more time was needed to convince issuers and market participants of the usefulness of these clauses. And it also needed Mexico to overcome the first-mover problem in February last year. Since last year, a remarkable convergence of market practice has taken place. In the first six months of this year, practically all bonds issued under New York law included collective action clauses, while worldwide some 83% of all foreign currency sovereign bonds included such clauses. Despite widespread fears, experience so far has not revealed any discernible impact on borrowing costs for the countries concerned. Given their more limited use in the past, very little experience has so far been gained with the use of collective action clauses in the actual resolution of sovereign debt crises. Ukraine, Moldova and Uruguay used such clauses in the context of bond exchanges in order to bind in the minority of creditors that would otherwise have objected to the bond exchange. Besides this progress with collective action clauses, I am pleased to note that work is proceeding on the development of a Code of Good Conduct. I have suggested myself some time ago that there should be guidelines for the behaviour of debtor countries and creditors regarding information sharing, dialogue and close cooperation in times of financial distress. Such guidelines embedded in a Code agreed between countries and creditors might help to prevent liquidity problems turning into a deep financial crisis with serious repercussions for all parties involved. They would also improve the handling of debt restructurings, if they become unavoidable. Discussions are currently taking place between emerging market issuers and private sector representatives on the main elements of such a Code. I would like to encourage all parties to be as active and constructive as possible. It is clear that this initiative can only lead to improvements in crisis prevention and resolution if the main stakeholders, i.e. emerging market issuers and private sector representatives, fully “buy into” the process. The official sector would play a catalysing role in that context. To sum up, important lessons have been learnt and significant changes have been introduced also in the area of crisis management. That being said, implementation of the agreed principles still remains a challenge. Closing remarks Ladies and gentlemen, we are living at the beginning of the twenty-first century in a world which has been very profoundly transformed during the last fifty to sixty years since the Bretton Woods institutions were set up. In a way, what we see today is for a large part made of dreams of the second half of the forties and the fifties of the twentieth century becoming reality: • The falling down of the iron curtain, the European unity marking the end of the dramatic political and conceptual divide has been the emblematic illustration of a world more united at a global level as far as values, principles and economic rules are concerned; BIS Review 52/2004 5 
• The very rapid development of emerging countries and of countries in transition permits the catching up towards a better standard of living of a large proportion of the poorest citizens of the world located in China, India, emerging Asia, and Latin America; • The acceleration of the scientific and technological advances, including - but not exclusively - in the domain of IT - is giving the full body of the global economy a major impulse; Under these profound philosophical, conceptual, and economic transformations we have been progressively inventing a new fully globalised economic and financial system, in which human resources, goods, services, capital, concepts, ideas are moving around the planet instantaneously or fairly rapidly. This has created, in turn, a wealth of new chances and new opportunities that are, as always, associated with new challenges and new risks. One of our particular responsibilities in the sphere of the central banks is to guard against financial instability, to promote financial stability. If I had to sum up what we to cope with in the present circumstances, I would say that we have three main challenges: to understand, to tirelessly upgrade institutions and to remain alert. • To understand, first. Research is more necessary than ever to have a deeper, more profound and more operational understanding of this new global financial system. It has no precedent and its complexities defy previous modelling. We have already done a lot in this direction: we understand why credibility is so important, particularly credibility of authorities like central banks; we understand better the phenomenon of contagion, of herd behaviour in a globalised environment; we understand better why structural flexibility improves resilience. But a lot remains to be done, in particular to understand the dynamics of the system and its potential instability. • Second, to upgrade tirelessly institutions, the informal groupings, the rules and regulations, the codes of good practices and conduct. A global system must be monitored at a global level with all parties concerned having a systemic influence. The aim of preventing instability must be present in all respective entities concerned. A lot has been done in this domain which is sometimes underestimated. A lot remains to be done. • And, third, to stand ready to weather economic and financial shocks and open crises if and when they come. There is no time for complacency. We can minimise risks. But economic theory and empirical observations suggest that chances and opportunities of the dimensions magnitude that the global economy presents displays suppose that risk are taken and that we cannot eliminate them totally. This calls for important progress in two areas: augmenting resilience which calls for structural reforms that is particularly necessary in Europe; and preserving the capacity to give fairly rapid response at a global level thanks to intimate and confident cooperation, in particular across the Atlantic between the two major industrialised economies. It is on that remark that the Atlantik-Brücke is more important than ever that I will conclude this exposition. Thank you for your attention. 6 BIS Review 52/2004 
Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy, house prices and household indebtedness Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Sparbanken Finn’s customer meeting, Lund, 20 September 2004. *      *      * Introduction Let me begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and speak at Sparbanken Finn’s customer meeting. Tonight I intend to talk about something that has been much debated in the media recently; namely the increase in house prices and household indebtedness and its significance for monetary policy. House price trends, combined with increased indebtedness, could for instance cause significant problems in the future if households have not taken into account in their calculations the fact that interest rates will rise from their present low levels. Is this something we should take into account when making monetary policy decisions? To answer this question, I shall begin with a few words on how we conduct our monetary policy and the aims of our policy. I shall then go on to describe developments in household borrowing and house prices and the most important driving forces behind them. I shall also mention how household wealth is included in our forecasts and whether there is reason to pay particular attention to developments in debts and house prices in the monetary policy stance. In conclusion, I shall also briefly comment on the present economic situation and the inflation outlook. The aims of monetary policy The Riksbank has been assigned two tasks by the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament). The first entails maintaining price stability and the second involves promoting a safe and efficient payment system, i.e. contributing to financial stability. In addition, if it is possible to do so without creating a conflict with the other aims, we shall also take into account other aims of economic policy, such as economic growth and employment. Maintaining price stability means in more concrete terms that the Riksbank has set an inflation target for its monetary policy. The rate of price increase in terms of the consumer price index, CPI, shall be limited to 2 per cent a year with a tolerated deviation interval of +/- 1 percentage point. The fact that deviations from the target are tolerated, within a set interval, is because monetary policy is not sufficiently precise to be able to bring inflation to exactly 2 per cent all of the time. However, the deviations must not be too large, nor of long duration. The Riksbank mainly endeavours to influence inflation by raising and lowering its key rate - the repo rate. The aim is to subdue or stimulate demand in order to affect the balance between supply and demand in the economy, and thereby resource utilisation and inflationary pressure. An adjustment in interest rates affects the cost of borrowing and thereby also demand for housing and households’ demand for primarily durable goods. The speed and strength of the impact of these interest rate adjustments to some extent depend on household indebtedness and asset holdings, for instance, housing. As monetary policy has an impact after a certain time lag, it is difficult to steer inflation in the short term. Monetary policy decisions are therefore based on an inflation forecast, usually looking one to two years ahead. This is the approximate time required for the effects of an adjustment in interest rates to pass through various channels of the economy and attain full impact on the rate of price increase. At the same time, we try to conduct our monetary policy in a way that will avoid excessive fluctuations in production and employment. This may give us reason to extend the forecast perspective a little beyond the two-year horizon. One could say that the Riksbank conducts a flexible inflation-targeting policy, a concept to which I will return later. Developments in household indebtedness and house prices Before I go into more detail on the significance of debts and wealth in monetary policy, I would first like to comment on developments in indebtedness and house prices in Sweden and compare them with developments in some other countries. BIS Review 51/2004 1 
In recent years, household borrowing and property prices have increased rapidly in Sweden, as they have in many other countries. Debts have increased more than disposable incomes, and in Sweden the debt ratio, i.e. debts in relation to disposable incomes, is approaching the level seen during the crisis period in the early 1990s. House prices, when regarded across the country as a whole, have risen since the end of 1996. The rate of increase has varied this year between 7 and 10 percentage points a year according to Statistics Sweden’s real estate price index. As I see it, there are several factors of a partly structural nature behind this development. One is the decline in interest rates, which is largely a result of the economic policy conducted. The fact that credit markets have been deregulated in recent decades and become more efficient has also created more beneficial conditions for household borrowing. These driving forces have been similar in many countries, although they have occurred at slightly different points in time. The fact that households have increased their indebtedness can to some extent also be due to the changeover in economic policy that took place in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s, with a focus on price stability. Public finances were consolidated and an inflation target was introduced. Confidence in the low-inflation policy was established gradually and has brought greater stability to the economy, with lower inflation and interest rates. A more stable economy makes it easier to predict future developments in interest rates and inflation. This can in turn mean that the risks connected with slightly higher indebtedness are perceived as smaller. In recent years, household loans have largely been used to buy housing. The fact that the increase in lending to households has gone hand in hand with rising property prices is therefore no surprise. The rapid increase in house prices during the second half of the 1990s is partly due to the decline in interest rates. However, there are also other explanatory factors. Naturally, income growth has also played an important role. Other driving forces behind house price trends include demography and relocation flows that have contributed to a large demand for housing in certain areas of the country, particularly the metropolitan regions. There are also other factors that have had an impact, such as reduced housing subsidies and rising construction costs. There has also been relatively little new building since the crisis years, despite substantial demand for housing. Nevertheless, it now appears that the trend regarding construction has turned. The increase in house prices has in turn contributed to a rise in the value of household wealth, as well as in the collateral for most of their loans. Household debts as a percentage of total assets, which among other things include housing, equity and saving in insurance policies, have therefore shown relatively little increase, despite the fact that the loans have risen in relation to disposable incomes. The fall in interest rates has also meant that the percentage of households’ disposable income used to pay interest expenditure after tax is currently low, despite the increase in indebtedness. Is there reason to be concerned that households have acquired such large debts and house prices have risen so much that it could cause problems in future? To determine this, it is necessary to have some perception of the long-term sustainable levels. One point worth noting to begin with, is that the Swedish nation as a whole has not increased its indebtedness in recent years. On the contrary, the large surplus on the current account indicates that external debt has declined. This should have contributed to making the economy as a whole less vulnerable to a rise in interest rates. In this respect we differ from a number of other countries, where household indebtedness has increased rapidly, while they have had a deficit in their current accounts for several years. This applies, for instance, in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia.  Developments in household indebtedness in Sweden are not remarkable when seen in relation to other OECD countries. It is clearly difficult to compare the level of debt ratios between different countries. Differences in taxation systems, credit terms and the percentage of the population that are home-owners are just some of the factors that complicate this analysis. On the other hand, a comparison of how much the debt ratio has increased in different countries in recent years can provide some perspective for developments in Sweden. It appears that developments in, for instance, the United Kingdom and Australia have been much more dramatic than in Sweden. Property prices have also risen more rapidly in these countries. However, in the United States, which deregulated its credit market at an earlier stage than the other countries, indebtedness has increased at a slightly slower rate, although it did not show any decline in the mid-1990s, as there was in Sweden. The structure of the credit market and the wording of the loan contract also affect property prices, and lead to differences in trends between countries. One example is that in some countries, such as the United States and Denmark, there is an opportunity to renegotiate fixed-rate loans - at a very low cost - when interest rates fall. 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
One phenomenon that is probably significant for indebtedness and property prices in some other countries, but which does not appear to be particularly common in Sweden, is that private households invest in property to rent out. This occurs, for instance, in the United Kingdom and, probably to an even greater extent, in Australia, where loans for making investments comprise approximately one-third of the banks’ lending to households.1 The fact that households borrow money to buy property in addition to their own housing to rent out probably increases the risk of speculative elements in the price-setting. At the same time, it makes households more vulnerable to changes in interest rates and income. They also become more sensitive to changes in the balance of the rented property market. This means that the risk of substantial fluctuations in house prices is probably greater in countries where it is common to buy housing to rent out. There has thus been an increase in indebtedness internationally, parallel to a rise in property prices. As has been the case in Sweden, questions have arisen regarding the sustainability of this trend and what happens when interest rates rise. Developments in house prices and household indebtedness are regularly analysed in the Riksbank's Financial Stability Reports. Of course, any assessments of the valuation of the house market are connected with a large measure of uncertainty. However, the calculations we have made so far do not indicate that the pricing of houses in Sweden as a whole is significantly out of balance. Price trends can be explained fairly well by the increase in household incomes, the decline in interest rates and a low construction rate, despite strong demand. However, one should be aware that the rate of price increase varies substantially between different regions. House prices have increased at a much faster rate in metropolitan areas than in the rest of the country. The possibility that price increases may have been exaggerated in certain individual regions or markets cannot be ruled out, although developments in Sweden as a whole appear to be balanced. Indebtedness, house prices and inflation forecasts What significance do house prices and household indebtedness have for the Riksbank's inflation forecasts? The inflation forecasts are based on an analysis of the various driving forces behind domestic inflation and the international rate of price increase, imported inflation. Domestic inflation is largely governed by cost trends and by how total demand develops in relation to production capacity, that is to say, resource utilisation. Household consumption comprises a significant part of total demand and this is where indebtedness and house price trends mainly come into the forecast work. Household wealth plays an important role in the Riksbank’s assessment of how private consumption will develop. Wealth affects households’ consumption in several ways. To simplify, one can say there are two reasons why an increase in wealth, for instance in the form of an increase in the value of one’s own home, can be expected to lead to increased consumption. Firstly, the larger the wealth an individual has, the more he or she can consume during his or her lifetime. This is a traditional wealth effect. Secondly, the size of the wealth can affect the possibilities to obtain loans. This is usually called the balance sheet effect. The larger the collateral a household can offer for its loans, the greater the possibilities to borrow and thereby to consume. When the value of the property owned by the household increases, this also provides a possibility to take out further loans on the property, for instance, to extend or renovate and further increase the value of the property, or to consume other goods. Another effect is that a higher valuation provides the possibility to renew last mortgage loans as first mortgage loans and thereby reduce the interest costs for the loans. There is also empirical support for a positive correlation between wealth and consumption. Wealth also has significance for how strongly households are affected by interest changes. An adjustment in interest rates affects the price of households’ assets, such as housing and thereby wealth, and through this channel has an indirect effect on households’ consumption in the way I just have described. However, an adjustment in interest rates also has a direct effect on households’ purchasing power and willingness to incur debt via interest costs for borrowing. The speed and strength of the impact of an interest rate adjustment on households’ interest expenditure depends to a large extent, as I mentioned earlier, on the size of the debts, the percentage of the loans that are variable-rate loans and the average fixed-rate term for the loans at a fixed interest rate. The percentage of variable-rate loans increased during the 1990s and is currently around 35 per cent of the total debts. The larger the percentage of variable-rate loans a household has, the faster an                                                       1  See pp 15-17, Financial Stability Report 2004:1 BIS Review 51/2004 3 
interest rate adjustment will affect interest expenditure. The fact that indebtedness and house prices have increased should thereby have contributed to a more rapid and possibly also a stronger impact by monetary policy on household consumption demand than previously. Do the inflation forecasts contain all of the relevant information on house prices and indebtedness? As I mentioned earlier, the Riksbank’s monetary policy is normally based on forecasts of inflation one to two years ahead. Two important issues in this context are whether this is a sufficiently long time perspective and whether there are problems with the forecasting methods that lead to the effects of households’ increased indebtedness being underestimated. The reason why the Riksbank has chosen to focus on the inflation forecasts one to two years ahead is that this is the perspective in which monetary policy is assumed to attain a full impact. However, it is not possible to disregard expectations of how inflation and the real economy will develop beyond the two-year horizon. Sometimes shocks may occur that affect the economy for a much longer period than two years. This indicates that monetary policy should, in principle, also take into account whether events now, such as developments in household indebtedness and house prices, can be expected to have serious repercussions on the real economy and inflation in a longer perspective. However, at present there is no reason to believe that the developments in the housing market or household indebtedness entail a risk of creating shocks that would require special consideration in monetary policy. So what are the potential problems with regard to assessing how indebtedness and property prices affect inflation? Our forecasts are based on both calculations using economic models and more qualitative assessments of the factors expected to affect inflation. The theoretical models are usually based on households behaving in a rational manner. This involves households making plans for the future and building up expectations of future economic developments, and also there being no systematic errors in these expectations. It is not unlikely that households’ rationalism is in some cases overestimated in the formal models. If this is the case, the conclusions regarding the effects of, for instance, repo rate rises that are calculated using these models may be incorrect. One such example would be if households did not include in their calculations the fact that interest rates rise when economic activity strengthens and that indebtedness and house prices therefore were being pushed beyond sustainable levels. Something that can give rise to special problems in the forecast context is that changes in indebtedness and property prices have a tendency to reinforce one another over the economic cycle. Low interest rates make it cheaper to finance house purchases, which means that house prices rise. As the value of the collateral for households’ loans mainly consists of houses or tenant-owned apartments, the price increase in itself contributes to making it possible to borrow more money. Sooner or later, interest rates will rise and the question is what happens then. If indebtedness and house price trends during the upturn phase have been based on over-optimism and unrealistic expectations among lenders and borrowers, house prices may fall sharply and households may experience difficulty in meeting their interest payments. Demand in the economy can then fall substantially. It is difficult to completely capture a sequence of events where changes in different variables tend to reinforce one another in economic calculations. If the households have also been overly optimistic - irrational - in their expectations, it becomes particularly difficult to capture these effects. It is therefore important for forecasters to make more “qualitative” assessments in addition. Another reason for not trusting solely to formal models based on historical data is that the effects of structural changes that have taken place fairly recently can easily be underestimated. Let me give an example that to some extent captures these problems. During the years from the mid-1980s to the beginning of the 1990s, substantial changes were made in the economic structure and there was a clear correlation between the change in house prices and the change in household borrowing. The decline in house prices during the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s was largely due to an unfavourable combination of changes of both a structural and a cyclical nature. In connection with the deregulation of the credit markets during the second half of the 1980s, household borrowing increased substantially and the loans were largely used to buy houses. The fairly high and fluctuating inflation rate contributed to real interest costs after tax often being low, sometimes even negative, which in practice meant that one could at times make a profit from borrowing. At the beginning of the 1990s, the tax system was reformed, and this entailed a substantial reduction in the opportunities for deducting interest expenditure. Interest rates rose substantially at the same time, and 4 BIS Review 51/2004 
the Swedish economy was affected by an international economic slowdown. This had very negative effects on both household borrowing and house prices. Could a similar situation arise today? Although we have seen a rapid increase in both indebtedness and house prices in recent years, the present situation is quite different, with a low-inflation policy and thereby more stable economic environment. Nor have there been any extensive structural changes of a nature that would completely alter the conditions for households’ decisions on indebtedness and property purchases. Monetary policy takes account of other factors than inflation In principle, household indebtedness and developments in house prices could create problems for the payment system. This is something regularly analysed in the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Reports. The conclusion that can be drawn from the most recent report in June is that the risk of the household sector alone being able to create such large losses for the banks as to threaten the payment system is very slight. As I mentioned earlier, the assessment is that house prices over the country as a whole are reasonable. A special study of households in debt was included in the June report, and this showed that, on average, these households were assessed to have good margins for managing rising interest expenditure or increased unemployment. It is also worth mentioning that during the property crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, it was not the households that caused problems for the banks. As I mentioned earlier, the Riksbank, like many other central banks, conducts a flexible inflation-targeting policy. In addition to taking account of price stability, monetary policy may in certain cases wish to take into account developments in the real economy as a whole. This can mean, for instance, conducting a less aggressive interest rate policy and thereby allowing inflation to return to the target gradually after a disturbance to avoid excessive fluctuations in production and employment. In connection with the build-up of household debt and price trends in housing, there could be a situation where households may have based their decisions on incorrect expectations and the trend may have proved unsustainable, or that we see a tangible risk of this situation arising. This could lead to an adjustment process, where house prices fell heavily and there was a decline in the real economy as a whole. We explained in a clarification of monetary policy published in 1999 that, if we choose to take these considerations into account, we will clearly motivate our decision. If flexible inflation targeting functions well, it leads to smaller fluctuations in production, without this causing average inflation to rise. The scope for conducting such a policy is determined by households’ and companies’ confidence in monetary policy. If they have considerable confidence, there is little risk that inflation expectations will be affected if inflation should deviate temporarily from the target level. At present, I cannot see that real economy considerations could lead to the Riksbank wishing to deviate from the normal rule of thumb for monetary policy, given the current level of household indebtedness. My own assessment is that there does not appear to be any conflict between price stability and stability in the financial and real economy. The current situation Before I summarise what I have said tonight, I would like to briefly comment on my current perceptions of future inflation. Our assessment in the spring was that economic activity both in Sweden and abroad would continue to strengthen this year and over the coming two years. Inflation in Sweden was expected to be relatively stable over the coming year and then to increase gradually as resource utilisation rose in Sweden and abroad. The conclusion was that inflation would be in line with the target level two years ahead, and we therefore chose to leave the repo rate unchanged. At our meeting in August, there appeared to be reason to expect slightly more rapid growth in Sweden and abroad, which then gave reason to assume a higher figure for resource utilisation and inflation. However, we still anticipated that inflation would be in line with the target two years ahead. The conclusion drawn by the Riksbank in August with regard to future inflation still largely stands, in my opinion. However, there may be reason for some upward revision to the inflation forecast made in May, and perhaps even to the one made in August. One factor which could indicate a higher inflation rate, at least in the short term, is the high oil prices. Resource utilisation may also be slightly higher than anticipated in the coming years. One reason is the strong figures for Swedish growth that we have seen over the summer. Another is that fiscal policy will probably become more expansionary BIS Review 51/2004 5 
now. Inflation can nevertheless be expected to be in line with the Riksbank's target two years from now. This is also the picture painted in a speech by Riksbank Governor Lars Heikensten in London today. Conclusion Let me summarise what I have said this evening. Despite stock market fluctuations and a periodically weak economic climate, both household indebtedness and house prices have increased substantially, on a national level, in recent years. There have been similar developments in many countries, and households’ debts and interest payments as a percentage of disposable income are not remarkably high in Sweden. Although the debt ratio is approaching the high level prior to the financial crisis at the beginning of the 1990s, the low interest rates have meant at the same time that households' interest expenditure as a percentage of income has largely been halved since then. Our calculations also indicate that households with debts on average have a relatively good safety margin for interest rate rises and reductions in income. We therefore do not at present envisage any major problems for the household sector as a whole, even if interest rates rise significantly. However, this does not mean that problems will not arise for individual households in the case of higher interest rates. It is important that borrowers include rising interest rate expenditure in their calculations and carefully consider what level of indebtedness they can manage when interest rates sooner or later begin to rise. For this reason, we have emphasised in connection with our monetary policy decisions over the past six months that interest rates are at present low in a historical perspective and will need to be raised in the long run. With regard to house prices, the calculations we have made so far do not indicate that prices for housing in the country as a whole are substantially unbalanced. The developments can be explained fairly well by factors such as disposable income, living costs, construction costs and the fact that there is relatively little new building, despite strong demand. Supply is expected to increase at a slightly slower rate than demand over the coming years. My assessment is that at present no imbalances have been built up that could risk leading to a sharp fall in prices further ahead. However, the rapid increase in house prices and indebtedness occurring now is something we shall monitor closely. I would at the same time like to emphasise that monetary policy often involves difficult considerations. If I and my colleagues were to come to the conclusion that serious imbalances were building up in the economy in a way that threatened the stability of the payment system, or in a way that we felt would have serious consequences for the real economy in the future, we may want to take this into account when conducting monetary policy. However, so far, considerations concerning the effects of house prices and household indebtedness on other elements than inflation have only played a marginal role in monetary policy. 6 BIS Review 51/2004 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Towards creating an Islamic Financial System as an integral part of the International Financial System - strategies and challenges Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Asian Islamic Banking & Finance Summit, Kuala Lumpur, 21 September 2004. *      *      * “The integration of Islamic finance with international financial markets and institutions has demonstrated its viability, competitiveness, resilience and sustainability as a form of financial intermediation. This trend has contributed towards facilitating greater cross border flows in terms of increased trade and investment transactions thereby strengthening the global economic and financial linkages. As this international integration process intensifies, it not only raises the prospects for more balanced global growth but also allows for greater diversification of risks thus contributing towards greater global stability. At the core of this financial globalisation process is the robustness and resilience of the domestic Islamic financial system. The development of a sustainable Islamic financial system that is able to withstand the challenges of the uncertainties and instabilities inherent in the global financial system, thus not only requires an effective global financial architecture but a system that is also supported by an appropriate, comprehensive and sound domestic financial infrastructure. These mutually reinforcing structures would not only accentuate wealth creation and foster greater potential for trade but would also promote global financial stability and breakthroughs in new business relationships”.  Distinguished Guests, It is my honour to be invited to address this distinguished audience at this ‘Asian Islamic Banking & Finance Summit - Developing a Comprehensive Islamic Financial System’, organised by the Euromoney Seminars for the Asian region. While the overall development of Islamic banking and finance for more than three decades has been evolutionary, the pace has intensified in recent years. Islamic financial concepts have been incorporated into many financial products to meet the changing needs of consumers, businesses and investors. New Islamic financial institutions are being established ranging from the traditional banking institutions to more specialised financial institutions. This Islamic financial landscape has been supported by a well-developed regulatory, prudential, legal, accounting, framework and reinforced by the necessary research and development. Initiatives to promote greater awareness and education amongst Muslims and non-Muslims have also been intensified. In this recent decade, we have seen the financial globalisation of Islamic finance with the participation of both the authorities and the private sector. In the case of the former, attention has been given to developing the financial infrastructure, including the financial markets, institutions and agencies as well as establishing the necessary prudential and accounting standards. While the latter has included the borrowers, investors and institutions that participate in the process. Sovereigns, corporations and multinational and multilateral entities have accessed the international markets while the institutions and investors have been a source of financing. Indeed, these funds are either raised directly from international banking institutions or through bonds and equity issues in international markets. It has not only expanded the investor base, but reduced the cost of capital and enhanced its liquidity. By operating beyond their domestic borders, financial institutions also provide their services from different geographical locations. There has also been greater use of international financial institutions by corporations, households and funds to increase their ability to diversify their risks. Investments in the domestic economies have also been financed by foreign capital. International firms have also participated in local markets through Islamic based financial structures. With increased liberalization, there is also increased foreign presence in terms of foreign entry into the domestic financial system. This is an area where Malaysia is taking a step forward during the course of this year. The globalisation process has also taken place in terms of participation by firms in international capital markets through cross listings. My remarks today will focus on the strategies on the approach to accelerate the transition of Islamic finance towards being an integral part of the international financial system in terms of both the international financial architecture of the Islamic financial system and the development of a comprehensive domestic financial infrastructure. The establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) has been an important initiative in the development of the international Islamic financial architecture. It has been established to BIS Review 51/2004 1 
promulgate the international regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic financial institutions aimed at achieving best practices and to secure soundness and financial stability in Islamic finance. In this regard, the IFSB has already made progress in developing the prudential standards on the capital adequacy and risk management framework, and has commenced work on developing standards on corporate governance. Appropriate accounting standards have also been put in place to reflect the true and fair value of banking operations that would lead to greater accountability and responsibility on the part of financial institutions. While the Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) has made a significant contribution in formulating and issuing accounting and auditing standards for Islamic financial institutions, efforts need to be intensified to promote of the adoption of these standards. The International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM) further provides the environment that will encourage active participation by both Islamic and non-Islamic financial institutions in the secondary market for Islamic financial instruments. Several global sovereign sukuks have been issued in the international market that has attracted wide interest, both by Muslim and non-Muslim investors. The next phase in this development is the raising of funds from this market by multinational corporations and multilateral institutions. As the volume increases, it would strengthen the inter-linkages and integration amongst the Islamic financial centres. In addition to structuring a variety of attractive off-the-shelf instruments, efforts need to be intensified to create a benchmark curve for future issues. With a well-developed system, the trading of instruments would encourage the free flow of capital movements and would in turn facilitate greater Islamic fund management activities. As a platform to promote greater cooperation among Muslim countries and further promote IIFM, a proposal that can be explored is the creation of an Islamic universal bond, structured similar to the universally-accepted asset-backed Ijarah sukuk. Under this proposal, interested countries and selected organisations could be invited, where each country sells its assets to an SPV, which in turn would lease back the assets to the country. Proceeds could then be transferred to the participating country for the general purpose of socio-economic development. This could be an avenue for countries that have not secured stronger ratings to get more competitive funding. Indeed regional and multilateral entities would be well positioned to explore the viability of this proposal. The role of Shariah is one of the key elements that can spur the innovation process and enhance the global integration of the Islamic financial system. To effectively enhance Shariah governance, the understanding of the mechanics of finance by the Shariah experts is imperative to assist in the deliberation process in deriving a sound Shariah decision. The Shariah decision should then be made transparent. With such disclosure, the ability for others to appreciate the juristic reasoning based on contemporary analysis and logical inference of process could lead to wider acceptance of a Shariah decision, especially if it has implications on cross-border transactions.  With better understanding, the likelihood of a Shariah convergence is higher and this will enable the creation and trading of Islamic financial instruments at the international arena to be more universally accepted, as interpretations will be uniform and consistent. Harmonisation of the differing views among the scholars from different schools of thought is necessary to enhance the global development of Islamic banking and finance. I believe, at this juncture, the right approach is to advocate mutual respect in any Shariah discourse where there are differences in opinions, interpretations and practices.  To complement the efforts to create a sustainable and comprehensive Islamic financial system, consumer education and awareness on Islamic banking and finance should be extensively undertaken. Concerted efforts between the governments and Islamic financial fraternities should be engaged to develop such a consumer education programme. Such programmes would increase transparency on the virtues and availability of Islamic financial instruments offered by the Islamic financial institutions. How consumers can expect to benefit will depend on how well informed they are about the financial services being provided. Barriers across geographical boundaries can be removed by leveraging upon the advances on Information Communication Technology to create an integrated internet platform as means for the knowledge sharing on research findings, conference discussions, Shariah rulings and other vital information on Islamic banking and finance. Improvements can be made to the existing internet portals to be more comprehensive with linkages to other useful information providers. Equally important is the consumer protection infrastructure. An international financial information dissemination body should be set up to disseminate the development of Islamic banking and finance 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
worldwide. In addition, with greater disclosure and transparency on the manner in which Islamic financial transactions are being conducted and the risk and return profiles of the products, the role of market discipline in driving Islamic financial institutions towards ensuring Shariah compliance will be strengthened. This will ensure operational efficiency, strengthen risk management infrastructures and institute sound and dynamic risk management practices. As part of the process of enhancing inter-linkages with the rest of the world in the area of Islamic finance, Malaysia is also encouraging the domestic Islamic financial institutions to be more global by expanding beyond the domestic shores. With the experience that has been acquired in Islamic banking and finance that has been accumulated over more than three decades now, it is timely and desirable to extend this experience beyond our own borders. The domestic Islamic financial institutions would need to undertake feasibility studies and in-depth groundwork to identify new markets to expand their business operations, in particular with economies in which there is potential for greater economic linkages and integration.  As the pace of globalisation and liberalisation accelerates, securing financial stability and confidence has increased demands for more robust and resilient financial systems. While affected by some market instability and uncertainties, it has not, however, undermined the development of the global Islamic financial system that has now become an increasingly integral component of the international financial system. The approach to building a sustainable and progressive domestic Islamic financial system involves the creation of the key components comprising the Islamic banking industry, Islamic financial markets, the Islamic insurance or takaful market, and fund management industry given the strong linkages, inter-dependence and synergies among these components in the system. In addition, to the financial intermediaries and fund managers, other institutional players such as brokers, specialists and corporate treasurers also have important roles to play. Another area of focus is the growth of non-bank Islamic Financial institutions. In Malaysia, the first included Tabung Haji, the Pilgrim Fund Board. Other components include institutions such as waqaf, corporate zakat, investment trusts, mutual funds and inheritance management. This is part of wealth management that will become more significant as the domestic economy enters into its next level of development and as savings across borders becomes more institutionalized. This will become an important source of funding for productive investment, in particular for large-scale investments. New forms of financial structures may be developed for this purpose. In promoting Islamic finance in the Labuan offshore financial center, emphasis is being given to several of these areas, in particular, to promote the fund management industry including via the Labuan International Financial Exchange (LFX). Labuan will also be promoted as a center for waqaf administration. It will also promote the development and market acceptance of IIFM. In the LFX, dual listing and trading of capital market instruments are being undertaken, for both Islamic and conventional papers. This includes equities, debt instruments, bonds (sukuks), asset back securities and mutual funds. In addition, the Islamic capital market will be expanded through IIFM and strategic alliances with other stock exchanges. These offshore activities will thus complement the onshore activities. Not only has attention to be given to the financial infrastructure, the financial markets and to institutional development, but also to the regulatory, Shariah and legal dimension. The hallmark of a well-developed financial infrastructure is an effective legal, regulatory and supervisory framework which underpins the stability of the financial system. For the Islamic financial system, this framework also needs to be consistent with the requirements of the Shariah.  It is also recognised that good corporate governance reinforces sound regulation and supervision. This contributes towards maintaining market confidence, and strengthening transparency and accountability that is implicit in Islamic finance. Its emphasis is value-oriented and to promote fairness and justice with respect to all stakeholders of the financial institution. Transparency and disclosure is essential to this process. While the comprehensive and timely availability of financial information will increase market discipline, it also needs to be complemented with the ability of the market players to analyse, and appropriately interpret the information. Closely related to this issue is the need to strengthen the framework for consumer protection to provide an avenue for redress in the event of disputes.  Emphasis on improved corporate governance goes hand in hand with the need for improvements in risk management standards. Sound risk management practices will minimise adverse consequences BIS Review 51/2004 3 
faced by financial institutions during periods of uncertainty. Robust internal controls to provide qualitative standards are also necessary to complement the quantitative analysis of risk to provide the necessary checks and balances. In the area of Islamic banking, the requirement to manage the risks becomes more important because of the unique peculiarities in the contracts. Basel II has, to a certain extent, incorporated some aspects in the identification of risks, in particular the credit, market and operational risks that can be assimilated by the Islamic banks in terms of its product offering.  Another important pre-condition to sustain the continued growth of Islamic banking and finance is a comprehensive legal infrastructure for legal redress arising from disputes in Islamic financial transactions. The legal infrastructure needs to comprise both effective regulatory and substantive laws as weIl as appropriate adjudicative fora to resolve disputes relating to Islamic financial transactions. To address this, efforts are needed to develop a sufficient number of competent lawyers and judges that are equipped with sound knowledge and expertise in both Shariah and civil laws to deal with such matters. This would need to be supported by an efficient court system that can effectively deal with all Islamic banking and finance cases, whose decisions are enforceable over the range of financial issues. Above all, these pre-conditions have to be in conformity with the Shariah framework. Whilst it is necessary to have in place the market infrastructure, institutional players and the regulatory, Shariah and legal framework, it is still not sufficient in sustaining the robustness and dynamism of an Islamic financial system. To achieve this, the strong linkages and synergies especially among the components in the financial markets, namely, the money market, foreign exchange market and the capital market, have to be extensively capitalised. The Islamic money and foreign exchange markets are integral to the functioning of the Islamic banking system, firstly, in providing the Islamic financial institutions with the facility for funding and adjusting portfolios over the short-term and thus the necessary liquidity mechanism to promote stability, and secondly, serving as a channel for the transmission of monetary policy.  The inter-linkages in the functioning of the Islamic financial markets have brought about a natural environment for innovation of Islamic financial instruments. A broad spectrum of instruments, such as Government papers including bonds and treasury bills, Central Bank notes and Islamic accepted bills, can be structured on a Shariah-compliant basis to meet the needs of these markets. In addition, instruments for a risk mitigating mechanism for hedging or value protection need to be developed. While risk mitigation is desirable in Islamic finance, innovations need to be made for this purpose. To aid the process of developing the financial markets, Bank Negara Malaysia has recently developed a website on the Islamic money market as a source of information on domestic Islamic financial instruments and to facilitate investment decisions and secure public confidence in their investment. The website aims to effectively meet the needs of bankers, financiers, statisticians, economists and prospective investors as well as increase awareness of the users - domestic and foreign. Moving forward, the website will be linked with other markets to serve as a platform for exchanging information and knowledge beyond our borders. The existence of a well-developed capital market is also important to provide users of capital with an alternative and cost efficient source of medium and long-term financing. It would also provide investors and savers with a wider range of financial instruments to suit their individual return and risk profiles as well as allow for better diversification of risks in the financial system. One of the linkages in this market is asset securitisation. Mortgage financing is an example of where the asset liability mismatch can be addressed. This would substantially improve the liquidity and quality of assets of the banking institutions, while at the same time contribute towards promoting the development of the capital market and secondary trading of instruments through the issuance mortgage-backed private debt securities. Over the years, the scope of securitisation activities can evolve and expand with the introduction of securitisation of Islamic hire and purchase or leased assets ending with ownership, and other types of leased financing. At the core of a financial system of any country must lie an efficient and effective payment system as a means for clearing and settling payments. In modern economies, this function is already highly mechanised to support a sound and stable financial sector. It is vital that a real time settlement system for inter-bank funds transfer be implemented to reduce the credit and settlement risk in the financial system. It must be able to handle scripless debt securities trading, processing and settlement on a model that reduces counterparty risk. 4 BIS Review 51/2004 
Conclusion As Islamic finance advances forward to become an important integral component of the international financial system, efforts need to continue to strengthen further both the international architecture and to enhance international cooperation and collaboration as well as to develop the domestic financial system to meet the changing requirements of a highly dynamic and rapidly evolving environment. Malaysia will continue to play an active role in this process. In our quest to build a viable and sustainable Islamic financial system, the aim is to contribute to the channeling of capital flows to productive investments, create wealth and promote trading activities, with the activities undertaken not just among Muslims but with the rest of humanity, Insyaallah.  On that note, I wish you a successful conference. Thank you. BIS Review 51/2004 5 
David Dodge: Canadian monetary policy in an evolving world economy Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, Calgary, Alberta, 20 September 2004. *      *      * Good afternoon. I'm glad to be back in Calgary. We at the Bank of Canada welcome these opportunities to get out across the country, to speak to business people, and hear your perspectives on the economy. The feedback we receive from businesses from coast to coast is an important part of our monetary policy deliberations. I know that the staff of our regional office here in Calgary work hard to stay on top of local business conditions on the Prairies, as do our other offices for their regions.  I am happy to have the opportunity to meet with the national body of the Chamber of Commerce. I can tell you that my regular contacts with the Ottawa liaison group are very valuable to me. The Bank does look to the Chamber to help us understand how economic developments are unfolding at the industry level. And I particularly want to thank the Chamber for being an ongoing partner in our efforts to smoothly introduce three new high-denomination bank notes this year. This is the second straight year in which we have set up a currency-education kiosk at your annual meeting, to help spread the word about our new bank notes. You can learn about the security features that we have included in our high-denomination notes. And we have materials about our new $20 note that we unveiled last month, and which goes into circulation beginning next Wednesday, 29 September.  I should add that I'll be back here in Calgary on 13 October to unveil the new $50 bank note, which goes into circulation beginning in mid-November. During the past year, powerful forces have continued to shape the global economy. Alberta, and indeed all of Canada, have felt the impact of these forces. Of course, the evolution of the global economy is not a short-term event. Some of the forces currently at work have been building for years. Similarly, today's developments may have repercussions, and raise the need for adjustments, for years to come. So today, I want to talk about Canada's economic outlook and the prospects for monetary policy within the context of the evolving world economy. How the monetary policy framework works I will start with a brief review of our monetary policy framework. Let me remind you of the goal of Canadian monetary policy. Experience has taught us that the best contribution the Bank of Canada can make to good economic performance is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. By doing so, we can provide the backdrop that best allows our economy to grow in a strong and sustainable way.  We aim to keep inflation - as measured by the annual rate of increase in the consumer price index - at 2 per cent. It's important to note that we conduct monetary policy in a symmetric way. This means that we will raise interest rates to dampen total demand when we see that inflation is threatening to rise above our 2 per cent target over the next 18 to 24 months. In the same way, we will lower interest rates to stimulate demand when we see that the trend of inflation is poised to fall below the target. This symmetric approach to monetary policy has delivered an average rate of inflation that has been very close to 2 per cent since inflation targeting was adopted in 1991. It is also important to keep in mind that monetary policy actions take time to have their full effect. The lags are variable, but it typically takes a year and a half to two years for a change in interest rates to have its full impact on the economy and inflation. That is why we say that we need to be forward looking with our monetary policy, and that is why we are always trying to assess the state of the economy 18 to 24 months into the future. Specifically, we try to evaluate the various factors that will affect supply and demand, to help us estimate the future size of the output gap. What do I mean by "output gap?" That term refers to the difference between actual output - what the economy is producing - and potential output - the maximum amount the economy could produce without triggering higher inflation. Another way that we sometimes refer to this concept is to talk about how close the economy is to its production capacity. This idea is important because when economies operate above their capacity - or, as economists like to put it, there is excess demand and a positive output gap - inflationary pressures can build. But when economies operate below capacity - meaning that there is excess supply and a negative output gap - disinflationary pressures can set in. Ideally, we BIS Review 51/2004 1 
want to see the economy operating close to its capacity, with total demand roughly in balance with total supply. If we achieve this, we can have the best outcome over time - strong, sustainable growth that avoids booms and busts, along with rising employment and low inflation. One major problem is that we cannot directly measure potential output. Further, the economic data that measure actual output are often revised - sometimes significantly so. The challenge for us, then, lies in estimating the size of the output gap, and there is always a significant degree of uncertainty around that estimate. So we look at a number of other economic variables to help us form an opinion about how large the output gap is. You can find out more about these variables on our Web site. They include, among others, indicators of capacity in goods markets, signs of tightness in labour markets, and signals of pressures in the real estate market. Some of these are quantitative, and some are qualitative, based on surveys of businesses conducted by our regional offices. Another indicator is the rate of inflation itself. If core inflation - which strips out eight highly volatile components of the consumer price index - is consistently coming in above or below our expectations, it may lead us to adjust our view about the current size of the output gap. Earlier, I said that when the economy is operating near its capacity, total demand for Canadian goods and services - or what economists like to refer to as "aggregate demand" - is roughly in balance with total supply. Total demand has two components - domestic demand and foreign demand. Assessing foreign demand is difficult, but because it represents such a large share of total output in Canada, we at the Bank spend a great deal of time and effort trying to gauge that demand.  Of course, it is nothing new to say that our economy is importantly affected by events abroad. Canada has always relied on international trade. For a long time now, the United States has been the focus of attention in assessing the world economy. But many of today's global economic developments have their origins outside North America, most notably in Asia. Before I talk about their current implications, I would like to take a few minutes to discuss the nature of these developments and their likely implications over the next decade or so. The medium-term implications of global developments Just as Japan and Korea emerged as major players on the global stage in previous decades, China is now quickly becoming an economic powerhouse. And India is not far behind. When you consider that these two countries account for 40 per cent of the world's population, it is not hard to see why they are having such an impact on the global economy. As we look ahead, it is clear that China and India will be major global competitors, not just in labour-intensive industries, but increasingly in skill-intensive industries as well. It's a pattern of development that the world has seen before. Established firms in many industries will feel competitive pressure from China and India, until the large pool of surplus labour in those countries can be absorbed. But at the same time, this process will create income and wealth in China and India and, hence, increase their ability to buy more goods and services from abroad. So, the integration of these countries into the global economy represents both a competitive challenge and a tremendous opportunity for the industrialized world. These emerging markets are just that - markets. China is already one of the largest importers in the world and its importance will increase over the next decade. This source of growing demand can provide a much-needed boost to the global economy in general and to the Canadian economy in particular. We have already seen some Canadian commodity producers step in to fill the demand from Asia. Indeed, Statistics Canada recently reported that the value of Canadian exports to China in the first seven months of this year rose by 58 per cent compared with the same period in 2003.  There will also be opportunities for Canadian firms to integrate low-cost components into their own production processes, through direct investment or joint ventures. This will be an increasingly important way for Canadian firms to maintain cost competitiveness. Over the medium term, it will be absolutely crucial for all Canadian businesses and governments to continue to take advantage of these opportunities as they arise. At the same time, Canadian businesses and governments need to recognize that these global developments will require adjustments here in Canada. There will be some activities, particularly those that are labour-intensive and lower-value-added, where Canadian firms will not be well placed to compete with lower-cost producers in Asia. The key will be to adjust by shifting resources into expanding, higher-value-added activities, where Canadian firms can exploit the opportunities 2 BIS Review 51/2004 
presented by the changing world economy. By making these adjustments, we will be able to increase productivity and raise our standards of living over the medium term.  Of course, it is not just developments in Asia that will require us to make adjustments here in Canada. We will also have to adjust as the U.S. economy reduces the size of its fiscal and current account deficits. But the subject of adjustments to global imbalances is beyond the scope of my remarks today. What I can say, though, is that the Bank of Canada will facilitate whatever adjustments are necessary by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. This will help Canadian firms and individuals read market signals more clearly and allow them to make plans with confidence in the future value of their money. Near-term implications of global developments That's a look at the medium term, and it is important for business people and economic policy-makers to always keep an eye on the horizon. But, as you run your business from day to day, and as we at the Bank conduct monetary policy, it is the shorter-term developments that are the greater focus of attention. So, let me spend a few minutes on the near-term outlook for the world economy, and what that outlook implies for foreign demand for Canadian goods and services.  As I said before, the emergence of China and India is having an important impact on the Canadian economy through an increase in demand for many of the commodities that we produce. This has caused a run-up in the prices of nickel, potash, and steel, among others. And, in turn, this has boosted the income of many Canadian producers, even after taking into account the effects of the large appreciation of the Canadian dollar that we saw in 2003. Of course, the most high-profile price increase recently has been that of oil. Very rapid growth in Asia has led to unexpected additional demand for oil. For the time being, this unanticipated demand is putting pressure on a market that already had little spare capacity. Over the medium term, oil production will, in all likelihood, increase to meet this additional demand. But it takes time for new production to come on line. Thus, it is not unreasonable to think that oil prices will be higher in the near term than what we might expect them to be over the medium term. Our best judgment at the moment is that high levels of growth in Asia will continue over the next couple of years, and that demand for commodities will continue to grow, although perhaps not quite as rapidly as in the past couple of years. This is based on the not-unreasonable assumption that the Chinese authorities will be able to manage economic growth at a more sustainable pace.  While developments in Asia are likely to play a very important role in supporting continued strength in the global economy, developments in the United States will still have the largest impact on the volume of Canada's exports over the short term. As we said in our July Monetary Policy Report Update, recent data point to some slowing of U.S. growth from the red-hot pace of the second half of 2003 and the first quarter of 2004. Higher oil prices appear to be having some restraining effect on U.S. consumer spending, and both consumers and businesses seem to be somewhat less optimistic than they were earlier this year. Nevertheless, we still expect growth to be similar to what we forecast in July - that is, faster than the growth rate of U.S. production capacity. This strong U.S. growth bodes well for continued high levels of Canadian exports, although they are unlikely to continue to grow at the rapid pace of the first half of this year.  Consistent with this profile for solid U.S. and global economic growth and with the expectations of financial markets, we continue to assume some upward movement in global policy interest rates to moderate inflation pressures as output levels approach production capacity.  Canada’s economic prospects Let me now turn to Canada, beginning with a quick recap of the first half of 2004. At the start of the year, we said that we did not expect net exports - the difference between what we export and what we import - to make a significant contribution to Canada's economic growth in 2004 or 2005, because of the sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar last year. We also said that economic growth would have to come primarily from domestic demand in order to eliminate the excess supply that existed at the start of the year and to close the output gap. To facilitate growth in domestic demand, we reduced our key policy interest rate from 2 3/4 per cent to 2 per cent in three steps earlier this year. BIS Review 51/2004 3 
However, Canada's economic performance in the first half of 2004 turned out somewhat differently from our expectations. The volume of exports grew much more rapidly than we had anticipated. So did imports, but not to the same extent as exports. As a result, net exports made a very significant contribution to growth, and aggregate demand in the first half of the year grew more strongly than we had expected at the beginning of 2004. So the output gap at mid-year was smaller than we had projected. Indeed, the Bank judges that the Canadian economy is now operating close to its production capacity.  As we look ahead to the remainder of this year and to 2005, we expect that exports will grow more slowly than in the first half of 2004. But there are lots of uncertainties that cloud the outlook for foreign demand and Canadian growth. These include uncertainty about the western grain crop, the re-opening of the U.S. border to live cattle exports, and auto production, as the "Big Three" automakers face softer markets for their products. Despite these caveats, aggregate demand will likely grow at a rate equal to, or marginally above, the rate of growth of production capacity over the next four quarters.  With the economy currently operating close to capacity, we reduced the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy two weeks ago by raising our key policy interest rate to 2 1/4 per cent.  Inflation, both total and core, has been volatile in recent months, primarily because of swings in energy prices and because of automobile purchase-incentive programs. But despite this volatility, we continue to project that core inflation will be a bit above 1.5 per cent for the second half of 2004, before gradually moving up to the 2 per cent target in 2005. Looking forward, we will need to continue to reduce monetary stimulus to avoid a buildup of inflationary pressures and to contribute to sustainable, solid economic growth. However, the pace of our actions will depend on our continuing assessment of the evolving prospects for pressures on capacity and inflation. In this context, there are several key factors that the Bank will be watching closely. As always, there is uncertainty about the exact size of the output gap. There is also considerable uncertainty at this time about the future growth rate of both exports and imports, and about the evolution of world prices for energy and non-energy commodities. And we will be watching the impact of geopolitical developments on global confidence and demand. We will update our outlook for the Canadian economy in our next Monetary Policy Report, which will be published on 21 October. Conclusion Let me conclude by going back to my earlier point about the need to adjust to changes in the world economy. We can be certain that the powerful global economic forces I spoke of today will continue to be felt as the world economy continues to evolve. This evolution will lead to challenges that we must face, but it will also lead to opportunities that we must seize. At the Bank of Canada, we will continue to monitor these global forces closely and assess their impact at home and abroad. This will help us contribute to Canada's future economic prospects through low and stable inflation.  For Canada to grow and prosper over the long run, Canadian businesses and governments will need to make the right adjustments to the evolving world economy. As leaders in the business community, your job will not be easy. But over the past several years, we have seen ample evidence that you can face challenges and take advantage of opportunities. I am confident that you will continue to do so in the future. 4 BIS Review 51/2004 
Amando M Tetangco: The importance of risk profession and sound risk management practices Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the 2004 Convention of the Professional Risk Managers’ International Association Philippine Chapter, at the Asian Institute of Management, Manila, 13 September 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I am pleased to speak today at this important event - the 2004 Philippine Risk Convention. I wish to congratulate AIM-JBF (Asian Institute of Management-Jose B. Fernandez) Center for Banking and Finance and the Professional Risk Managers’ International Association for organizing and sponsoring this gathering; the number of participants speaks well of the great interest in risk management and the risk profession. My topic is the importance of the risk profession and sound risk management practices in the Philippines. The risk profession is an area that has become a growth industry; and it is the one that is particularly relevant to banks given their fiduciary functions, the complexity of risks inherent in their working environment, and the stability and efficiency of the payments and settlement system which greatly rest on them. Allow me to tackle this presentation from the perspective of the BSP, both as a regulator of the Philippine financial institutions and an institution which in itself is an end-user and a staunch promoter of risk management. The BSP performs a dual role. First, as the county’s monetary authority, the BSP sees to it that the monetary policy is supportive of its mandate of maintaining price stability conducive to balanced and sustainable economic growth. Second, as the regulator of financial institutions, the BSP seeks to promote the soundness of the financial system, which in turn, would support overall macroeconomic stability and growth. I would first focus on the current and future thrusts of the BSP in line with the second role as they relate to risk management and then proceed to the importance of risk management, risk profession and risk management practices. The need to change regulatory approach A crucial moment in the development of risk management occurred in February 1995 when it was announced that the Barings PLC, the oldest bank in England had lost over GBP600 million and was insolvent as a result of the derivative trading activities of a single trader in Singapore. At the time of its collapse, Barings was known to be very conservative, well capitalized and historically profitable. The Barings case brought to light that the real issue was not derivatives per se, but the quality of management and control required in modern financial environment. The collapse called into question the strength of existing internal controls in the investment industry and the aptness and adequacy of external monitoring done by the exchanges and regulators. The event demonstrated very clearly that their existing regulatory frameworks were no longer appropriate for the continuously changing and complex market environment. This led to a critical reassessment of the regulatory approach and brought changes in the banking supervision approaches by the Bank of England and other regulators around the world. Financial regulatory initiatives in Philippines on internal risk management The BSP, for its part, in its role as bank supervisor has taken a number of initiatives to improve internal risk management among banks by adopting the Basel framework. In March 2001, the BSP adopted the original Basel I through Circular No. 280. This Circular provided the guidelines for the computation of risk-based capital for credit risk. This was further enhanced by the issuance of Circular No. 360 in December 2002 incorporating market risk into the risk-based BIS Review 50/2004 1 
capital framework. We also issued Circular No. 400 in September 2003, extending the risk-based capital adequacy requirement to Quasi-Banks. The BSP’s focus on supervision is ultimately intended to give banks greater flexibility to respond to challenges and changing opportunities under a more deregulated and globalized environment and amidst rapid technological advances. Traditional bank supervision tended to instruct banks to avoid risks that seem too high. The new approach to supervision favors assessment of the quality of risk management practices, and generally allows banks to take risks so long as they demonstrate the ability to assess, measure and manage them. We believe that a good first step to good risk management is good corporate governance. We have thus issued a number of guidelines instituting good corporate governance. These include laying down the guidelines to govern the responsibilities and duties of the board of directors (Circular No. 130, June 1997); requiring banks to develop and implement a compliance system and appoint/designate a compliance officer to oversee implementation (Circular No. 145, October 1997); implementing the fit and proper standards for directors and officers of banks and non-banks including the requirement for a mandatory orientation program on corporate governance (Circular No. 296, September 2001). This year, the BSP issued anew a number of guidelines that aimed to further enhance the risk management practices in banks. In January, the BSP issued the guidelines for managing large exposures and credit risk concentrations of banks (Circular No. 414). Also in the same month, the BSP issued the guidelines for the capital treatment of banks’ investment in credit-linked notes (CLNs) and similar credit derivative products (Circular No. 417). In April 2004, the BSP issued guidelines for the treatment of compliance risk and to further strengthen banks’ compliance function (Circular No. 429). And more recently, in June 2004, the BSP issued the guidelines for the development and implementation of banks’ internal risk rating systems(Circular No. 439). Journey to Basel II The simplified approach of Basel I has been successful in boosting capital levels in the global banking system from what were considered uncomfortably low levels throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s. Its major shortcoming, however, is that the “risk weights” poorly represent the likelihood of sustaining losses and such lack of risk sensitivity can lead to misallocation of scarce financial resources and hamper long-term economic growth. The New Capital Accord otherwise known as Basel II, formally unveiled last June 26, is seen to make capital requirements to be more risk sensitive than Basel I. It allows greater reliance on the banks’ internal systems for setting the capital requirements. More importantly, it provides incentives for banks to continuously improve their risk management practices. However, Basel II poses challenges to Philippine Banks and the BSP. Banks will have to develop a more disciplined, rigorous, and auditable approach to risk assessment. This challenge has many dimensions and technology will only address some of them. For the BSP, our challenge is to build up technical knowledge and supervisory resources to validate bank’s risk management systems. We will also need to examine our existing charter to see to it that we have the necessary powers to implement Basel II, particularly Pillar 2. The risk management standards and practices embodied in Basel II are real and are drawn from the best practices of large internationally active banks. It reflects the many insights gathered through practical experience, including both successes and failures in risk management. It contains many useful lessons and can serve as a good roadmap on how to improve internal risk management. However, we acknowledge that not all aspects of Basel II will be of use to every bank. For example, some of the quantification tools used in large complex institutions may not be necessary for the smaller and less sophisticated institutions. And some risks inherent in the activities of banks which are internationally active may be remote to those which are merely active domestically. This is the reason for modifying the Philippine framework by taking into account, the local banks’ state of readiness, local conditions and practices consistent with the nature, complexity and materiality of the local institution’s activities. This is also the reason for providing a breathing space for thrift and rural banks in implementing Basel II. 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
The BSP has lined up certain projects which involve the study of the applicability of certain Basel II requirements to local conditions. These projects are expected to culminate in a set of comprehensive guidelines for banks which we plan to release not later than end-2006, for implementation in 2007. As you may be aware, Pillar 1 of Basel II proposes standard and advance approaches to credit and operational risks. Universal/commercial banks are expected to implement the standardized approaches to Basel II by 2007. However, implementation of the more advanced approaches is not expected to occur until perhaps 2010 to allow banks time to build-up reliable historical database to estimate default probabilities and other variables as important inputs to the advanced models. Foreign banks whose head offices are using the advanced approaches, will be allowed to use them provided that they can show that their models are suited to domestic conditions. With regard to Pillar 2, we will continue to push banks to improve their risk management practices and risk assessment capabilities and corporate governance. With respect to Pillar 3, the appropriate disclosure requirements under Basel 2 are targeted by 2007. BSP’s view of the importance of risk management and sound risk management practices On the topic of the importance of the risk profession and risk management practices in the Philippines, I believe this could be best approached by presenting our views on the significance of risk management and our expectations from risk managers. • Risk management is more than a regulatory reporting and compliance exercise; it is a necessary risk-reducing tool to promote long-term profitability and stability of the firm and enhance the competitive advantage of firms. We encourage banks to have the flexibility to use their internalmodels not merely for computing the level of capital needed to absorb possible losses inherent in their activities, but to encourage them to make rational decisions on the basis of risk and return considerations. Good internal models provide timely information on how much risk the bank is taking in order to achieve specific business objectives. Internal models must also allow banks to compare and select, on a timely basis, from among the alternative business opportunities or strategies not solely from the profit angle but also from a risk standpoint. The Philippine adoption of Basel II will certainly obligate banks to cover more types of risks and on the basis of our calculations, the banks’ capital requirements will surely increase with said adoption. However, if a bank has right risk management systems that can effectively capture the risk exposures, there is an opportunity for them to lower their capital charges. As financial markets progress towards the market transparency mechanism that is promoted under Pillar 3, risk management will be seen as a potential differentiator and a source of competitive advantage. Ultimately, it will reward banks that manage their risks effectively, and penalize those that do not. Good risk management practice is thus even more essential for banks to maintain competitiveness over the long run. • Corporate governance is not a mere risk compliance measure; It is vital to the institution’s health. As far as the banking industry is concerned, corporate governance relates to the manner in which businesses and affairs of the individual banks are directed and managed by the board of directors and senior management. It provides the structure though which the objectives of the institutions are set, the strategy of attaining those objectives is determined and the performance of the institution is monitored. Corporate governance is essential to the institution’s health. It seeks to meet legal requirements and uphold fiduciary responsibilities to investors, creditors and depositors. It attracts and retains good senior management, officers and employees. It also makes the organization attractive to investors, clients and business partners. Equally important, corporate governance reduces exposure to reputational risks or the potential that a negative publicity regarding an institution’s business practices will cause a decline in the customer base or lead to costly litigation. • Risk management matters are necessary parts and parcel of sound strategic planning. BIS Review 50/2004 3 
The need to include risk management in strategic planning cannot be overemphasized as we have seen a number of banks getting into trouble where the root cause can be traced to inconsistencies between the bank’s strategic goals and risk management objectives or simply the lack of risk management objectives. Sound strategic planning should involve not only setting targets such as revenue, assets under management, and the number of new accounts, but also include the establishment of control and risk management systems. Specifically strategic planning should lead to an objective assessment of the institution’s risk profile and highlight areas of strengths and weaknesses. It should help the firm determine the risks it wants exposure to, the risk it cannot avoid, risks that the firm is not prepared to face and the risks it can reduce. Strategic planning should involve the use of internal risk assessment as such could uncover natural hedges, or countercyclicalities, that exist across different businesses of a firm. Such knowledge helps the firm focus on its net exposures and more effectively allocate resources. Risk assessment often results in a better understanding of the internal and external environment, which can be a source of competitive advantage by the uncovering of business opportunities or the early assessment of threats which in turn allow the firm to have competitive lead over less informed competitors. • Stress testing enhances management of risks. Many of us here today may wish that we have the ability to predict with certainty when the next crisis will strike. Regrettably there appears to be no existing technology that would allow us to predict it with accuracy. However, we can prepare for it well in advance it if we know how it would impact on us, if and when it comes, and plan in advance the right level of resources to withstand it. We can do this if we have the capability to perform on a regular basis, the suitable stress testing and scenario analyses. • A proactive risk culture must exist in an institution to ensure effective risk management A proactive risk culture means there is awareness of risk within an institution which permeates the actions and words of all the members of the firm. This can be done through regular risk awareness activities, education, open communication lines among units/groups concerned, and continuous interaction with senior management. When considering the importance of risk culture, it may be asked why some firms fared better than others at risk management. Nick Leeson’s actions at Barings would have been less likely if a meaningful “risk culture” had been in place which institutionalized management oversight, upheld segregation of duties, and permitted closer monitoring of the trading in books that appeared to be profitable. Risk culture is important today because the complexity of modern financial instruments makes it possible for even a single, unsupervised trader to gamble and lose, the entire capital of a firm. A good example of recent failure of risk culture is that of the National Australia Bank. In January of 2004, the National Australia Bank(NAB), Australia’s largest bank and second biggest company was reported to have lost $360 million in foreign currency trading. A report released by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority attributes the losses to the four currency options traders who, possessed of an abundance of self confidence, positioned the NAB’s foreign currency options portfolio in the expectation that the fall in the US dollar that occurred mid last year would reverse and that volatility would eventually stabilize. Rather than closing their positions as the market moved against them, the traders chose to conceal their true positions - allowing those positions to deteriorate unchecked over a period of three months before they were finally discovered. The traders were able to paint a rosy picture of P&L and masked losses by amending trades and using fictitious trades. By the time they were discovered, the positions held were totally out of control. The report highlighted that the risk control failures have more to do with poor implementation than poor design. On paper, NAB’s existing control framework should have been able to identify and contain risk positions of the traders. There are many layers to NAB’s internal control framework, the risk management group and the board included, but they failed at every level to detect and shut-down the irregular currency options trading activity. The NAB’s internal governance model, which should have enabled timely identification and effective and 4 BIS Review 50/2004 
quick escalation of serious risk issues on the currency options desk, simply did not function. Had the risk control framework been implemented effectively, the losses would certainly have been substantially less, or quite possibly, averted altogether. Expectations from risk managers • Risk management team requires diverse set of skills and knowledge. The many complex risks across an organization are too varied for any one discipline to claim mastery over. As the role of risk management is complex and comprehensive, the ideal risk management team must be made up of multiple individuals, with different sets of skills and knowledge to effectively address the risks confronting the institution. Integrating staff from such areas as trading, research or financial control and legal, can enhance the group’s understanding of the business implications of risks, and its ability to interact with other areas that either feed the risk analysis process or are affected by its results. • Risk management team must be independent of business units but needs to interact and communicate with other parts of the firm. Risk management needs to be performed as an independent function, sponsored and supported by senior management. The group in particular needs to be separate from the business units such as front office, otherwise there would be conflicts of interest and firm’s risk would not be independently measured. However, this independence is a delicate balancing act because the risk management group needs to communicate with the business and operations groups to have a clear understanding of their views on the markets, products, positions, strategies and operational procedures before it can accurately assess risks. In addition to business units, the risk management group would also have to interact with other internal and external entities, typically, the senior management, financial control, operations, legal/compliance units, regulators, auditors, rating agencies, investors and clients. To illustrate some of these interactions, risk management and financial control (accounting) must have a close relationship since performance evaluation is no longer confined to simply reporting returns and total profit figures, but has increasingly incorporated the measure of risks taken. And since financial control maintains the books and records with respect to P&L while the risk control group has responsibility for risk data, the two departments must invariably work together. Further, public and supervisory reports used to require disclosure on the traditional financial accounting information only; however under Pillar 3, banks may be required to make public certain material risks information such as tier capital. In order to ensure consistency in providing regulatory and public reports, the financial control and risk group must necessarily share the same database. External auditors in other countries now frequently include an assessment of risk management in the annual audit, in part because of the trend to include risk management information in the annual report and to comply with the regulatory approach of ensuring the soundness of the financial institution. With the adoption of the Basel II Framework, we expect this trend to grow globally, including in the Philippines. The risk management group must hence work closely with the auditors to demonstrate clearly the measurement methodology used, as well as the completeness of the supporting procedures. • Risk managers must look beyond organization’s boundaries. The corporate demises of Enron and WorldCom have shown the need to achieve the organization’s vision, mission and objectives under any stress or extreme events. The proactive risk manager must therefore look beyond the organization’s boundaries and assess the impact of its action on the wider environment where the firm operates, including those of its stakeholders, i.e., customers, employees, retirees, suppliers, communities, borrowers, creditors and regulators. BIS Review 50/2004 5 
Speaking of regulators, internationally active banks need to take into account regulations in the various jurisdictions in which they operate, and the fact that regulatory standards may shift over time. • Risk managers must be effective communicators and leaders in the organization. The risk manager must be well versed in the risk management process and be able to effectively communicate and lead the processes within the organization to mitigate exposure to business risks. In support of this he must have a good understanding of the environment and community served by the organization, the operations of different units and relationship between different levels of the organization. • Risk managers must address corporate governance issues and contribute to improved corporate governance. The increased anxiety among shareholders due to the celebrated cases of accounting scandals and corporate bankruptcies have highlighted the need for good corporate governance. Corporate governance has become an issue for a growing number of risk managers who are now given an active role in managing corporate governance standards. Risk managers are therefore expected to address corporate governance issues and contribute to improved corporate governance to prevent losses and enhance long-term sustainability of the organization. • Risk profession must embrace good business ethics. Allow me to tackle this subject by way of Enron’s experience with risk management. Enron maintained a risk management function with capable employees. Lines of reporting were reasonably independent in theory, but less so in practice. The group’s mark-to-market valuations were subject to adjustment by management and in this context, the mark-to-market accounting became a mark-to-model accounting. The traders who were performing the trades, too, had considerable influence on how the deals were marked-to-model. With their bonuses depending upon the profitability of the deals, there was an unaddressed conflict of interest. Trading businesses were generating considerable profits, but much of these were dubious mark-to-model profits. Enron maintained a fluid workforce. Employees were constantly on the lookout for their internal transfer. Those who rotated through risk management were no different. A trader or structurer whose deal a manager scrutinized one day might be in a position to offer that risk manager a new position the next. Astute risk managers were careful not to burn bridges. Risk managers knew that they would suffer if they blocked deals or did not support the favorable management-approved mark-to-model valuations. Even worse, risk managers were subject to Enron’ “rank and yank” system of performance review. Under that system, anyone could contribute feedback on anyone, and the consequences of a bad review were high. Risk managers who blocked deals could expect to suffer in “rank and yank”. Risk management, thus, became little more than a rubber stamp and a stepping stone for employees moving around the company. The Enron’s case clearly describes the importance of ethics in risk management profession and the consequences of the lack of it. A code of ethics which sets forth a discipline of moral duty and conduct in support of the demanding standards of risk management profession must necessarily be in place. At the minimum, the code of ethics should cover the standards for integrity and dignity, trust, confidentiality, competence and professional practice. Conclusion To conclude, in the longer term, the power of computers to create and analyze huge databases will change the very nature of risk management. Real time, on-line risk analysis and reporting, scenario analysis and stress testing will become more and more standard tools for day- to- day operations. But more important than these sophisticated systems is the development andadherence of institutions to good corporate governance ? one that permeates a proactive risk culture. We believe that this is the first step to good risk management which an institution can implement even in the absence of sophisticated systems. If one has a good risk management process that it follows strictly, then the institution has a better chance of preventing the occurrence of losses even during extreme events. 6 BIS Review 50/2004 
The requirements of Basel II are amazing even for the sophisticated risk professional. Not only does he need new set of improved risk techniques and technology, he also needs to unlearn old traditional techniques that have now became obsolete or unreliable. He needs to be constantly aware of new market developments, good or bad, and learn from the experiences and mistakes of others. Not only that, the Basel world would require vast amount of data inputs, analysis and reporting that would place pressure on the risk professional to do a better job. Our views on risk management and our high expectations from risk practitioners as presented, point to the varied and difficult roles that the risk professional must play. It is incumbent upon him to be prepared for them and accept the challenge. The lessons learned from the financial disasters, some them I mentioned here, and the challenging tasks on the road to Basel II, the need to integrate risk management in strategic planning to maintain competitive advantage and ensure company long-term survival, - all these highlight the growing importance and broadening application of risk management and consequent increased challenges for risk management practitioners. In playing these increasingly challenging roles, risk practitioners, in whatever capacity he/she is in ? as an in-house risk manager or risk specialist or an external risk management adviser-- may be faced with key issues as lack of independence, lack of competence in specific areas, unclear scope of responsibility, unclear legal or contractual liability, conflict of interest, inconsistency of treatment and approaches, inadequate or inappropriate risk management tools and processes, and uncertainty of the results of advise or recommendation. Therefore, in order to face these issues squarely, it would be ideal to have a professional approach to risk management by instituting a system of guidance as to the appropriate and standard behavior, work practices and ethics to observe in the provision of risk management services, and a framework or benchmark for a professional risk management service. It is also important to have a system of qualification, training and education as well as a forum to share experiences and ideas to improve competency among risks management practitioners. These are our views on the importance of risk profession and sound risk practices employed in the Philippines. May I clarify, nonetheless that most suggestions here also apply to non-bank entities. Let me re-emphasize that risk management is not merely for compliance, but is a vital aspect of protecting and enhancing an institution’s corporate image, gaining competitive advantage and ensuring its long-term viability. Thank you.  BIS Review 50/2004 7 
Kishori J Udeshi: Issues in bank regulation and supervision  Speech by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a seminar on Global Banking: Paradigm Shift, organised by the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industries, Bangalore, 16 September 2004. *      *      * FICCI has been in the forefront of creating a platform for healthy debate and discussion leading to responsible actions. I would like to thank FICCI for inviting me to speak at this Forum especially as there are several high level functionaries who have travelled great distances to be with us on this occasion. It is a wonderful opportunity and I would certainly use it to explore a few issues at the frontiers of regulation and supervision. Some of these are unsettled issues and the raising of issues is essentially with a view to encouraging debate as it is only through debate and dissent that we can aspire to achieve meaningful progress. I would, therefore, stress that the raising of unsettled issues at the frontiers should not be perceived as a statement of an official stance of the Reserve Bank of India. While much of the issues are raised from an Indian perspective, I would also like to glean some thoughts from experience abroad.  In recent years the blurring of the distinction between financial intermediaries under the combined effect of domestic and cross-border integration, innovations in instruments and processes, advances in technology and the massive volumes of capital intermediated by the financial system has necessitated a pro-active strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework.  The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing entry of some of the bigger banks into other financial segments like merchant banking, insurance, etc., which has made them financial conglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversified presence across major segments and possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring large enough proportions to have systemic impact make it imperative for supervision to be spread across various segments of the financial sector. Banks have grown organically beyond the national frontiers and spread across the globe. With liberalisation in trade in services, banks are also able to render banking services across territories even without the need for physical presence in those territories. These aspects add other dimensions to the challenges of regulation and supervision of the banking system.  Recent measures by RBI  I would now turn to some of the issues on which the RBI has taken action in the recent period. As part of a move towards greater deregulation, banks fulfilling certain minimum criteria regarding CRAR and net NPAs have been given the discretion to pay dividend without the prior approval of the RBI. In view of the ongoing shift towards financing borrowers based on estimated cash flows rather than on collateral and in recognition of the availability of financial assistance through credit substitutes, viz., commercial paper, bonds and debentures, the restriction on unsecured exposures was withdrawn and banks’ boards are allowed to formulate their own policies on unsecured exposures. Banks are not required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank for engaging in insurance agency business or referral arrangement without any risk participation, subject to their complying with the prescribed conditions. Banks intending to set up insurance joint ventures with equity contribution on a risk participation basis or making investments in insurance companies for providing infrastructure and services support, however, still require prior approval of the RBI.  Various issues which received regulatory attention during the recent period include ownership and governance in banks, further progress towards international best practices in prudential norms with country-specific adaptation, greater deregulation and rationalisation of banking policies, compliance with Know Your Customer (KYC) norms, strengthening the financial system for global integration in the light of the ongoing liberalisation of the capital account, greater inter-regulatory co-ordination and the drive for improving the quality of public services rendered by banks. In the evolution and implementation of policy, a consultative approach continues to be followed through formal institutional structures such as the Board for Financial Supervision, the newly-formed Standing Committee on Financial Regulation, the Technical Committee on Money and Government Securities Markets and also through specific working groups and committees as well as formal and informal consultations with the regulated entities, external experts and professionals. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Transparency and disclosure Transparency has been the watchword in our endeavour to promote best practices. Moreover, transparency is crucial to a well functioning financial system. The RBI recognises the need to align standards adopted by the Indian banking system with global standards. The Reserve Bank has issued detailed guidelines relating to several Accounting Standards. Banks are required to ensure that there are no qualifications by the auditors in their financial statements for non-compliance with any of the accounting standards. We recognise that the banking sector will need to adjust to more exacting valuation rules. Again, rules on disclosure will need to be exacting, including disclosure on penalties or adverse action by the supervisory authority. The financial sector has to recognise that exacting standards of disclosure are necessary to strengthen the financial sector and there is a world-wide move to such disclosures.  In recognition of the importance of dissemination of credit information, the RBI requires banks/DFIs to obtain the consent of all their borrowers - not only defaulters - for dissemination of credit information to enable Credit Information Bureau of India Ltd., to compile and disseminate comprehensive credit information. Preserving the integrity of the banking system Prevention of frauds and implementation of anti money laundering (AML) measures are two important aspects of the efforts being made to prevent criminal misuse of the financial system which threaten the stability of financial transactions worldwide. Supervisory initiatives Keeping in view the emerging scenario under the Basel II accord and the need to use supervisory resources more productively, a beginning towards risk-based supervision (RBS) of banks has been made. On the basis of experience gained this will be extended to the entire banking system and will become an essential aspect of Pillar 2 compliance. Risk management systems I would now like to flag a few issues - some of which are purely exploratory and are raised for debate rather than as a statement of the official stance. As you are all aware, we are positioned at a crucial juncture because the current phase will be the time when risk management skills of financial entities will be put to test.  The liquidity overhang in the system coupled with the past downward movement of interest rates seems to have spurred a sense of complacency oblivious of the downside risks of an adverse interest rate movement. It is also apprehended that this attitude has led some banks to dilute their approach to credit risk. The building of the risk elements into the pricing of the credit facilities is reportedly taking a backseat in the pursuit of asset expansion. This may leave banks in a situation where some of the players are not only less prepared to face the reversal of interest rate movement, but are also left with a badly priced portfolio in relation to the credit quality. I would like this aspect to be appreciated not so much as a note of alarm but as a voice of prudence. Credit growth should be carefully calibrated with risk measurement and should not be merely seen as deployment of funds at marginal costs in the background of sluggish growth. Banks should look ahead at the expansion of credit portfolio in a healthy way, particularly in the background of higher industrial growth, new plans of corporate expansion and higher levels of infrastructure financing. Coupled with this are the regulatory requirements of management of market risks, which are becoming increasingly relevant. As we are all well aware, the adverse effects of risk exposures do not impact independently but tend to snowball into an avalanche. These are perhaps the times when market players begin looking for some concessions in the prudential norms, regulatory forbearance and dilution of accounting principles. So what would one make of such a situation?  • That the most ill prepared players make the loudest noises or • The weakest ones make the first noise? 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
What is the lesson to be learnt from this? Is it not time for banks to adopt integrated risk management systems whereby they effectively address all relevant risks in an ongoing and comprehensive manner? Should banks not think in terms of having a Chief Risk Officer who oversees all risks - credit, liquidity, operational and market risks?  Moreover, while banks may have adopted risk management systems for their various portfolios, very few, if any, have developed risk models suited to their operations. It occurs to me that India is the cradle of IT professionals who are doing wonders and are providing efficient solutions to their clients across the world. It is also a matter of pride that some Indians are at the helm of the affairs at some of the large global banks. In these circumstances, it is surprising that the banks in India are lagging behind in tapping the IT potential of the country and putting them to productive use for developing / applying risk models. As compared with the potential available in this country, the extent of application of the talents in banks is relatively low, especially when the benefits to be derived from them are tremendous.  A concurrent question that emerges is whether banks should think in terms of disclosing to the investors at large their risk management policies indicating also their risk containment practices and strategy pursued by the bank, on the same lines of statements made by Chairmen of large corporates. At present, such disclosures cannot be made mandatory considering the level of maturity of the financial sector and the levels of assimilation of information by the stake holders and the public.  Banks confident of pursuing a well defined strategy taking into account their clear strengths should articulate their philosophy of running their banks in their annual reports. Encouraging banks to do so should certainly help in improving the perception of the concerned banks in the eyes of the public and the market. It should, however, be a well thought out step, considering that the bank’s major asset is the trust reposed by the public at large and nothing should be done to undermine that level of confidence. We have recently issued guidelines to banks for maintenance of capital charge for market risks. In addition, banks will also be required to draw up their strategies for meeting the capital requirement arising out of implementation of Basel 2. Banks have been until now tapping the traditional instruments eligible for capital status, namely equity shares and subordinated debt instruments. The present legal framework does not allow all banks to raise capital through issue of preference shares. There are also certain restrictions on the maximum tenure of preference shares. This not only gives rise to an uneven playing field but also raises issues pertaining to the eligibility of redeemable preference shares for capital status, especially with regard to inclusion under Tier I or Tier II. In view of the above uncertainties this has been a largely untapped source of capital in India. With a view to enabling banks to tap this source the Reserve Bank is examining the amendment of the existing legislation. Through proper structuring, preference capital may be made attractive to meet the needs of a section of investors. We need to explore carefully this option as also the raising of capital through other hybrid instruments defined under the Basel guidelines, so as to address the requirements of capital by the banking sector in India.  This brings me to consolidation in the banking sector. As you are aware, the First Narasimham Committee had recommended consolidation in the Indian banking sector whereby we would have a few internationally active banks, a few national banks and the others would remain regional banks. It was also clarified that the mergers should be based on synergies and locational and business specific complementarities of the concerned institutions and must obviously make sound commercial sense. Mergers of public sector banks should emanate from the managements of banks with the Government as the common shareholder playing a supportive role. In this background, the implementation of Basel 2 could trigger a round of consolidation in the banking sector. It is difficult to foresee the precise pattern of consolidation which is likely to be triggered with the implementation of Basel 2 in India. As we have seen in the past, in any merger integrating the manpower and culture of the taken over bank with the manpower and culture of the host bank proves to be a great challenge. It is only when integration in these aspects is achieved successfully that the merged entities would be able to capitalise on the synergies. Hence, while the consolidation moves would be triggered by market forces, it will be necessary to ensure that mergers are successful in all respects, including manpower and cultural aspects, which are unique in the Indian context.  Smaller localised banks might nonetheless still have a relevant role even on a standalone basis if they were to redefine their business strategy in favour of conservative growth which can be supported by internal accruals and by having an effective control on their risk exposures. This would perhaps be possible when they carve out a niche for themselves.   BIS Review 50/2004 3 
Self-regulation The international experience with reference to banking sector suggests that statutory regulation by the banking regulator cannot be substituted by self-regulation. It could at best supplement the banking regulation. Having recognised that self-regulation has its relevance even when banking regulator is present we would encourage self-regulation. If self-regulation has to establish itself firmly the first and foremost prerequisite would be establishment of sound principles of corporate governance in the banking system as a whole. The supplementing factor, which is also enshrined in Pillar 3 of Basel 2, namely, transparency and disclosure should also take strong roots in the system. Transparency and disclosure under Pillar 3 is expected to facilitate active role for market discipline. A thought which occurs to me is whether Indian markets are equipped to discipline the participants. One opinion is that the markets in India lack adequate depth and width which would qualify them as efficient markets.  The above reaffirms the need for intensifying supervisory/ regulatory efforts, at least in the short term, before self-regulation and market discipline stabilise in the country. In the interregnum it would be useful for the banks to take proactive measures on both, corporate governance and transparency / disclosure aspects.  Following the Ganguly Report, issues of governance in the banking system have come to the fore. Increasingly exacting standards of Board accountability will need to be introduced and issues relating to penal action if directors fail to properly discharge their duties need to be addressed. I raise this issue not to create panic among directors or to generate media headlines but to pose the issue of wider and effective powers for bank boards commensurate with increased accountability.  Ownership issues in banks In the recent period there has been considerable debate on the question of ownership of the banking system and the issue of restriction on ownership of a bank by a single individual, institution or group. In view of the importance of corporate governance in banks, it was considered necessary to lay down a comprehensive framework of policy in a transparent manner. Accordingly, we have recently placed in public domain a draft paper on ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance in private sector banks’. The RBI has been openly encouraging a debate on this issue and the draft would be reviewed on the basis of the feedback received from various quarters. In this context, I would only make two brief comments. First, the banking system is central to the country’s economy irrespective of whether banks are locally or foreign owned. Some countries like Australia feel that banks are so systemically important that foreign controlled banks are precluded. Our stance in India is on the middle ground where foreign ownership of banks has been permitted on certain conditions. Secondly, we must not forget that the cost of bank failures is not limited to rescuing banks or bailing out depositors but there can be large real economy costs. Thus, a well reasoned approach of regulating ownership of banks is a necessary concomitant of a stable financial system.  Anti-tying measures  I would now refer to an issue which is at the frontiers of regulation.  Banks and financial institutions are increasingly offering a broad measure of financial services and thereby endeavoring to build customer loyalty. In some countries there are anti-tying restrictions to prevent banks from forcing customers to take unwanted products to obtain needed services. These issues are interlinked to corporate ethics, a robust internal control culture and transparent disclosures. I would submit for debate that sooner or later we in India will need to consider the feasibility of anti-tying regulations in the financial sector. I would invite attention to an interesting presentation by Ms. Susan Schmidt Bies. (BIS Review No. 42).  Further, with increasing consumer spending the data bases of the banks’ customers are also being shared with various product sellers and the cross-selling is acquiring a new dimension of invasion of the privacy of the customer. This is an area where banks need to exercise self-regulation.  Concluding observation  I would end here by saying that the rationale for financial regulation lies in the economic costs imposed on the society by financial market failure. The adverse consequences include threat to 4 BIS Review 50/2004 
systemic stability, the potential for gridlocks due to adverse selection and moral hazard problems as well as undermining the substantial benefits which would otherwise accrue from correction of market imperfections, reduced transaction costs and providing people with a financial system they can trust. In a rapidly changing economic environment the financial system necessarily has to undergo change, however painful it may be.  BIS Review 50/2004 5 
Leonard Wilson Kamit: The 2003 dividend to the government Speech by Mr Leonard Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor and Chairman of the Board of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, on the occasion of the payment of the 2003 dividend to the government, Port Moresby, 14 September 2004. *      *      * Introduction The Minister for Finance and Treasury, Honourable Bart Philemon M.P, members of the Board, executives of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, ladies and gentlemen. The Central Banking Act (CBA) 2000 specifies the objectives and functions of the Bank of Papua New Guinea. Besides our core functions of managing monetary policy, supervising the financial system, ensuring an efficient payments system, promoting macroeconomic stability and economic growth in Papua New Guinea, the Central Bank also has a special relationship with its shareholder, the Government. The Bank is mandated to provide to the Government advice on financial and banking matters, and liaise closely with the Treasury Department on macroeconomic matters. Our relationship with the Government involves acting as its banker and financial agent, as the official depository, perform general agency functions, liaise with international financial institutions and provide short-term advances to meet cash-flow mismatches. The Bank of PNG has a Board that ensures that the Governor and management perform in fulfilling the duties so prescribed as well as strive to make profits and declare dividends to its shareholder. I am pleased to announce that the Central Bank has a very dynamic and vigilant Board, which ensures that the Bank’s policies and operations are prudent and sound. The membership of the Board as prescribed under the Central Banking Act has representation from the civil and business community with explicit governance responsibilities. The Board members are: Mr L Wilson Kamit CBE  – Governor & Chairman Mr Benny Popoitai MBE  – Deputy Governor, Management & Operations Rev Samson Lowa  – President, PNG Council of Churches Mr John Mahuk  – President, PNG Trade Union Congress Mr Michael Mayberry  – President, PNG Chamber of Commerce Mr Patrick Kolta  – President, PNG Institute of Accountants Mr Kostas Constantinou OBE  – Managing Director, Lamana Hotel Ltd Mr Robert Igara CMG  – Chief Executive, PNG Sustainable Development Program Ltd The late Koiari Tarata ISO, CBE  – Secretary, Department of Treasury (now vacant) To ensure that accountability, structural and governance matters were strengthened in the Bank, the Board established an Audit Committee. The approved a charter for the Audit Committee covers the responsibilities, role, purpose and authority of the Audit Committee. An internal Tender Committee was also established to ensure that due process is followed in the assessment and allocation of contracts for good and services to be provided by external parties. The Board also established an Investment Committee to oversee the development and implementation of procedures for management of foreign exchange reserves held by the Bank of PNG. The Central Bank performance has been strengthened due to its adherence to good governance, ensuring that procedures and policies are followed. The Board insists on adherence to good governance and management and staff strive to maintain a high degree of professionalism and integrity in their work. This has been supported by the implementation of new systems in the Bank, and on-going capacity building and training of staff. Today marks another occasion when the Central Bank pays due to its shareholder, the Government, on behalf of the people of Papua New Guinea. This time, paying our dividend to the Government from the Bank’s 2003 operating profit. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
The 2003 dividend At the Board meeting on 30 June 2004, the Board endorsed the Bank’s final and audited accounts for 2003, which was audited by the Auditor General’s office. The audit confirmed that the operating profit for 2003 was K68 million, which is the highest level recorded in the Bank’s history. The Board also approved that the net profit available for payment as dividend to the Government is K50 million after a transfer of K18 million to the reserve funds of the Bank of PNG. This appropriation is consistent with the Bank’s policy adopted by the Board in September 2002, to build its reserve funds to 10 percent of assets at risk in order to meet any future contingencies that may arise in the Bank’s operations. At end December 2003, the amount of assets at risks was K2,600 million, while the balance in the reserve funds was K125 million. The Minister has agreed to these profit appropriations. The 2003 operating profit resulted from the following major sources of revenue and expenditures areas:   2003  (K mn) 2002 (K mn) Interest revenue   Overseas investments 31.93 61.10 Domestic gov’t securities 116,15 76.94 Others: fees/commission from Fx transactions/rent 11.27 16.52 Total 159.35 154.56    Expenses     Interest - gov’t securities 55.07 73.80 General administration 36.28 26.70 Total 91.35  100.50  The figures for 2003 in comparison to those of 2002 show that: (1) Significant revenue was earned from domestic market operations due to higher level of Government securities held by the Bank and high interest rates on Treasury bills; (2) Interest expenditures were lower compared to 2002, due to limited involvement by the Bank in the secondary market for Treasury bills; and (3) Generally expenditures were well controlled although significant costs were incurred in the areas of: – IT Management of Systems; – Building Maintenance; – Currency Replenishment; and  – Staffing Costs - Salaries and Wages, and Training. The way ahead Honourable Minister, the Bank’s 2004 financial results would likely be affected by the current low interest rate environment and high liquidity situation that we confront since the beginning of the year. Whilst we have rebuild our foreign exchange reserves, our interest earnings on them would be also affected by the low interest rates overseas and the appreciation of the kina exchange rate. 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
It is therefore important that this dividend payment should not allow us to rest on our laurels and pat ourselves on the back. Whilst we should take time to celebrate achieving such a result, we must also be mindful of our on-going duty to the Government and the nation. There are still on-going work within the Central Bank to improve the design of our policies and their implementation. We are constantly striving to improve our operations to enhance efficiency in achieving our core objectives and functions by using the latest technology, follow international best practices, and continue to build our internal capacity. And indeed the brief but very significant visit by the Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, Mr. Agustins Carstens, not only provided a strong sign of confidence on the Government’s economic management, but also gave us the opportunity to discuss further technical assistance in various areas of the Bank’s operations. Let me mention some of the major tasks currently undertaken by the Bank: • Building up our capacity to supervise the financial system including life insurance and superannuation fund industries with external assistance; • Undertaking research work on the Central Bank’s operations and policies; • Implement an electronic registry system to help with our domestic trading of Government securities; • Review of the Exchange Control Regulations; • Drafting of the Anti-Money Laundering legislations with Government agencies; and • Involvement in the implementation of the PNG-ADB Microfinance Project. These changes and the on-going work will ensure the Central Bank not only fulfills its mandate to the Government and people of Papua New Guinea, but also allows us to be responsive to the everchanging vagaries of the world we live in today. I am confident that the Board, management and staff of the Central Bank are up to the challenge. I would like to take the opportunity to thank the Board to which I am most privileged to be the Chairman; the management and staff of the Central Bank for the support and commitment they continue to display in their various roles. I also wish to thank the Auditor General and his staff for their assistance over the years. Honourable Minister with these few remarks, I now present to you the Bank of PNG’s dividend for the 2003 financial year of K50 million. Thank you.  BIS Review 50/2004 3 
Sunil Mendis: A brief look at financial information technology Keynote address by Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, for the Financial Information Systems Seminar, Colombo, 8 September 2004. *      *      * His Excellency Akio Suda, the Ambassador for Japan in Sri Lanka, Mr Yoshihisa Onishi, Executive Director, FISC, other officers from the FISC in Japan, Ladies and Gentlemen, The Central Bank of Sri Lanka is happy to co-sponsor this programme together with the FISC of Japan (Center for Financial Industry Information Systems), in view of the importance of financial information technology in the financial services industry. Sri Lanka is no exception to continuous changes in the technology used by its financial services industry. In a market driven financial system, for information to be effective, there should be two vital ingredients, that is system integrity and timeliness - both of which are crucial. The more dependable your information systems are, the more efficient and competitive banks can be as a player in the financial services industry. That is why we see banks investing heavily in IT.  Globally too, with the interdependence of markets their integration is facilitated through information systems which link these markets which make the world a very small place indeed on a PC monitor - where the whole world is virtually at your doorstep. The FISC, therefore, has contributed significantly, over the last 20 years, to making information systems more efficient and dependable through their research activities and technical co-operation programmes which have been extended to Asian countries such as Sri Lanka. Of particular interest to banks would be the security guidelines on computer systems and audit guidelines for information systems of financial institutions, which they have issued. Some of these can be used as guidelines by our banking industry. Government and the people of Japan have contributed immensely to the development of this country for many decades in the past in different fields and their support in sharing their knowledge on financial information system with the Sri Lankan financial sector is greatly appreciated. In this connection I wish to thank the FISC who has devoted so much of its time and effort to bring in expertise in this area to market participants in Sri Lanka’s financial system. This would also provide a good forum for our banks to exchange ideas on specific security features adopted by the FISC. I have no doubt that this Seminar will provide an excellent opportunity for useful interaction amongst participants, and I would like to convey my best wishes. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Michael C Bonello: The Central Bank of Malta and financial stability Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the conference “Onshore Europe”, organised by the Malta Financial Services Authority, St Julians, 13 September 2004. *      *      * The title chosen for this conference is as significant as it is brief. The two words “Onshore Europe” neatly capture Malta’s current reality, that of a financial centre with solid credentials which affords its players both the guarantees and the opportunities to be offered by the Single European Market for Financial Services. As we commemorate Malta’s first ten years as an international financial centre, it is appropriate to record that if we are able to look back with satisfaction at past achievements, it is only because our legislators had the political vision to adopt a consensual approach to the task at hand in 1994. This involved a radical overhaul of existing laws and the drafting of new ones to lay the foundations of a modern financial centre governed by the highest standards and yet flexible enough to allow new opportunities for growth and development to be seized to the country’s economic advantage. I would, therefore, like to pay tribute to all those who saw the project through to a successful conclusion. An analysis of Malta’s track record leads to another important conclusion, which is that having in place an appropriate legislative and institutional framework is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for success. Recent experience around the world suggests that the potential of a financial centre cannot be maximized unless it possesses another essential attribute. That other ingredient is stability and it is this aspect that I propose to explore today. Ensuring financial stability is a statutory responsibility of the Central Bank of Malta. The Bank is thus obliged to participate actively in the maintenance of a stable and efficient financial system and to contribute towards its development. This applies not only to the payment and settlement system, of which the Bank is the regulator, but to the entire financial system. The Bank has an on-going role to play in assessing the robustness of the system. It must draw attention to any problems and ensure that these do not in any way impede the functioning of the financial markets as efficient providers of capital for companies and households. The Bank’s approach is therefore to consider the general risks to the system rather than the situation of individual credit and financial institutions. The latter is the task of the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA), which has successfully assumed, over the last ten years, full responsibility for the supervision of institutions providing financial services. Why central banks promote financial stability There are several reasons why the maintenance of a healthy financial sector is an essential function of central banks, and this irrespective of their involvement or otherwise in regulation and supervision. First, by virtue of their role as providers of liquidity to the banking system and their involvement in payment systems, central banks have a vested interest in the quality of their counterparties. Any developments that could affect the financial health of their counterparties are of direct interest to a central bank, not least because the inability of the former to honour their commitments would have negative financial implications for the central bank. Furthermore, instability in the financial system could hinder central banks from successfully pursuing their other objectives, particularly the achievement of price stability through monetary policy measures. Indeed, monetary policy can only be implemented effectively if the financial system is stable, for only then can financial intermediaries respond to changes in interest rates and in liquidity conditions engineered by the central bank, and thus transmit these impulses on to non-financial intermediaries. At the same time, by pursuing price stability central banks contribute directly to financial stability, since a stable price environment reduces volatility in financial variables and ensures the smooth functioning of markets.  From a central bank perspective, it is also evident that a healthy financial system contributes to stability in the exchange rate particularly where, in countries like Malta, a fixed exchange regime coexists with the absence of capital controls. Thus, in a situation where there are concerns about the robustness of the financial infrastructure, the regulatory framework or the integrity of financial intermediaries, the external account may be undermined through sizeable outflows of capital. In other BIS Review 50/2004 1 
words, what starts off as a crisis in an individual institution could easily develop into a balance of payments and currency crisis, which may, in turn, trigger off secondary effects throughout the rest of the financial sector, disrupting other sectors of the economy in the process and thus resulting in a full-blown financial crisis. In the case of the Central Bank of Malta, these considerations assume even greater importance given the Maltese economy’s small size, openness and lack of natural resources, which make it highly dependent on foreign markets. The small size of the domestic market, moreover, also has implications for savings and investment. Thus a limited pool of savings is in turn reflected in a low volume of internally generated resources for investment purposes, making the country highly dependent on external financing. This dependence is evidenced by the private savings ratio, which is not only low by international standards, at around 22% of GDP, but has also been falling in recent years as public sector imbalances have widened to unsustainable proportions.  The Central Bank of Malta’s approach to financial stability Against this economic background, therefore, price and exchange rate stability assume particular importance and the need for a stable financial environment becomes all the more crucial. The maintenance of financial stability was accordingly recognized in the legislation setting up the Central Bank of Malta in 1968, but it was only pursuant to the 2002 amendments to this legislation that the Bank’s responsibility was made more explicit.1 These amendments also recognized the Bank’s role in preserving a sound and efficient payment system. The Bank’s efforts to strengthen its capacity in the area of financial stability commenced before its responsibility for banking regulation and supervision was transferred to the Malta Financial Services Authority (MFSA) in January 2002. In fact in 2000, a Financial Stability Office was set up to identify and analyse potential systemic threats not only in banks, but also in other parts of the financial system, such as the insurance and investment sectors, the securities markets and also selected large corporations in the non-financial sector. The Office has since developed a set of financial soundness indicators and a model which detects and assesses the impact of different types of risks. It has also introduced shock scenario techniques to stress-test the resilience of the banking system. This year the Bank has also started to conduct a bi-annual financial stability review whereby developments abroad as well as in the domestic macroeconomic, regulatory and operational environment are assessed in one analytical framework designed to detect potential weaknesses and to devise appropriate remedial measures. These activities are supplemented by the work of the Bank’s Payment Systems Office, which is responsible for the maintenance and oversight of the payment system. This is an important function because modern electronic payment systems have the potential to serve as channels of contagion by transmitting the payment difficulties of one, or a few, large financial intermediaries to others in the system.  In 2002 a Retail Gross Settlement System based on the Bank for International Settlements’ ten core principles2 was introduced in Malta through which inter-bank domestic payment orders are now transmitted, cleared and settled with greater efficiency than previously. The Bank has also issued a number of directives which seek to provide participating banks with an adequate degree of protection against legal and systemic risks associated with participation in such systems. Other directives seek to ensure that the rights of banks’ clients to adequate information concerning retail payments are upheld by the intermediaries rendering payment services. In this way, credibility in the integrity of the infrastructure used for the settlement of payments is preserved at both wholesale and retail level. The Bank’s role in financial stability has more recently been enhanced by membership of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) from May 2004. It has started to participate in the ESCB                                                       1  The 1967 Act referred to the Bank’s role in promoting a sound financial structure and to foster an orderly capital market in Malta. Article 4 (2) of the revised Act specifically states that it shall be one of the objective of the Bank to “ensure the stability of the financial system.” 2  The core principles recommended by the Committee on Payment and Securities Settlement Systems of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
committee dealing with financial stability, the Banking Supervision Committee, and at the EU level the Bank also participates in the Economic and Finance Committee and in its Financial Stability Table. The importance of two-way cooperation with the MFSA The initiatives I have described have strengthened the Bank’s ability to monitor and analyse developments in the financial system in a wider context. It is nevertheless becoming increasingly clear that to carry out this role effectively, the Bank’s efforts in this area need to be supported by the activities of the overall supervisor in the financial field, that is the MFSA.  It is, therefore, reassuring to note that good co-operation already exists between the Bank and the Authority. More specifically, the Authority’s focus on the health of individual service providers complements the Bank’s macroprudential analysis of the financial system as a whole and its oversight of the payment and settlement systems.  In undertaking their respective tasks, both these institutions have access to information that may not be readily available to the other. Thus, for example, through its involvement with payment systems and the daily monitoring of the banks’ foreign exchange exposures, the Central Bank of Malta has daily information on the amount of liquidity and the extent of foreign exchange risk prevalent in the inter-bank market. Similar information, however, only becomes available to the Authority with a delay, through the monthly statistical reports submitted by the individual financial intermediaries. Furthermore, the Bank’s macro perspective assessment of financial developments may identify general risks to the system that may not be apparent when the prudential supervision of individual financial institutions is undertaken. This may occur, for example, if the risk profiles of the institutions in question show a high degree of similarity, making the system especially vulnerable to a particular type of shock. Supervision at the micro level, therefore, has to be complemented with a macro analysis of the interlinkages between different segments of the domestic financial sector and its links with the payment system, the rest of the economy and its counterparts abroad.  On the other hand, it is also true that the Bank’s macroprudential analysis may not provide precise information on individual institutions, particularly those that may be on the brink of insolvency. Here, the Authority, through regular inspections of individual service providers will have a more in-depth knowledge of the health of single intermediaries and market segments, including those which play a peripheral role in the monetary policy transmission process and with which the Bank’s relationship is, at least on a one-to-one basis, rather distant. In this sense, the Authority also contributes to the soundness of the Bank’s counterparties. It is also the Authority which ensures that only sound institutions are licensed to enter the Maltese market. Furthermore, confidential supervisory information available to the Authority could be useful to the Bank as an input into its overall analysis of the financial system, enabling it to respond to liquidity and related constraints that could set off negative ripple effects.  The potential for synergies between the two institutions prompted them to sign two Memoranda of Understanding in 2002 to provide for enhanced co-operation, including through the establishment of a Standing Committee. This cooperation framework has contributed to the general soundness and stability of the financial system. The profitability of our banks, for example, has remained stable with an average return on assets after tax of 0.8% in 2003, the same level as that recorded by European banks. Furthermore, bank liquidity and capitalization levels have both remained strong. Liquid asset holdings as a percentage of short-term liabilities were close to 53% at the end of 2003, compared to a minimum threshold of 30%. Meanwhile, the banks’ aggregate capital adequacy ratio, defined as the ratio of own funds to risk-weighted assets, currently stands at 23%, compared to a minimum of 8%. In the insurance sector and collective investment schemes steady growth continues to be registered.  This positive performance notwithstanding, there remains scope for further improvement in the framework through which the Bank and the Authority seek to safeguard the health of the domestic financial system. It is becoming increasingly evident, for example, that a proper analysis of the system’s robustness requires detailed statistics about entities for which data are currently either not available or are fragmented. This is particularly the case of the non-bank financial sector, and also of the corporate and household sectors, although in this latter area some progress is being made through the joint efforts of the Bank, the Authority and the National Statistics Office. BIS Review 50/2004 3 
Another aspect warranting particular attention is that of financial crisis management. While the current institutional and regulatory framework has been successful in keeping at bay any major systemic disturbance, further progress is required, for example by defining the specific roles and responsibilities of the Bank, the Authority and the Government. In this respect, the Joint Contingency Plan for systemically important banks drawn-up by the Bank and the Authority already takes into account the involvement of the Ministry of Finance with respect to the possible use of public funds and the Bank’s lender of last resort function. This framework is currently in the process of being refined further.  The need for improved cross-border cooperation On the other hand, it is a matter of some concern that whereas modalities for crisis management have been, or are in the process of being formalised effectively in most jurisdictions, including Malta, the way forward for the resolution of crises of a cross-border nature, and requiring the prompt intervention of central banks and supervisors that operate in different time zones and with different day-to-day practices, is not yet clearly defined. Some progress in this respect has been made at the EU level through the formalisation of the Memoranda of Understanding of the ESCB on high-level principles of co-operation in crisis management situations and between payment systems overseers and banking supervisors. However, these agreements, to which the Central Bank of Malta and the MFSA are also a party, do not go far enough. The implications of systemic crises whose resolution would, for example, require some form of fiscal input and possibly also the contribution of other entities spanning different jurisdictions are not yet articulated. This issue will hopefully be addressed during the forthcoming review of the EU Banking Codified Directive of March 2000. As the two key institutions with financial stability responsibilities, the Bank and the Authority have a direct interest in the future evolution of international co-operative arrangements. Such arrangements, moreover, will also impact on the way in which the two institutions seek to co-operate with each other and with similar authorities based abroad. In particular, the activities and institutions which the Bank and the Authority will be expected to monitor will become more complex as the number of financial intermediaries with a presence both in Malta and in other countries, either directly through the establishment of branches or subsidiaries, or indirectly through the provision of cross-border services via the internet or otherwise, continues to grow in the light of the incorporation of EU passporting rights in Maltese legislation. The coming into effect of Basle II and, at the EU level, CAD III will be significant factors in this regard. At the same time, the tendency of companies to seek multiple listings in different securities markets means that interest rates and stock market valuations in one country will increasingly mirror those in other countries, even though the underlying economic fundamentals of that country might warrant some divergence in such variables.  Indeed, as has been the experience of other countries, the trend towards consolidation and merger activity in the various segments of the market, from banking and the selling of insurance and investment funds to the provision of payment services and trading facilities, will lead to a situation where the institutions to be supervised will vastly exceed the financial resources and technical expertise available to supervisors and central banks. This will be further accentuated by the current trends whereby financial intermediaries outsource activities both on a domestic and cross-border level, while the introduction of the European Union Directive on the European Single Company Statute, the so called Societas Europea, will present new regulatory and financial stability challenges on a regional level. The implications of international developments for Malta These observations are particularly relevant for Malta. First, whereas the size and complexity of financial intermediaries, and that of corporate entities to which they are exposed, has grown disproportionately relative to the resources available to regulators and liquidity providers across the globe, this divergence is magnified further in a small jurisdiction such as ours.  Second, because the characteristics of the Maltese economy make it vulnerable to developments abroad, the financial sector is especially exposed to changes in the perceptions of foreign investors about the sustainability of prevailing economic policies and the capacity of the financial sector to absorb external shocks.  4 BIS Review 50/2004 
Given the ease with which funds can now move in and out of the country, moreover, and the scope for disparity between the size of the economy and that of foreign institutional investors, the need to maintain confidence in the domestic financial sector assumes particular importance. This risk is further accentuated by the fact that while most sectors of the economy operate in a competitive environment, in many sectors business remains concentrated among a small set of market players. The financial sector is no exception in this regard.  Furthermore, while the structure of the domestic financial sector has evolved considerably over time, its level of development still falls short of that of the more advanced EU Member States. Thus, for example, although in the past few years the number of players in the non-bank sector has increased in terms of both number and variety, financial intermediation in Malta remains largely bank-based. Within the domestic banking sector, moreover, two banks together account for around 90% of total loans and deposits. A similar picture emerges in the capital market where the degree of capitalisation, the number of market participants and the volume of turnover are still relatively low. In 2003, for example, the ratio of stock market capitalisation to GDP stood at 37%. While this was higher than in most of the other new Member States, it was only around half of the euro area average. Annual turnover was even lower, hovering around 4% of GDP and 12% of stock market capitalization. Where, as in Malta, the performance of the financial sector hinges crucially on the fate of a small number of players and where the lack of depth and liquidity in capital markets often causes the market value of a particular debt instrument to deviate from underlying fundamentals, the risk of contagion within the system, as well as, from other systems is accentuated.3This latter aspect might become less relevant as financial services providers in Malta and in the EU respond to the introduction of the Financial Services Action Plan and the eventual establishment of a single market in financial services. On the positive side, such initiatives provide better income-earning and liquidity management opportunities, improve the efficiency with which the sector operates and enhance its capacity to weather sector-specific shocks.  On the other hand, the advent of liberalisation and heightened levels of competition could well spur service providers domiciled in Malta to take on new risks and venture into non-traditional lines of business. Furthermore, as a result of passporting rights, competition is likely to become more acute. The ensuing interdependence between different sectors and countries could well expose the domestic system to new vulnerabilities, including possible contagion from systemic shocks. This will be especially the case upon Malta’s entry in the euro area as such a move would provide further momentum to the pace of financial market integration. Moreover, the eventual linkage of the domestic payment system with TARGET will also facilitate the transmission of certain risks, not least those of an operational nature.  Conclusion There are clearly several good reasons why sound regulatory and oversight practices remain vital for the stability of our financial system and why, therefore, the Central Bank of Malta and the MFSA must work more effectively together. It is also evident, however, that on their own these two institutions cannot provide full protection against systemic disturbances, and that the modalities for co-operation which are in place locally need to be strengthened further and extended to other bodies with comparable responsibilities at the international, and particularly at the EU level.                                                       3  ECB. 2002. Financial Sectors in EU Accession Countries. BIS Review 50/2004 5 
Zhou Xiaochuan: Anti-money laundering in China - the status quo and prospects Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the first meeting of the Ministerial Joint Conference on AML, Beijing, 27 August 2004. *      *      * Approved by the State Council, the People’s Bank of China (PBC), as the leading ministry in the Ministerial Joint Conference on Anti-money Laundering (AML), invites today the member ministries to review the current AML situation, to draw up the plan for the AML work in the next stage, to determine the working procedure for the Ministerial Joint Conference on Anti-money Laundering (AML) and the responsibilities of the relevant ministries. I.  The significance of AML  Money laundering is the practice of legitimizing the illegally obtained gains and proceeds through a series of transactions, transfers or conversions in order to evade legal punishments. Money laundering helps criminals to evade legal punishments as well as puts a premium to the spawning of new crimes, distorts normal economic and financial orders, damages credibility of financial institutions and corrupts public morality. With the deepening integration of China’s economy into the world economy and new changes in social conflicts, strengthening AML is of great significance. First, sound AML work is an objective necessity for safeguarding China’s national interests and the fundamental interests of the masses. AML involves efforts in the diplomatic, economic, judiciary and security fields etc. The performance of AML is closely related to the public image of China’s government both at home and abroad, to the economic stability and to the social justice. A sound practice in AML also constitutes the concrete measure for safeguarding the order of China’s socialist market economy and the fundamental interests of the masses and for practicing the important thoughts of “Three Represents”. The work stands for an important move for honoring the Commitments of the Chinese government to the outside world and for creating the image of a responsible big country with respect to AML. It is also a necessary step for speeding up the opening of the financial industry and promoting the internationalization of the Chinese banks. Therefore, we shall, from the vantage point of “stressing political awareness” and based on the significance of safeguarding China’s economic and financial security, sharpen the awareness of the importance and urgency of AML, establish effective AML system, and bring AML onto the track of standardization and institutional arrangement. Second, AML is a necessity for relentlessly cracking down on economic crimes. At the start of reform and opening, Mr. Deng Xiaoping pointed out that, fighting economic crime “is a long-term continuous struggle,” is a protracted task calling for perseverance in the course of China’s modernization construction. With the deepening of marketization of China’s economy, such crimes as smuggling, tax evasion, tax rebate cheating, financial frauds, market manipulation and insider trading are on the rise. The above crimes are catalyst to corruption like embezzlement and bribery taking, severely damaging the health of national economy and corroding social and public morality. A sound practice in AML will enable an effective monitoring of abnormal and suspicious fund movement, generate opportunities for controlling the transfer and hiding of the illegally obtained gains and provide effective means for recovering illegal funds transferred abroad, so as to fight economic crimes effectively. Third, carrying out AML is a necessity for forestalling other grave criminal crimes. With China’s opening wider to the outside, international narcotics crimes and organized crimes with the nature of underworld have picked up. In some part of the regions, there emerged the symptoms of terrorist crimes by a small handful of extremists and separatists, creating grave social problems. Experience at home and abroad suggests, the severe crimes are not possible without enormous financial support and therefore often entail frequent money laundering. Cracking down on money laundering and spotting and cutting off the funding chains on which crime organizations rely, will forcefully weaken, break up and disintegrate the criminal activities, strictly forestall them from spreading and realize ultimately the targets of combating crimes, protecting the fundamental interests of the masses and safeguarding social stability. BIS Review 50/2004 1 
Fourth, a sound practice in AML is also a necessity for safeguarding the credibility of financial institutions and the financial stability. Money laundering is basically divided into three steps, placement, covering up and integration. First, placement, i.e. placing unlawful proceeds into the economic system, mainly the financial institutions. Second, covering up, i.e. covering the origin and blurring the nature of illegal funds through complex transactions. Third, integration, i.e. using “laundered” funds legally. The above features indicate that financial institutions, as the carrier of funds activities, are objectively prone to become the channels for money laundering. Involvement of financial institutions in money laundering, will not only damage the reputation of the financial institutions, but also bring about formidable legal and operational risks. AML is of important and realistic significance for safeguarding the reputation of financial institutions, forestalling financial risks, safeguarding the stability of the financial system. II.  International AML situation  After the mid-20th century, governments around the world were confronted with the grave situation where the flooding of narcotics became a scourge, and they conducted in-depth examination on the legal policies of preventing narcotics-related crimes. In 1970, the United States passed the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). BSA reformed on the traditional bank secrecy system, built up the AML foundation in the US and instituted the AML working system led by one government department and participated by various others. Meanwhile, AML was paid much attention by the majority of Western developed economies and emerging economies. During 1980s-1990s, these countries and regions have successively enacted AML laws. Switzerland, famous for its strict bank secrecy arrangements, also accepts the international AML practices under international pressure. Starting from July 1 this year, for those who transfer money above a certain amount through anonymous accounts with banks of Switzerland, the banks should make known their true identity. Faced with ever-raging money laundering, such international organizations as the Security Council of the UN have responded actively as well. In 1988, the UN passed the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, which criminalizes money laundering related to narcotics. The Convention is the first international convention against crimes of money laundering in the world. Since 1990s, the international community has paid ever closer attention to money laundering. In 1990, the European Council passed Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of Proceeds from Crime. In April 1995, the UN particularly drafted guidelines on preventing money laundering activities, for reference of all countries in the course of AML legislation. In December 1999, the UN General Assembly passed International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. In November 2000, the UN General Assembly also passed Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, calling for all parties to institute AML program. In October 2003, the UN General Assembly further passed Convention against Corruption, stipulating stricter requirements for AML programs of the parties. Such international organizations as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision have also developed an array of principles and guides. Because of the transnational nature of money laundering, the G-7 Summit in Paris decided in July 1989 to establish the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in a bid to examine the cooperative results with respect to combating money laundering through banks and the financial system, to improve laws and rules in AML and measures, and to strengthen preventive AML measures through multi-lateral judiciary assistance. In February 1990, the FATF set out a set of Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering (“Forty Recommendations”). First, each country should criminalize money laundering of funds used in severe crimes. Second, governments of all countries should strengthen financial supervision by urging financial institutions to develop and implement feasible internal AML control system and to fulfill the obligation of customer identification, record-keeping of customer information and transactions and detection and reporting of suspicious financial activities. Third, governments should establish Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) responsible for monitoring unusual and suspicious transactions of funds, so as to achieve coordination and cooperation between appropriate ministries. Fourth, countries should exchange intelligence on money laundering and conduct international cooperation in AML investigation, search and freezing of illegal funds and extradition of suspects. The Forty Recommendations by the FATF has become the most important guiding document in the current international AML sphere, promoting AML legislation in all countries and regions and development of the international AML system. 2 BIS Review 50/2004 
After 9/11 terrorist attack, anti-terrorism is combined with AML. Combating terrorist financing has become an important field of AML. AML and combating terrorist financing have become important issues of some international organizations and forums, occupying a significant niche in current international relation. After 9/11 terrorist attack, the US congress wasted no time in passing the USA PATRIOT Act, strengthening in an all-round way the rules for combating terrorist financing. The legislature of all countries and regions reacted to the movement quickly as well. Besides some international conventions passed by the UN with respect to combating terrorist financing, the FATF drafted specifically 8 more recommendations for combating terrorist financing in October 2001. The developed countries in Europe and America have rendered AML and combating terrorist financing a focus of their foreign affairs, and have taken resolute measures to that effect. III.  The status quo of AML in China 1.  AML legislation China’s criminal legislation with respect to AML almost synchronized with the international efforts. After the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances went into effect in 1988, China’s National People’s Congress promulgated the Decision on Ban of Narcotics, predicating “the crime of disguising and concealing the nature and source of funds for narcotics”. The Criminal Law was amended in 1997 with a specific article predicating the crime of money laundering. After 9/11 terrorist attack, the highest legislative body stipulated in the Amendment to the Criminal Law in December 2001 that terrorist crime be an upstream crime of money laundering. China has progressively promulgated an array of administrative and financial rules and regulations to legalize the arrangement of authentic names for individual deposits accounts, the management system on banking accounts and the regulations for management on large-value cash. In March 2003, the PBC promulgated Rules for Anti-money Laundering by Financial Institutions, Administrative Rules for the Reporting of Large-value and Suspicious RMB Payment Transactions and Administrative Rules for the Reporting by Financial Institutions of Large-Value and Suspicious Foreign Exchange Transactions. The rules put forward clearly the AML supervisory requirements for the banking institutions, and set up the basic framework for China’s system of AML reporting and AML information monitoring. The Law of the People’s Bank of China amended at end-2003 stipulated that the central bank is responsible for “guiding and planning AML work of the financial industry and monitoring of fund movement with respect to AML”.  The criminalization of money laundering and the formation of the basic system of AML in the financial industry symbolize the preliminary establishment of the system of AML laws and rules. 2.  Implementation of AML work To carry out its duties on AML, the PBC set up, with the approval of the State Council, the AML Bureau in September 2003, further established the China AML Monitoring and Analysis Center in April 2004 responsible for accepting and analyzing AML intelligence. In order to strengthen the coordination within the financial industry, the PBC convened a Symposium of AML for financial regulatory authorities in April 2004, and formed a coordinating mechanism for AML led by the PBC and participated by China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) and the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE). In May 2004, the Ministerial Joint Conference on AML was, with the approval of the State Council, re-organized and enlarged from the original 16 members to 23 with scope of AML supervision widened. Thus, the coordinating mechanism at the national level and in the financial industry has formed preliminarily and begun its operation, and China’s AML system has taken its initial shape. Since the implementation of the three Rules in March 2003, the Head Office of the PBC has altogether received 3,061 reports of suspicious RMB payment transactions through screening by its branches while the SAFE has received 170,500 reports of suspicious foreign currency payment transactions with an amount of USD9.720 billion. After cross-examination, suspect cases of money laundering have been referred to the public security departments for investigation. The Ministry of Public Security, the PBC and the SAFE have also joined in cracking down on underground money centers. Since 2002, in operations of combating underground money centers, 73 cases have been solved, 57 underground money centers and 96 underground banking outlets destroyed, 240 suspects detained or arrested, BIS Review 50/2004 3 
illegal funds and assets equivalent to more than RMB80 million yuan confiscated. The total amount involved in the cases was as high as several billion yuan, effectively holding in check the momentum of money laundering through underground money centers. At present, there are still some pending cases of money laundering referred by the PBC and the SAFE to the public security departments for investigation. Meanwhile, we shall realize clear-minded the difficulties and protraction of AML work. Due to late start of AML and faced with the complex situation, the current AML in China is still falling short of the requirements and changes of the situation. The deficiencies of AML are mainly as follows. AML laws and regulations are far from perfect, leaving quite a gap from the perspective of the international practices and AML requirements. The awareness of the importance of AML by financial institutions has yet to be sharpened. The AML internal control system and the reporting system of suspicious funds transactions have yet to be strengthened and improved. AML in non-financial industries has yet to be reinforced either. With the changes of the economic environment, the means of money laundering has become ever more sophisticated and specialized, there has already emerged money laundering via the internet. 3. International AML cooperation The Chinese government has all along attached importance to international AML cooperation. At present, China has signed and approved the United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and has signed the UN International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and the UN Convention against Corruption. The Chinese government has been advocating the expansion of representation by developing countries in international AML organizations. With the approval of the State Council, the PBC has formally written to the FATF in April this year and applied for a membership in the FATF. Meanwhile, China has contacted the preparatory committee of the Euro-Asia Group on AML and Combating Terrorist Financing (EAG) through various channels. The PBC and the Ministry of Public Security participated in the preparatory meeting of the EAG on AML held in Russia in June 2004. China will make efforts to become the initiating member of “the EAG”.  Making full use of international resources in beefing up in staff training constitutes an important part of the international AML cooperation of China. In recent years, the PBC, the Ministry of Public Security and the SAFE, in collaboration with the international organizations like the UN, the World Bank, the IMF and the FATF, have held a series of seminars and training sessions. In the first half of 2004, the PBC, jointly with related agencies and international institutions, organized four AML seminars and training sessions, providing technical support for AML work in China. IV.  Prospects for AML in China Generally speaking, the situation of AML is good. The relevant AML policies and measures have taken effect. The coordination and working mechanisms at various levels have been brought onto the right track. And with the deepening of AML work, the effects will unfold further. As AML is an important while arduous task that influences the overall society, all members of the joint conference shall collaborate with concerted efforts in doing well the following work. 1. Continuing to reinforce the coordinating mechanism of AML Efforts shall be made to continue to carry out directives by the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council on combating corruption, advocating honest and clean government and fighting economic crimes. In order to effectively fend off and crack down on crimes of money laundering, to safeguard the national economic and financial security and normal economic order, the Ministerial Joint Conference on AML will, under the leadership of the State Council, be responsible for guiding the national AML work, drawing up the important national AML principles and policies and the policies and measures for international AML cooperation, and coordinating all departments and mobilizing resources of the whole society to carry out AML work. As the leading ministry of the joint conference, the PBC will commit to strengthening research on AML policies and measures, improving management on AML, reinforcing supervision on AML of financial institutions, beefing up funds monitoring and analyses for AML purposes. The PBC will, together with relevant government 4 BIS Review 50/2004 
departments, develop AML guidelines for such high-risk sectors as banking, securities and insurance, spur financial institutions and other entities with high risk of money laundering to improve their internal AML policies and procedures. The PBC will make efforts to detect clues of crimes in money laundering and timely transfer them to public security and other departments for criminal investigation. The PBC will collaborate with authorities of public security, state security, commerce, customs, industrial and commercial administration and taxation in investigating, through AML monitoring system, cases of unlawful practices and crimes. 2.  Improving and strengthening AML legal system The AML Law has been included in the legislation plan of the Tenth Standing Committee of the NPC. In March 2004, the Budgetary Committee of the Standing Committee of the NPC convened the inauguration meeting for the drafting group of the AML Law. The leading and working groups for AML Law drafting have been established with the leadership of the NPC and the participation of 18 units like the Supreme Court, the Supreme Procuratorate, the Ministry of Public Security, the Ministry of Finance and the PBC. As planned, the draft AML law will be presented to the Standing Committee of the NPC for deliberation in early 2005.  The drafting of the AML law will further define China’s AML work mechanism, the relevant authorities for AML and the responsibilities of relevant departments, and will stipulate the AML responsibilities of financial institutions and other sectors with high risk of money laundering, so as to immensely improve the AML work in China. 3.  Establishing and improving the supervisory system for AML in the financial industry The PBC will continue, in collaboration with the CBRC, the CSRC, the CIRC and the SAFE and other supervisory authorities, improve and newly developed AML guidelines for all financial business, implement in real earnest the information collection and analyses on as well as detection and monitoring of suspicious large-value funds, encouraging financial institutions to build and improve internal AML procedures by fulfilling conscientiously the AML responsibilities in verifying customer identity, reporting of suspicious large-value funds and record-keeping of transactions, so as to forestall financial risks and safeguard stability of the financial industry. 4.  Further strengthening international AML cooperation Strengthening international cooperation in the field of AML is necessitated by the developments of the current international situation, China’s active participation in the international economic cooperation and the proceeding of AML in China. In the recent periods, we shall not only make efforts to join international AML organizations but also establish bilateral cooperation with major countries and regions in the areas of AML. We shall, within the multilateral and bilateral framework, carry out AML intelligence exchange and training cooperation, and provide assistance in the investigation and seizure of assets and extradition of suspects. By strengthening international AML cooperation, we will forcefully crack down on and hold in check the momentum of transferring overseas illegal assets by the criminal suspects, and will prevent the stripping of state-owned assets. We will provide assistance to foreign law enforcement authorities on the basis of mutual benefits. Ladies and Gentlemen, despite some achievements attained in China’s AML work, we are still facing very arduous tasks. We shall, from the vantage point of practicing the important thought of “Three Represents” and fully implementing the guidelines laid by the Sixteenth Congress of the CPC, sharpen our awareness of the importance and urgency of AML work, and strengthen our sense of responsibility in this mission. We shall, under the leadership of the State Council, bring into full play the role of the Ministerial Joint Conference on AML, and proceed in a practical, forward-looking and pioneering manner to open a new chapter for China’s AML work.  Thank you! BIS Review 50/2004 5 
Kishori J Udeshi: Bank supervision - challenges ahead NA Palkhivala Memorial Oration lecture by Ms Kishori J Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Jaipur, 28 August 2004. *      *      * I deem it an honour and a privilege to speak before this august gathering on the occasion of the Nani Palkhivala Memorial Oration. While conferring on him the Honorary degree of Doctor of Laws, Shri Nani Palkhivala was described by Princeton University, USA, as a “defender of constitutional liberties, champion of human rights, teacher, author and economic developer”. This description, however, does not capture the brilliance of the man’s mind, the eloquence of his speech and the goodness of his heart. While I do not have even an iota of his ability to speak without notes for hours and keep his audience in rapt attention there is one small thing that we two have in common and that is our alma mater; St. Xavier’s College, Mumbai. Shri Palkhivala was a Director of the Central Board of the Reserve Bank of India from 1963 till 1970 and it is befitting that the subject of today’s talk is on the challenges ahead for banking.  For a better appreciation of the future challenges let me begin by giving a brief glimpse of how we reached where we are today.  The financial sector witnessed a radical shift with the introduction of the reform process in 1992. The focus of the reforms was on deregulation and liberalisation especially of the Banking sector which is the major component of the financial sector of the country. The banking sector reforms were guided primarily by the recommendations of the Committee on Financial System (Narasimham Committee, 1991) which related, among others, to (a) reduction in the levels of statutory pre-emptions, (b) dismantling the complex structure of administered interest rates, (c) laying down of capital adequacy requirements; (d) introduction of prudential norms and (e) liberalisation of entry norms for domestic and foreign banks.  At the macro level, firstly there has been a reduction in the level of preemption of banks’ resources. The statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) has been reduced from 38.5 percent in 1991-92 to 25 percent. The average cash reserve ratio (CRR) has been reduced from 15 percent in 1991-92 to 4.5 percent now. Secondly, interest rates have been deregulated. The number of administered interest rates on bank advances has been reduced from 20 in 1989-90 to just 2 by 1994-95. Interest rates on loans above Rs. 2 lakh are fully deregulated. Prime lending rates have declined from 19 percent in 1991-92 and the benchmark PLR now, in respect of five major banks, is in the range of 10.5 to 11.5 percent currently. Interest rates on domestic term deposits have also been deregulated. Thirdly, directed credit schemes have been streamlined to avoid inefficient use of credit. Fourthly, a Board for Financial Supervision has been set up with an Advisory Council to strengthen the supervisory system of banks and financial institutions and an independent Department of Banking Supervision has been set up in the RBI to assist the Board.  At the micro level, the less strong banks, which suffered capital erosion due to rising levels of non-performing assets were recapitalised. Secondly, capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 8 percent was introduced. This is now at 9 percent. Thirdly, prudential norms for income recognition, classification of assets and provisioning for bad debts were introduced. The management of NPAs has been fortified by the enactment of the Securitisation & Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Securities Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 which provides statutory support for the enforcement of creditors’ rights and inter alia, paved the way for the establishment of Asset Reconstruction Companies. Fourthly, Debt Recovery Tribunals were set up to assist the banks in the recovery of loans. Fifthly, the Scheme of Ombudsman was introduced in 1995, to look into and resolve customer grievances. Sixthly, the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and the Bank Nationalisation Act of 1970 were amended to enable the banks to access the capital market for debt and equity. Lastly, reforms were also introduced in respect of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and non-bank finance companies (NBFCs).  The above measures together with the strengthening of prudential norms and market discipline and the adoption of international benchmarks to suit India specific needs have served to make the Indian financial sector competitive, viable and resilient.  BIS Review 49/2004 1 
Financial crises the world over have revealed that weak financial systems and their supervision are the most important factors contributing to macro instability. As East Asia discovered so painfully, the health of the banking system underpins that of the economy as a whole. Financial markets are different from product markets and therefore, greater liberalisation goes along with deeper supervision and higher degree of regulation. Any destablisation in financial markets affects even those who are not in financial markets. On the other hand, financial markets can drive the real economy. Therefore, transparency, disclosures, prudential norms and capitalisation are a must. This is essential because bank depositors have no other security except that banks are well regulated.  Increasing deregulation and globalisation, greater competition from within the country and cross-border dealings have exposed banks to even greater risk. Diversification into non-traditional products like insurance, derivatives etc., has added to the complexity of banking business. Further, internet banking, e-commerce, e-money and other information technology related innovations are adding new dimensions to risks faced by the banking sector. Mergers and acquisitions as well as outsourcing of some non-core activities are undertaken by the banks with some strategic objectives - they also enhance the risks in banking. Considering the speed with which banking is changing, it is recognised that there is a need to enlarge the focus and thrust of Risk-Based Supervision (RBS) so as to be able to improve the risk sensitivity of the supervisory approach.  In view of the relevance of improved risk management systems under the changing circumstances and the larger emphasis placed on risk management systems in banks under Basel II, it is essential that RBS stabilises at an early date and serves as an important feedback to not only the managements but also the supervisors. However, taking into account the diversity in the Indian banking system, stabilising the RBS as an effective supervisory mechanism will be a daunting task.  Consolidation and move towards universal banking We are slowly but surely moving from a regime of “large number of small banks” to “small number of large banks”. The new era is going to be one of consolidation around identified core competencies. Mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector are going to be the order of the day. Successful merger of HDFC Bank and Times Bank earlier and Stanchart and ANZ Grindlays has demonstrated that the trend towards consolidation is almost an accepted fact. We are also looking for such signs in respect of a number of old private sector banks, many of which are not able to cushion their NPAs, expand their business and induct technology due to limited capital base. Coming times may usher in large banking institutions, if the development financial institutions opt for conversion into commercial banking in line with the recommendation of the Second Report of the Narsimhan Committee. In India, one of the largest financial institutions, ICICI, took the lead towards universal banking with its reverse merger with ICICI Bank. IDBI is also well on its way to transform itself into a universal bank. This may lead logically to promoting the concept of financial super market chain, making available all types of credit and non-funded facilities under one roof or specialised subsidiaries under one umbrella organisation. The setting up of banks by financial institutions and non-banking financial companies and setting up of insurance, merchant banking, mutual funds, housing finance and investment companies either as subsidiaries or as joint ventures has brought into focus the need for consolidated supervision. Consolidated accounting and supervisory techniques would have to evolve and appropriate firewalls need to be built to address the risks underlying such large organisations and banking conglomerates.  Supervision/regulation of financial conglomerates The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing entry of some of the bigger banks into other financial segments like merchant banking, insurance etc., which has made them financial conglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversified presence across major segments and possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring large enough proportions to have systemic impact make it imperative for supervision to be spread across various segments of the financial sector. In this direction, an inter-regulatory Working Group was constituted with members from RBI, SEBI and IRDA. The framework proposed by the Group will be complementary to the existing regulatory structure wherein the individual entities are regulated by the respective regulators and the identified financial conglomerates would be subjected to focused regulatory oversight through a mechanism of inter-regulatory exchange of information.  2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Risk management and capital adequacy Financial sector reforms in the current millennium are going to focus on setting the rules of the game for financial intermediaries in such a way that risks are taken with an adequate level of capital. In other words, financial intermediaries should be free to engage in asset liability management that allows them to diversify their risk so long as they are supported by a level of capital sufficient to cushion them against their risk profile. The first Capital Accord of 1988 evolved by Basel Committee provided a framework for a fair and reasonable degree of consistency in the application of capital standards. However, the methods used to determine the capital charge for credit risk in the accord were not sufficiently sophisticated and not perceived to be risk sensitive. Keeping in view the financial innovation and growing complexity of financial transactions, a need was felt for a more broad based and flexible framework for capital adequacy. Towards this end the Basel Committee has formulated a new framework, popularly called “Basel II” which attempts to formulate more precisely than before the levels of regulatory capital that banks must hold as a cushion against the credit and other risks that banks take. Cross-border supervision  This would involve a greater focus on overseas operations of Indian banks and in having information sharing arrangements with overseas supervisors on a firmer and more formal footing. In the context of money laundering concerns raised by some of the supervisors, it needs to be ensured that some of the branches, especially those which are not compliant with the anti-money laundering principles of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), are not causes of serious operational and reputational risks to their parent banks in India.  Money laundering  Although I touched upon this issue in brief earlier while discussing cross border supervision, I would like to dwell a little bit more on this issue as it has been engaging the attention of governments, regulators and international financial community for quite some time. And there will be no exaggeration if I call it the biggest challenge before the supervisors today.  Post September 11, the issue that bank supervisors the world over are grappling with is “How to root out the menace of money laundering?” Until recently, the governments talked tough about the problem, but did little about it. All that changed three years ago. The FATF was conceived by G-7 countries as a helpful mechanism to persuade governments to combat money laundering and offer them technical assistance to do so. The laws being enacted typically require a bank to “know the customer” to be confident that his money is obtained by legitimate means, and to report any suspicious activity. This involves a Herculean effort, thanks in part, to the growth of “Correspondent banking relationships.” In effect, this means banks must know their customers’ customers as well. Banking supervision all over the world has to achieve the delicate balance between respect for customer privacy and making banks report suspicious transactions. This raised the toughest question: What exactly are efforts against money laundering trying to achieve? So far, countries have been free to define what they regard as illegal sources of money. Some include drugs, racketeering and other dark crimes in their definition of illegal money. Some, such as France, consider tax evasion to be money laundering. Others like Switzerland have more flexible laws. However, as recently as last week, Switzerland has agreed in principle to dismantle the veil of secrecy governing its banking activity in order to comply with anti-money laundering requirements. This is a landmark development.  Corporate governance I would also like to touch upon an area, which is going to be the focus of the next generation financial sector reforms. One of the latest initiatives of RBI aims at enhancing the level of corporate governance in banks.  In view of the special status enjoyed by banks whereby they freely accept deposits from the public and leverage on such funds through credit creation, legal prescription for ownership and governance of banks have been laid down in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. These have been supplemented by BIS Review 49/2004 3 
regulatory prescriptions issued by the Reserve Bank from time to time. These cover the following aspects:  • Composition of the Board of Directors • Approval of the Reserve bank for the appointment of CEO • Powers for the removal of managerial personnel, CEO and Directors • Guidelines on criteria for appointment, role and responsibilities of Directors • Guidelines for acknowledgement of transfer/allotment of shares in private sector banks • Foreign investment in the banking sector  We have recently placed in public domain a draft paper on ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance in private sector banks’. The objective of the draft guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank in July 2004 is to have a regulatory road map for ownership and governance in private sector banks in the interests of the depositors and financial stability. The underlying thread of the draft guidelines is to ensure that the ultimate ownership and control of banks is well diversified, banks are owned and managed by ‘fit and proper’ persons/entities and well capitalised and that the processes are transparent and fair. Several countries, both developed and developing, have regulatory stipulations and clearance for significant shareholding and control. The threshold level may vary from country to country and can also involve more stringent conditions for higher thresholds. The draft guidelines allow for a level of shareholding of a single entity or a group of related entities beyond 10 per cent with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank. Such approval will be governed by the principles enunciated in the February 2004 guidelines. Apart from more intensive due diligence at higher levels of shareholding, the February 2004 guidelines require public interest objectives to be served for shareholding beyond 30 percent. In case where the ownership of a bank is that by a corporate entity, diversified ownership of that corporate entity will be considered among other factors. The draft guidelines do not cover foreign bank investment in Indian banks, which will be released separately consistent with the policy in the Government press note of March 2004 to allow only one form of operational presence for foreign banks in India.  In order to minimise vulnerability due to small size, the guidelines provide for increase in the net owned funds to Rs.300 crore for all private sector banks within a reasonable period. Cross holding beyond five percent is sought to be discouraged and where such holding exceeds five percent, the objective is to reduce it to five percent. Promoters with existing shareholding beyond ten percent will be required to indicate the time table for reduction - the requests will be considered on the basis of the underlying principles of ‘fit and proper’, governance and public interest. As a matter of desirable practice, not more than one member of a family or close relative or associate should be on the board. Based on the feedback received, a second draft of the guidelines would be prepared and put in public domain. The broad principles underlying the proposed framework is intended to ensure the following: • Well-diversified ownership and control • ‘fit and proper’ status of important shareholders, Directors and CEO • Minimum capital/net worth for optimal operations and systemic stability • Transparency and fairness of policy and process. A consultative group headed by Dr. Ashok Ganguli was set up to review the supervisory role of board of banks. The recommendations included due diligence procedures for appointment of directors, the role and responsibilities of independent non-executive directors, qualification and other eligibility criteria for appointment of non-executive directors, providing training to the non-executive directors so that they are in touch with the latest developments, etc.  In the midst of all these initiatives and challenges, a major challenge for the Reserve Bank has been to ensure that the overarching banking regulatory framework facilitates banking services reaching the common man. The Reserve Bank has appointed an External Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services headed by Dr. S.S. Tarapore and this committee has in one of its reports focused on depositor’s accounts and other banking facilities relating to individuals - the common man. Subsequently, Governor, Dr. Y.V. Reddy has addressed all the Chairmen of banks reminding them of the trust reposed by the common person in the nature and quality of customer 4 BIS Review 49/2004 
service rendered by banks. Banks must recognise that if there is disenfranchisement of the depositor they may wake up to find slippages on the liability side of their balance sheet.  In the ultimate analysis, however, it is the human resource which will have to respond to these challenges and in the words of our previous Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan, “In the years to come this ‘human’ bias is likely to get stronger and the quality of human resources would become the cutting edge of competitiveness. A forward looking approach to our long term vision must focus on building human resources in a continuous cycle of competency and development”. To drive the change and meet the challenges we need bankers with not only requisite leadership and technical skills but also ethical standards of the highest order and in this we need look no further than the late Shri Nani Palkhivala for a role model - a man about whom it can be truly said that he walked with Kings yet lost not the common touch.  BIS Review 49/2004 5 
Mark W Olson: Protecting the financial infrastructure  Testimony of Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, 8 September 2004. *      *      * Introduction Thank you Chairman Oxley and Ranking Member Frank, for inviting me to discuss a matter of significant importance to our country: protecting our financial infrastructure. As we approach September 11, I would like to take a moment to honor the memory of those who lost their lives and to honor those who supported one another on September 11, 2001.  Although the financial sector has years of experience dealing with operational disruptions caused by weather, power, and other critical infrastructure outages, the September 11 attacks had a profound effect on how the industry thinks about physical and cyber security as well as business-continuity planning. After the crisis subsided, sector participants, including the Federal Reserve, reflected on lessons learned and how they should be incorporated into daily business processes and business-resumption planning.  My remarks today will highlight the actions the Federal Reserve took on September 11 and immediately following to maintain confidence in and restore the operation of our financial system. I will also focus on numerous steps that we and the other financial regulators have taken since September 11 to improve the resilience of - and to protect - the financial infrastructure.  Response to September 11 On Tuesday, September 11, terrorists destroyed a portion of the critical infrastructure that supports the U.S. financial markets, disrupted communications networks, and forced numerous market participants to move to contingency sites. These challenges, along with the tragic loss of employees of a few major financial firms, complicated trading, clearing, and settlement of a number of financial instruments. Operational disruptions caused uncertainties about payment flows, making it difficult for the reserve market to channel funds to where they were needed most. Depository institutions that held more reserve balances than they preferred had difficulty placing and delivering the excess in the market; on the other hand, depository institutions awaiting funds had to scramble to cover overdraft positions. As a result, market participants experienced significant liquidity dislocations, and the demand for reserves grew rapidly.  The Federal Reserve accommodated the demand for reserves through a variety of means, the relative importance of which shifted through the week. On Tuesday morning, shortly after the attacks, the Federal Reserve issued a press release stating that “the discount window is available to meet liquidity needs,” thus reassuring financial markets that the Federal Reserve System was functioning normally. Borrowing by depository institutions surged to a record $45.5 billion by Wednesday. Federal Reserve discount loans to banks to meet liquidity needs dropped off sharply on Thursday and returned to lower levels by Friday. Separately, overnight overdrafts on Tuesday and Wednesday rose to several billion dollars, as a handful of depository and other institutions with accounts at the Federal Reserve were forced into overdraft positions on their reserve accounts. Overdrafts returned to negligible levels by the end of the week.  Like their U.S. counterparts, foreign financial institutions operating in the United States faced elevated dollar liquidity needs. In some cases, however, these institutions encountered difficulties positioning the collateral at their U.S. branches to secure Federal Reserve discount window credit. To be in a position to help meet the enhanced need for funds, three foreign central banks established new or expanded arrangements with the Federal Reserve to receive U.S. dollars in exchange for their respective currencies. These swap lines, which lasted for thirty days, consisted of $50 billion for the European Central Bank, $30 billion for the Bank of England, and an increase of $8 billion (from $2 billion to $10 billion) for the Bank of Canada. The European Central Bank drew on its line that week to channel funds to institutions with a need for dollars.  BIS Review 49/2004 1 
During that week, the disruption in air traffic caused the Federal Reserve to extend record levels of credit to depository institutions in the form of check float. Float increased dramatically because the Federal Reserve continued to credit the accounts of banks for the checks they deposited, even though the grounding of airplanes meant that checks normally shipped by air could not be presented to the checkwriters’ banks on the usual schedule. Float declined to normal levels the following week once air traffic was permitted to recommence. Finally, over the course of the week, as the market for reserves began to function more normally, the Federal Reserve resumed the use of open market operations to provide the bulk of reserves. The open market desk accommodated all propositions for funding through repurchase agreements down to the target federal funds rate, operating exclusively through overnight transactions for several days. The injection of reserves through open market operations peaked at $81 billion on Friday. The combined infusion of liquidity from the various sources caused the level of reserve balances at Federal Reserve Banks to rise to more than $100 billion on Wednesday, September 12 - about ten times the normal level.  In addition to accommodating the heightened demand for reserves, the Federal Reserve took several steps to facilitate market functioning in the wake of the September 11 attacks. For example, the hours of the funds and securities transfer systems for U.S. government and agency securities operated by the Federal Reserve were significantly extended during the week after the attacks. From September 11 through the 21st, the Federal Reserve reduced or eliminated the penalty charged on overnight overdrafts, largely because those overdrafts were almost entirely the result of extraordinary developments beyond the control of the account holders. For four weeks after the attacks, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York liberalized the terms under which it would lend securities from the System portfolio, and the amount of securities lent rose to record levels in the second half of September. The Federal Reserve working with the National Communications System (NCS) also assisted market participants in restoring their telecommunications services.  The markets and financial market authorities worked hard to restore operations, and market activity resumed relatively quickly after the attacks. By the week following September 11, the financial system had largely begun to function normally, although activities to address the aftermath of the attacks continued for some time.  Steps taken since September 11 to protect the financial infrastructure Within weeks of September 11, we initiated a self-assessment of our contingency arrangements across the Federal Reserve and embarked on forty initiatives, which we classified under five broad headings:  • Ensure continuity of Federal Reserve operations.  • Ensure market liquidity during a crisis.  • Ensure effective communications and coordination during a crisis.  • Improve resilience of the private-sector financial system infrastructure.  • Improve resilience of the telecommunications infrastructure supporting critical financial services.  Some of the key steps the Federal Reserve has taken to improve our infrastructure and the delivery of critical central-bank and financial services include the following:  • We have developed plans to ensure that critical central-bank activities, supervisory functions, and financial services operations have sufficient redundancy in facilities and staff. We have enhanced and tested business-continuity arrangements for critical functions and business lines.  • Our facilities for providing critical financial services are backed up at fully operational, geographically diverse sites to ensure a speedy recovery even if the critical infrastructure is disrupted across multistate areas.  • We have enhanced our resiliency for discount window lending and cash services provided by the Reserve Banks.  • We have improved our tools and authority to provide liquidity in a crisis. In 2003, the Board established the primary credit program, as well as special arrangements for rapidly reducing 2 BIS Review 49/2004 
the primary credit rate to the federal funds rate in an emergency. We also have improved the ability of the Board to approve the extension of emergency discount window credit.  The federal financial agencies took immediate steps to work together to identify new vulnerabilities exposed by September 11. These efforts were coordinated under the umbrella of the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, the Financial and Banking Infrastructure Information Committee (FBIIC), and, for depository institutions more specifically, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The agencies have implemented a duty officer program and developed communications protocols for dealing with their staffs, regulated financial institutions, and the public. We have also developed and tested facilities for secure communication among ourselves and with other agencies.  The agencies that participate in FBIIC, including the Federal Reserve, and that have direct supervisory and regulatory responsibilities for the financial sector have assessed potential system vulnerabilities. We have shared that information with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Indeed, I would like to commend the DHS for their work to share information and coordinate with the financial sector including the FBIIC during the recent elevation of the threat level to orange for financial services firms in New York City, northern New Jersey, and Washington, D.C. The timely communications and sharing of information enabled financial-sector participants and law enforcement authorities to take steps to mitigate risks so that customers of financial services firms were able to conduct business in the usual fashion. Financial-sector participants, including the financial regulators, strengthened business-resumption plans with an overall goal of ensuring the smooth operation of the financial system. Previously, terrorist attacks were treated as low-probability/high-impact events affecting a single institution. As a result of September 11, industry participants are now planning for events that affect wide areas, last longer, and involve loss of life or widespread destruction of property and information assets.  The process of strengthening the resilience of the financial system and, in particular, organizations that could have a systemic effect if they were disabled, is being accomplished through the existing regulatory framework. More than a year ago, in April 2003, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued an Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System. The paper formalizes a set of sound practices viewed as necessary by the agencies and the financial industry to ensure the rapid recovery of the U.S. financial system following a wide-scale disruption that may include loss or inaccessibility of staff. In particular, the paper articulates sound practices for resumption and recovery of critical clearing and settlement activities by core clearing and settlement organizations and financial institutions that play significant roles in critical markets by virtue of their market share (greater than five percent in one or more critical financial markets). The sound practices include establishing geographically dispersed backup facilities for clearing and settlement so that these organizations can meet recovery objectives within the business day if a wide-scale disruption takes place.  Using their respective supervisory and regulatory processes, the agencies are conducting focused, ongoing dialogues with the organizations that are subject to the sound practices paper. Financial organizations are investing millions of dollars to implement the sound practices. Clearing and settlement organizations, which are the financial utilities for the U.S. financial system, have made substantial progress in improving their resilience and achieving out-of-region geographic dispersion between primary and backup operations facilities and data centers. Several have met or will meet the sound practices by year-end, with the remainder scheduled to complete implementation in the second half of 2005. Banks and broker-dealers that play significant roles in the critical markets defined in the paper indicate they will meet the paper’s 2006 implementation date.  The sound practices are also relevant to other financial-sector participants. Many of the concepts in the paper amplify long-standing and well-recognized principles relating to safeguarding information and the ability to recover and resume essential financial services. Over the past few years, the FFIEC has revised and expanded guidance for banking organizations pertaining to operational risk. In December 2002, we issued revised guidance on information security. In April 2003, the FFIEC issued expanded guidance on business-continuity planning. The guidance addresses both the operational- and business-risk issues that depository institutions must incorporate into their business-continuity plans. The guidance specifically refers to the need to plan and test for recovery of critical business lines and functions - such as retail banking services - in the face of wide-scale disruption, as well as scenarios in which physical or information assets and personnel are lost. Recently, the FFIEC issued guidance on managing additional risks arising from information technology operations, network BIS Review 49/2004 3 
management, and wholesale and retail payments systems. Our examiners are assessing banks against these guidelines. Other financial market authorities are taking similar steps for the organizations that they regulate.  Challenge of protection While the agencies and financial-sector participants are working to improve their operational resilience, some vulnerabilities continue to pose challenges. The strategy underlying the sound practices is to increase the likelihood that systemically critical institutions will be able to recover rapidly from a wide-scale disruption. However, the sound practices address only recovery, not the prevention of an attack.  The agencies are addressing this concern by working to improve coordination and emergency planning efforts between federal, state, and local homeland security authorities; the various federal, state, and local protection agencies; and the systemically critical institutions. Efforts have focused on the locations where the systemically critical institutions have their primary operations - including New York City. The agencies also plan to work with local protection agencies in cities where critical institutions are locating backup sites. As part of these efforts, the Department of the Treasury has arranged for site surveys of key financial-services sector assets to determine whether physical security can be hardened. Protection plans have been developed and are being implemented.  Importance of telecommunications to the financial services sector The resilience of the telecommunications infrastructure is, from our perspective, one of the most important national issues involving the nation’s critical infrastructure. The U.S. financial system depends on telecommunications to effect transactions and make payments.  Following September 11, the Federal Reserve and the FBIIC agencies expanded and promoted the use of National Security/Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) telecommunications programs sponsored by NCS. These programs worked well in helping to resume operations on September 11. The Federal Reserve is working with FBIIC agencies through outreach to expand NCS services to clearing and settlement organizations processing securities. Approximately 5,000 additional authorizations to ensure the priority of voice telecommunications have been issued in the financial sector. Moreover, about 4,100 critical circuits used to transmit financial data have been registered for priority restoration and provisioning of new lines; these include most circuits between the payment and settlement systems, the markets, and key market participants.  The National Security/Emergency Preparedness telecommunications program operated by the NCS currently focuses on recovery and restoration. The FBIIC agencies believe that a third aspect - protection - through establishment of a national program for maintaining physically diverse circuits and switches, should be incorporated into the program. Treasury has designated the Federal Reserve as the lead agency for telecommunications for the FBIIC interdependencies study. At the Federal Reserve’s request, the telecommunications sector through the National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC) reviewed the resilience of the telecommunications infrastructure. In response to the NSTAC’s recommendations that were submitted to the President in April 2004, the Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) is organizing a National Diversity Assurance Initiative. ATIS has asked the Federal Reserve to participate in a pilot program to develop and test the requirements for physical circuit diversity across multiple carriers that can be used by the financial system and potentially other critical sectors. The Federal Reserve is collaborating with telecommunications services providers through NSTAC and the Federal Communications Commission Network Reliability and Interoperability Council. As an example, the Federal Reserve is currently working with the NSTAC to plan how NS/EP telecommunications services can be applied to the next generation of telecommunications networks based on internet protocols.  Summary In summary, Mr. Chairman, we believe that protecting the infrastructure that supports our financial system is a matter of national importance. As a result of careful planning and considerable investment by both the private and public sectors, the financial sector is one of the most resilient parts of our economy. The supervisory framework for the financial sector oversees compliance with security and 4 BIS Review 49/2004 
business-resumption expectations, which are relatively high because of the importance of ensuring the smooth operation of our financial system. All financial institutions have been expected to incorporate lessons learned from September 11, recent power outages, and cyber attacks. Organizations that we believe could have a systemic effect on the financial system if their functions were disrupted are being asked to meet very high standards of business resumption. The Federal Reserve will continue to treat the protection and resilience of the sector as a key responsibility.  Thank you Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. I am happy to respond to any questions.  BIS Review 49/2004 5 
R Basant Roi: Corporate governance guidelines and monetary policy stance in Mauritius Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the opening of the Goodlands Branch of the Indian Ocean International Bank Ltd, Goodlands, 20 August 2004.   *      *      * Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance Chairman of the Board of Directors of the IOIB Chief Executive and staff of the IOIB Ladies and Gentlemen Good Afternoon I am pleased to be here in your midst for the opening of the Goodlands branch of the Indian Ocean International Bank Ltd. I understand that the Indian Ocean International Bank has for quite sometime been implementing a plan for strengthening its financial standing and is also in the process of enhancing its corporate image. The bank has so far made a good measure of progress in this endeavour. I would like to urge its board of directors to maintain the speed of progress with the same zeal and vigour to the finish. Poor corporate governance has been the major cause for the weakness of banks and bank failures in Mauritius. To the board of directors of the Indian Ocean International Bank and to the boards of directors of all other banks operating in Mauritius, I would like to say that adherence to good corporate governance principles is indisputably the key to the maintenance of the sound and solid financial standing of financial institutions. A bank, however small, with good corporate culture is far stronger than any big bank with poor corporate governance principles. In the past few years the Bank of Mauritius has issued to banks a comprehensive set of guidelines, including corporate governance principles that they are required to adhere to. While virtually no banker disputes the necessity to impose those principles and other guidelines, many in the industry view them as cumbersome and too demanding. It is true that relative to way banking business used to be conducted until very recently in Mauritius, the regulatory requirements are indeed demanding. We cannot, however, overlook the fundamentally important fact that regulatory requirements do serve the best interests of depositors. And the Bank of Mauritius, as regulator of the industry, is here to protect the interests of depositors. Regulations are not designed to shape good behaviour of bankers. They aim at establishing discipline in the conduct of banking business and promoting corporate habits that are not only fair but also transparent to market participants. In this process, regulations do also help create conditions conducive to the sound development of financial markets. Often we come across rogue shareholders and rogue board members. Companies commonly face a typical problem; it’s the agency problem that sits at the very heart of corporate governance. Certain board members in the banking industry, rather than being guided by such principles that best serve the interests of their banks, often use their authority to advance their own agenda. This attitude is anathema to the principles of good governance. In the banking industry, integrity should be a palpable mark of distinction. By integrity I mean that board members do not make decisions just for a quick buck. It means board members are not solely transaction-driven; they are in for the long-term benefits of their companies as well as of their clients. It also means that, if things do not go well, board members stand by their clients and if things do go well they do not take unfair advantage of it. While profit making remains the principal motive for any enterprise in a capitalist system, a usurious attitude in the banking business does quite often bring with it the seed of self-destruction. The good banker formulates an educated view before executing any decision in his professional life. I have been receiving many complaints from bank customers in the last five years. Few of the complaints that I receive seem reasonable. Most of the complaints, after investigations, are found to be unreasonable. It is a common feature that borrowers do not pay sufficient attention to the contents of contracts they sign before borrowing. Often borrowers tend to swallow more than they can chew. It’s panic when the banker finally applies the sword. My appreciation of such a situation leads me believe BIS Review 49/2004 1 
that both bankers and borrowers share the blame. To borrowers I would like to say: refrain from borrowing sums of money that is beyond their repayment capacity. To bankers, I would like to reiterate that they should, right from the outset, ensure that borrowers do have the repayment capacity before disbursing funds to them. Some banks do it; some don’t. We are contemplating anti-collusive measures. Lately, various interpretations have been given to the monetary policy stance of the Bank of Mauritius. Five years ago, the Bank of Mauritius tightened its monetary policy stance with the rate of interest having gradually risen to high levels. The then prevailing conditions did warrant the tightening. It is commonplace that economies do undergo cyclical changes. The same set of policies that is appropriate for a particular phase of the economic cycle may not necessarily be appropriate for a different phase of the cycle if the objectives of the Bank’s policies are to be achieved. That is why the Bank of Mauritius re-oriented its policy stance and brought about reductions in the rate of interest during the last two years. The successive reductions in the rate of interest helped alleviate the financial burden of enterprises in the Export Processing Zone (EPZ). To what extent monetary policy can go on accommodating the interests of the various economic sectors without compromising the very mandate of the Bank of Mauritius is clear to the enlightened observers. There are limits to what monetary policy of the Bank can deliver. The problems of the EPZ are mostly management and market-related. The emerging problem of our sugar industry is also market-related. The problems are definitively not rooted in the exchange rate of the rupee. It is inappropriate to speculate that a deliberate step to cause the rupee to depreciate is in the policy agenda of the Bank of Mauritius. This perception is incorrect. World price of oil has attained unprecedented levels. It will evidently impact on the domestic price level. A depreciation of the rupee, triggered by oral stimulus, would exacerbate inflationary pressures in the economy. Ladies and gentlemen, having said that let me reiterate my support to the Board of Directors and the management of the IOIB for the efforts they have been putting in so far to steer the bank out of troubles. I wish them the very best of success. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Zdeněk Tůma: The importance of statistics - a central banker’s view   Introductory speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the conference “Statistics - investment in the future”, Prague, 6 September 2004. *      *      * Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen,  Let me join my distinguished colleague, Head of the Czech Statistical Office, Mr Fischer and welcome you to this conference at the Czech National Bank’s Congress Centre. One reason the Czech National Bank is co-organising this event is our own involvement in the statistical field and consequently a close co-operation with the Czech Statistical Office.  Statistics is somewhat overlooked by the general public who does not perceive it as an area of primary significance, unlike matters such as privatisation, corruption, bankruptcies, problems of the banking sector, functioning of the courts, law enforcement and the other major transformation issues. The less statistics is the subject of attention-grabbing articles and reports in the media, the more systematic work it requires. Work that is often very demanding, particularly as regards to data consistency and detailed profiles. Indeed, it is the level of detail which is subject to sensitive evaluation. That is why, one of the most difficult tasks in statistics is to strike a balance between the amount of information required and the burden laid on respondents.  Statistical information is used not only for passive monitoring of past developments and their disclosure in statistical publications, but also as a basis for real-life decision-making by economic agents. Statistical data is used in various negotiations. There are many examples. Wage bargaining is strongly affected by the evolution of prices. So-called “inflation clauses” form part of many agreements, for example rental contracts. Statistical data also serve as a basis for the decisions of various authorities. Central banks are a specific category. They significantly affect the economic environment. To be able to perform their duties properly, central banks need high-quality statistical information. “Nothing is more important for monetary policy than good statistics”. This is how Alexander Lamfalussy, the former President of the European Monetary Institute, the predecessor of the European Central Bank, characterised the importance of statistics for successful monetary policymaking.  This year marks the fifteenth anniversary on the path of transformation from a centrally controlled economy to a market economy. All areas of our life underwent dramatic changes, statistics being no exception. In the early 1990s, the Czech National Bank worked in close co-operation with the International Monetary Fund. Individual missions visited us several times a year. Statistics was one of the first areas in which such co-operation was established. This is entirely logical, since without the creation of a basic statistical framework it would not have been possible to communicate on monetary policy matters. Among the most important outcomes was a creation of monetary survey. This survey made it possible to compile monetary and credit aggregates. One of the preconditions for influencing the money supply was to establish what is known as the “monetary base”. The ongoing liberalisation process meant that it was no longer important to divide the balance of payments statistics into koruna and foreign currency transactions. This classification was replaced by a standard breakdown into transactions between residents and non-residents. Numerous statistics linked with regulation were gradually abolished as individual areas of economic activity were liberalised. These examples merely illustrate how the central bank’s entire statistical system was rebuilt from scratch.  Let me now move on to the more recent past. In 1999 we began to co-operate closely with European institutions. The main topics included monetary and banking statistics, balance of payments statistics and more recently also financial accounts, government financial statistics and general economic statistics. The development of statistics was influenced by a need to standardise each area to ensure compatibility between the EU Member States and the candidate countries. Hand in hand with these contacts, we began to work much more closely with the Czech Statistical Office. In the area of statistics the Czech Statistical Office is the natural and closest partner of the Czech National Bank, since these two institutions are the major producers of statistical information in the Czech Republic.  The Czech Statistical Office conducts a far wider range of statistical surveys, providing aggregate information on the national economy, territory, climate, environment, population, elections and other areas of life and activity of our country. The Czech National Bank is above all a user of economic BIS Review 49/2004 1 
statistics and collaborates most closely in this area. As both a user and a partner, we can affirm that the quality of the Office’s statistical output has increased immensely over the transformation period. Examples include the publication of national accounts according to international standards and the compilation of data on the government debt and deficit. The Czech National Bank focuses mainly on monetary and banking statistics and balance of payments statistics. The harmonisation of the monetary statistics with European standards was recently completed in both main components - balance sheet statistics and interest rate statistics. Monetary and credit aggregates and interest rates are now methodologically comparable with the data of other EU Member States. Speaking of harmonisation, I must mention the calculation of another convergence criterion - long-term interest rates. This calculation is based on long-term government bond yields on the secondary market. The Czech National Bank thus provides the statistical foundation for assessing this criterion.  International standards such as the IMF’s 5th Balance of Payments Manual are also observed when compiling the balance of payments. The balance of payments is now published every month and the required items are also broken down geographically. In recent years, much attention has been devoted to the category of foreign direct investment, where the data are published in very detailed geographical and sectoral breakdowns.  The balance of payments is perhaps the best example of co-operation between the Czech Statistical Office and the Czech National Bank. Co-operation is essential in many areas, since the basic indicators of the country’s economic performance, for example gross domestic product, cannot be compiled without data on trade in services, which is supplied by the Czech National Bank, and, conversely, the balance of payments cannot be compiled without data on foreign trade in goods, which is supplied by the Czech Statistical Office. However, our working contacts run much deeper, among other things the exchange of information for maintaining up-to-date registers or collaborating to eliminate duplication of effort in collecting statistical data from respondents. There is very close co-operation in the field of methodology. One recent example is the joint preparation of a new method of monitoring real estate prices to ensure that the data is as up-to-date as possible. Daily contacts are also maintained in the area of data publication, for example when presenting information under the Special Data Dissemination Standards project, an IMF standard adopted by the Czech Republic at the end of the 1990s. There is not enough time at this forum to list all our other joint activities. I do think, however, that the Czech National Bank’s involvement in organising this conference proves that co-operation between the two institutions is fruitful.  Ladies and gentlemen, I wish this statistical conference every success and do hope that all sessions live up to your expectations. I also wish you a pleasant stay at the Czech National Bank as well as in Prague.  2 BIS Review 49/2004 
Philipp M Hildebrand: Ten theories on the economic relationship Switzerland - Europe Summary of a speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, to the Arbeitgeberverband Basel, Basel, 8 September 2004. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * The relationship between Switzerland and the EU is close in so many ways that it appears almost stronger than that among many member states themselves. The debate on a possible integration into the EU as a logical consequence should be as broad-based as possible. Economically speaking, the issue has become more pressing since the introduction of the euro, as Switzerland is now surrounded by a single-currency area. Switzerland’s weaker economic growth is also frequently quoted as an argument in favour of integration, since the necessary domestic structural reforms would then be easier to realise. However, one tends to overlook the fact that the national authorities would continue to be responsible for implementing reforms and that, moreover, the absorption potential of autonomous monetary and fiscal policies would be forfeited.  Even with an independent policy, Switzerland is in a position to outperform if it again focuses on its strengths of flexibility and openness. The independent monetary policy has helped to keep inflation in Switzerland at a low level for decades. This and the diversification properties of the Swiss franc make capital cheaper in Switzerland by approximately 1.5 percentage points (interest premium). Exchange rate volatility vis-à-vis the euro area has declined, while it would continue to exist vis-à-vis the US dollar even after integration. The as yet more flexible labour market ushered in by the transition period II of the Bilateral Agreements I is the flagship of Swiss economic policy. It keeps unemployment and the resultant national costs low in the long term and strengthens the incentives for individual performance. It is essential to translate openness and flexibility, also with respect to internal structural reforms and external relations, into autonomously implemented reforms and a practical global orientation. BIS Review 49/2004 1 
Caleb M Fundanga: Achievements and accomplishments at the Bank of Zambia during the past forty years Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 40th anniversary celebrations, Lusaka, 5-6 August 2004. *      *      * Chairperson, Baroness Lynda Chalker of Wallasey  The Guest of Honour, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Zambia, Mr Levy Patrick Mwanawasa, State Counsel  Honourable Ministers  Honourable Deputy Ministers Your Excellencies Members of the Diplomatic Corps Honourable Members of Parliament present Special Guest, Governor Tito Mboweni, Governor Reserve Bank of South Africa  Distinguished Past Governors of the Bank of Zambia  Senior Government Officials  Distinguished Invited Guests  Ladies and Gentlemen  On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, it is my singular honour and rare privilege to extend a warm welcome to you all as we commemorate the 40th Anniversary of the establishment of the Bank of Zambia. I would also like to thank, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Zambia, for accepting our invitation to officiate at this special occasion. Further, special thanks go to Governor Mboweni for accepting to deliver a key note speech and all foreign participants for coming. Mr President may I mention that amidst this gathering are participants from sister central banks in the region that have come to celebrate this anniversary with us as well as Zambians based outside the Republic.  Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, this Anniversary marks 40 years of dynamic transformations and achievements accomplished by the Bank. Some of the challenging issues that the Bank has confronted in the past and likely to do so in the future form part of the selected topics of Papers to be presented and discussed at this Conference. This conference is therefore expected to provide a platform for sharing ideas required for practical solutions aimed at improving the Bank’s deliverables. In doing so, however, we must be cognisant of global trends in central banking.  Madam Chairperson, since its establishment in 1964, the Bank of Zambia has played an important role in the economy by formulating and implementing monetary, regulatory and supervisory policies in its quest for price stability. Over this period, progress has been made towards the deepening of financial markets, specifically in the areas of monetary policy management, and the foreign exchange market. In addition, substantial improvements to the legislative and regulatory frameworks for banks and financial institutions have been attained.  Ladies and Gentlemen, during the pre-liberalisation period from 1964 to 1991, monetary policy was largely characterised by administrative controls on interest rates and the exchange rate. Although the Banking Act of 1965 was created to enable the implementation of monetary policy, in the pre-liberalization era monetary policy involved multiple objectives, such as, financing agriculture and parastatal companies, and providing guarantees for export marketing, which at times presented the Bank with conflicting roles as a monetary authority.  To the contrary, during the current liberalization period, which commenced with vigor in 1992, the Bank, in conformity with market reforms, has steadily moved towards the use of market-based structures and systems as opposed to direct instruments in the conduct of its monetary policy. In this BIS Review 48/2004 1 
regard, and beginning 1993, deregulation of interest rates, removal of capital controls and freeing of the foreign exchange market were implemented as part of the broader financial sector reforms.  As a result, through the use of mainly market-based instruments of monetary policy, the Bank has made several notable achievements. Amongst these, has been its contribution to the reduction of annual inflation to 17.2% in December 2003 from 197.0% at the end of December 1992. Further, inflation has remained just under 20% in the first half of 2004 and it is the Bank’s desire to see single digit inflation within the foreseeable future. The benefits of lower inflation in single digits can not be over-emphasized, especially with regard to the fight against poverty.  Madam Chairperson, last October the Bank took a bold stand of effecting a down-ward adjustment in the statutory reserve ratio to 14.0% from 17.5 % on both Kwacha and foreign currency deposit liabilities. This was intended to release funds to commercial banks. The outcome of this policy action has been increased loanable funds being available to commercial banks. This in turn has greatly contributed to the downward trend in lending rates in the economy. For instance, the weighted average lending base rate dropped to 29.8% in June 2004 from 39.6% in August 2003. This action was consistent with Government’s objective to ensure increased credit to priority sectors such as agriculture. I am glad to inform the conference participants that a noticeable increase in credit to key growth sectors namely agriculture, tourism, manufacturing and mining has been recorded since this policy action by the Bank. This process has been greatly assisted by a significant reduction in Government borrowing from the banking sector.  In its continued effort to develop a fully functional foreign exchange market, in July last year the Bank established a broad-based inter-bank foreign exchange management (IFEM) system as the new mechanism for determining the exchange rate in Zambia. Under this system market making has been transferred to commercial banks with the Bank performing mainly an oversight role. Coupled with favourable developments in exports, the IFEM has to-date yielded encouraging results as evidenced in the relative stability of the Kwacha against currencies of most major trading partners.  Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, one area that has seen remarkable reforms is that of the payment systems in Zambia, for which the Bank has been actively involved. These reforms include the establishment in September 1999 of the Zambia Electronic Clearing House Limited which provides a speedier mechanism of clearing funds to customers. It also reduces the risk of errors during processing of payments. Another development arising out of electronic clearing was the establishment of an electronic funds transfer system called Direct Debits and Credits Clearing (DDACC) in October 2001. The DDACC system provides unparalleled convenience to both payer and payee for processing bulk and small value regular payments such as salaries and utility bills. Owing to its fully electronic nature, funds are cleared within 24 hours.  In a further development, in June 2004, the Bank of Zambia launched the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system. This system facilitates real time settlement of large value and time critical payments. This is a significant step towards easing the payments side of economic activities in our country.  The above accomplishments not withstanding, challenges still remain and we in the Bank of Zambia are set to drive the payment system towards one that will be secure, efficient, cost effective and accessible to the majority of Zambians. The rural population and the unbanked majority will have a prominent focus in our reform process.  The Bank has also been instrumental in other reforms in the financial sector which include preparation of the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) whose overall objective is to increase financial intermediation and promote efficiency of the financial system. Madam Chairperson, the theme “40 years of Central Banking: Facing the Challenges of the 21st Century” during this anniversary is meant to make us reflect on the achievements that the Bank has made so far and then focus our attention to the challenges that lie ahead. This follows from the Mission of the Bank, which states “To formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system stability”.  The Bank of Zambia acknowledges the need for improved terms and conditions under which money and credit are provided to the economy. The increased number of registered domestic and domestically incorporated international banks has led to augmented credit creation to local businesses compared to pre-liberalisation levels. Previously, credit facilities were scarcely availed to local businesses. Efforts are currently being made to establish a Credit Reference Bureau, which should result in reduced information asymmetries and contribute to the further lowering of lending rates. It is also hoped that the bureau will provide an objective assessment of potential private sector borrowers 2 BIS Review 48/2004 
and improve credit culture. Timely, adequate and affordable credit is required in the economy to effectively facilitate economic growth, create employment and reduce poverty.  Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, financial stability which forms part of the Bank’s mandate is a critical component of macroeconomic stability. Our banking sector experienced an unprecedented structural evolution during the latter part of the 1990s when new bank entrants and eventual quick exits characterized it. The implications of a volatile banking sector speak for themselves. No doubt, the Bank of Zambia had met yet another daunting challenge in its role as a supervisory authority. Even in the aftermath, the Bank continues to deal with aspects of institutions in liquidation.  However, one welcome outcome from this experience is the consolidation of the banking sector, which is much more aware of the constant need for prudent risk management and good corporate governance. From our end, the Bank has also undergone a significant re-orientation of its supervisory techniques and approaches. These are now largely in line with international best practices and also constitute a platform on which we shall meet the future challenges facing the financial sector in the 21st Century.  Ladies and Gentlemen, from time to time developments are associated with setbacks and the Bank of Zambia is no exception. Here I am referring to the issue of polymer notes which were introduced sometime last year. The introduction of these notes as we have explained at several fora was meant and is still meant to have cleaner notes in the economy and more importantly to have notes with a relatively longer life-span before replacement, than the traditional paper notes. With a relatively longer life-span, the nation would save resources because the frequency of replacing the notes would greatly be reduced. However, due to technical problems experienced by the printer, most of the notes have been fading faster than expected. May I re-assure the nation that we have continued to work with the printer and a solution is being worked out in the quickest time possible. Needless to say that this problem has posed a big challenge for all of us at the Bank of Zambia.  Madam Chairperson, with respect to its organisational and functional structure, the Bank has overtime undergone modifications to suite its role as a monetary and supervisory authority. In addition, structural changes have been necessitated by the continuously changing demands along with changes in the economy and especially in the dynamic financial markets. From a handful of departments at inception currently, the Bank comprises the following core departments, Economics, Financial Markets, Bank Supervision, Non-bank Financial Institutions Supervision, Banking, Currency and Payment Systems, and the Regional Office in Ndola. The support departments include Procurement and Maintenance, Finance, Bank Secretariat, Human Resources, Information Technology and Internal Audit as well as a Security Division. In order to streamline the operations of the Bank and improve its performance, a performance agreement system for employees was introduced in 1995. This was meant to bring about a new work culture with emphasis on professionalism, based on the philosophy, “The BoZ Way means Action”.  Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, since the 1996 Bank of Zambia Amendment Act, the Bank has continued to enjoy operational autonomy with regard to the formulation and implementation of monetary policies and attainment of relative financial system stability. The ability of the Bank to continually meet quantitative benchmarks set by Government and cooperating partners, can be attributed to the focus of its monetary policy on creating a stable macroeconomic environment as a precondition for sustainable economic growth.  Ladies and Gentlemen, as we move ahead and look to the next 40 years of central banking in Zambia, the Bank of Zambia will continue to play a catalytic role in facilitating the exchange of ideas among the banking community, the private sector, and all other key stakeholders through such gatherings as this conference. We will continue to carry out our mandate, with the objective of facilitating the work of Government and economic activities of the private sector for the betterment of all Zambians.  Mr President, Madam Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would be failing this occasion if I do not recognise that the achievements of the Bank of Zambia over the last 40 years are a result of the hard work by employees, past and present, including the former Governors. Allow me at this point to present the names of the former Governors and also to recognize those that are in our midst.  BIS Review 48/2004 3 
These are: • Mr R C H Hallet, 1964-1967; • Dr Justin Zulu, 1967-1970; • Mr Valentine S Musakanya, 1970-1972; • Mr Bitwell R Kuwani 1972-1976 & also 1981-1984; • Mr Luke Mwananshiku, 1976-1981; • Mr David A R Phiri, 1984-1986; • Mr Leonard Chivuno, 1986-1987; • Mr Francis X Nkhoma, 1987-1989; • Mr Jacques A Bussieres, 1990-1992; • Mr Dominic C Mulaisho, 1992-1995; and  • Dr Jacob Mwanza 1995-2002. May I, at this point, request that we stand and observe a moment of silence in honour of our past late Governors; R C H Hallet, Valentine S Musakanya, Bitwell R Kuwani, Luke Mwananshiku and Leonard Chivuno and many other former employees of the Bank who passed away during the last 40 years.  Thank you. It is important to mention here that most of the former Governors have continued playing critical roles in the financial sector and I can proudly say that three of them today serve as chairmen of commercial banks. In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, may I again welcome you all to this conference, and I urge you to be open and constructive during the deliberations. I thank you. 4 BIS Review 48/2004 
Bandid Nijathaworn: Regional financial cooperation - some thoughts on the way forward Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC Finance and Development Program Annual Forum, Sanya, China, 28 November 2004. *      *      * Thank you Mr Chairman, I would like to begin by thanking the Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China and the AFDP Secretariat for inviting me to speak this afternoon in Sanya. It is a pleasure and an honour to be here, especially in the presence of so many distinguished experts and policy makers in the region. Today, I have been asked to speak on regional financial cooperation. This is a subject we all know well and one that many of us spent a lot time working on in the past years. Given the limitation of time, I would like to focus my talk today by making just two points. The first is to highlight some of the key achievements that have been made in regional financial cooperation. Next, I would like to share with you some of my thoughts on the way forward, especially on the measures that can be taken to further strengthen the process of financial cooperation in the region. First, on the achievements I think there is no doubt that a lot of progress has been made in regional financial cooperation in the past years. This progress has been driven by a combination of factors, but the most important has been the Asian financial crisis itself, which prompted policy makers in the region to recognize the potential benefits of financial cooperation as a mechanism that can allow the region to prevent or to better manage the risks of financial crisis. Since the 1997-98 crisis, regional financial cooperation has been strengthened in three main ways: The first is the strengthening of liquidity arrangements, the second is the introduction of regular policy dialogue and surveillance, and the third is the coordination of efforts to develop the region’s bond market. So far, progress which has been made includes an expanding network of Bilateral Swap Agreements between ASEAN and Plus Three countries under the Chiang Mai Initiatives to provide short-term liquidity. There is also the Formal and Informal ASEAN+3 Finance and Central Banks Meetings to exchange information and discuss policy issues, as well as the discussion under the APEC platform. Also, new developments from the Asian Bond Market Initiative and the APEC Forum have also been launched to develop the region’s bond market. My point is that these achievements are important and their realization would not have been possible without the awareness and the determination of the authorities concerned to make them happen. But notwithstanding the progress made, more can definitely be done to bring regional financial cooperation to a level that is on par with the region’s economic and financial potentials. This is to say that although the economies of East Asia have recovered and are on the path of sustained growth, regional financial cooperation needs to continue and should substantially move forward. The rationale for this is clear: First, financial cooperation will lead to a faster pace and a more comprehensive development of the region’s financial markets. Such development is crucial for sustaining the momentum of intra-regional trade and investment, a factor that has been instrumental for the region’s recent economic success. Going forward, this momentum of intra regional trade and investment has a potential to become a major source of growth for the region, through the promotion the region’s domestic demand. Second, with the globalized flows of finance and capital, maintaining financial markets stability is a key condition for preserving macroeconomic stability. To achieve this, in addition to the pursuance of sound economic and financial policies, the Asian region also needs to have its own financial arrangement. Such an arrangement will help ensure an orderly and stable financial environment such that any emerging vulnerabilities would not pose serious risks to the region’s financial markets and   1/3  
economies. Important in this context, I believe, is for the region to have its own financing facility that draws on the region’s own financial strength and resources. With such a facility, there would be greater confidence amongst policy makers in the region that we do have the capability and the capacity to look after our markets and economies if there were to be a major financial distress. On the basis of this rationale, it is my view that regional financial cooperation should move progressively forward, with the process being further strengthened and the work becoming more focused, aimed at producing more tangible results. Let me now spare with you my thoughts on the way forward. On this issue, I should say at the outset that the points I am going to make here are not new, and some of them are probably already familiar to you. The first is the Chiang Mai Initiative or CMI. CMI was created conceptually as a short-term financing facility to help participating members manage their balance of payments shortfalls at a time of financial distress. Although the economies of East Asia are now much stronger than five years ago, CMI should continue to remain a key pillar of regional financial cooperation. This is because it is important for the region to have its own liquidity arrangement that can be called upon when the need arises. With the crisis now behind us, we do have time to think on how best to improve the existing facility. And, one way we can approach this is to look for ways we can credibly turn the existing arrangement into a facility that emphasizes a greater level of resource commitment by participating members. This is to say that requesting members should be in a position to count on this facility when the need arises. Looking at the improvement from this angle, I think there are three ways we can reflect upon. The first is to make the size of the arrangement larger and more meaningful with respect to possible needs of members. The second is the simplicity of the activation process, especially for the first tranche. This is important for giving assurance to participating members that liquidity will be made available in a timely manner. And the third is the objective of turning CMI into a multilateral facility at a later stage. This last feature, if realized, will provide the region with its own financial arrangement that can help expand the region’s capability in safeguarding financial stability. lt goes without saying that a move to emphasize greater resource commitment by members will entail substantial strengthening in the current regional surveillance process. This is a development that we all should welcome. Strengthening the surveillance process should in fact be a key prior condition for expanding the CMI because it will help make the CMI process credible while reducing the risk of moral hazard. CMI is currently under review. I hope some of the points I have touched upon will be further explored. But whatever the outcome of the review may be, I am confident that it will signify another important step forward for regional financial cooperation. My second thought is on the region’s bond market. Economists in the region have long made known their views that Asia is a region with surplus savings, but the financial surplus of Asia has not been effectively utilize for the benefits of the economies in Asia. This is clearly a missed opportunity. To bridge this shortcoming, the region’s financial markets need to be substantially expanded and developed so that the region’s markets can effectively allocate surplus savings within the Asian region. The current focus on regional bond market development is therefore a step in the right direction. But my point today is that while developing the bond market is important, two additional areas of market developments in tandem with the work on the bond market should also be looked at to ensure a balanced development of financial infrastructure in Asia. The first is human resource: that is the need to build a steady supply of high quality financial personnel to serve the Asian financial markets. In the short term, this issue can be partly addressed by promoting a greater role of Asian financial institutions in cross-border transactions or businesses within the Asian market. The expanded role of Asian financial institutions will enhance the experience of Asian financial firms in cross-border transactions and help transfer financial skills and technology among market participants in the region. For the long term, we should be thinking of establishing a regional finance institute that aims specifically to train and develop financial personnel for the Asian market. To me, this type of initiative looks practical and is economically feasible because Asia’s large domestic market will always call for substantial demand for trained financial personnel. Such an institute will also play an important role in   2/3  
supporting the development of financial markets in Asia, as well as producing the next generation of Asian Financiers. The second area that should also be considered is the harmonization and streamlining of the existing rules and regulations. This is especially important for cross--border capital movements so that the region’s financial resources can flow more smoothly between economies in the region. Streamlining rules and regulations will help reduce unnecessary barriers, and through lower transaction costs, will allow a more efficient allocation of resources. For example, measures to protect domestic markets from outside competition may need to be relaxed. Along the same line, there is room to harmonize taxes on capital market transactions so that tax implications are neutral and do not act as a constraint to efficient resource allocation. Ladies and Gentlemen, My last thought for today is on ways we should proceed to expedite the pace of regional financial cooperation. At this juncture, there is no disagreement that we all would like to see more and faster progress on regional financial cooperation. And, to ensure its progress, we have seen policy makers in Asia ready and prepared to take bold and important policy actions. My view is also the same. I also want to see a faster pace of development rather than a slow one. But one also needs to underscore that, to achieve long term sustainability and continuity, the process of development needs to be market driven rather than policy driven. This is important for ensuring that resources would be allocated efficiently and that the direction of development would be in line with the needs of markets, which reflect private sector’s priority and expectations. At the initial stage of development, as is the case now for the Asian Bond Market, government policies and efforts will be important to spearhead the process of growth and development. But once the momentum takes off, market mechanism should take over to ensure that the pace and focus of development are consistent with market expectations. And, at this level, the role of policy should be to support and facilitate market development by streamlining rules and regulations, by facilitating cross-border trade and investment flows, and by providing the necessary financial infrastructure. This approach will help ensure that the region’s financial environment remains conducive to private sector activities and participation. Let me take the opportunity here to stress that, at this juncture of financial markets development in Asia, I think that support from the authorities is still important and remains a crucial factor. But in order to leverage the impact of government’s support and involvement to the fullest, it is important for the authorities to be clear and firm on their commitments to develop the markets. Government involvement should also be focused and concentrate on issues that cannot be tackled by private market participants. Importantly, the authorities should engage the private sector early into the process of market development so that the direction of policy and development is aligned with needs of the private sector. Most of the issues that I have raised today are not new, but they are the important ones. Again, I will not be surprised if many of you are also having the same thoughts. Such convergence of ideas will be good in helping to advance our interest and work on regional financial cooperation. I am confident that we can move forward more rapidly in the direction that will be most beneficial to our economies, while sharing a common vision of greater prosperity and economic well-being for our region. Thank you for your attention.   3/3  
Ardian Fullani: Monetary policy challenges in the framework of approximating the Bank of Albania to the European Central Bank Greeting speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop organised by the Bank of Albania in cooperation with the GTZ, Tirana, 8 December 2004. *      *      * Honorable participants, I would like to express my pleasure for participating in this meeting, whose topic has been of great interest to me, and not accidentally I expressed in my first public pronouncement the approximation of the Bank of Albania to ESCB pattern as one of my essential challenges. I had the possibility to discuss this issue even with the Vice President of the ECB, Mr. Papademos, at a meeting in Frankfurt, where I launched the idea to be assisted by the ECB and member banks of the ESCB on approximating our system with the European one. Trying to spare the time for other discussions of interest in this meeting, I would like to briefly mention some of the main steps to be undertaken by the BoA in the integration process with the European System of Central Banks, a process that requires not only time, but also dedication, lobbying, financial resources and above all, capable human resources. 1. Reviewing the legal and regulatory framework of the Bank of Albania and of the financial system in Albania In integration process, the reviewing of laws and by-laws is of priority, particularly in the context of the prerequisites that a country aspiring for membership has to meet in the central banks area, in financial and banking system and even broader. In spite of the so-far achievements, much work has to be done. Therefore, the identification of our needs and priorities in this direction would serve as the first step. The Bank of Albania is not the sole authority in supervising the financial operations licensed in Albania. In this sense, the reviewing of laws and bylaws, involving not only the banking system but also the financial one, would open the way to more effective supervision of the overall financial system. This process would serve not only to further develop the financial system but also to assist in increasing the institutional cooperation between the banking and financial system, thus leading the cooperation between these systems to a higher level.  2. Reviewing the organizational and institutional system It is natural that the pattern to be pursued is that of the ECB and ESCB. In this issue, much importance will be given to the institutional development of the Bank of Albania over the mid-term period, which will be based, above all, on meeting without conditions of a very important requirement of any aspiring country, which has to do with the central bank independence. The institutional and documentary approximation to practices on which the ECB is based and operates will be the main principles of the BoA agenda. 3. Improving the monetary policy and operational framework From the viewpoint of operational monetary policy framework, the Bank of Albania is a relatively advanced institution, but the same consideration may not be valid concerning its transmission mechanism. Significant improvements are required for the development of banking and financial markets. So, we may mention: the development of lending to economy, especially in Lek, thus creating a better extension of operations according to demand, and reducing the transactions in cash.       1/2  
In the function of market development, positive tendencies are expected in the future, in terms of increasing competition and banking intermediation efficiency.  Concerning cash reduction in economy (money outside banks), the BoA is not going to work in campaigns but will be led by a more active philosophy in terms of encouraging banking products, completion of clearing systems, use of credit cards not only for payments but also for general services and particularly for utilitarian ones.  The identification of factors impacting on inflation and the magnitude of this impact remains an important element, thus creating possibilities for a more accurate inflation forecasting. An important role in this direction will be played by improvement of research and information abilities and the system of statistics within the bank, which will also be subject of discussion by the BoA representatives in this meeting. We may mention here the establishment of an Institute of Scientific Research of the Bank of Albania, with a regional dimension, that will impact significantly on raising the standards.  Concerning price stability, the necessary institutional framework of the Bank of Albania, the independence, credibility, accountability and transparency should be ensured and strengthened. Dear participants, The above issues constitute some main pillars, which will create a real approximation of the Bank of Albania to European System of Central Banks. On the other hand, I am convinced that today’s meeting will be a concrete step in this direction. Wishing the successful continuation of this workshop, I express once more my determination to lead the integration process of the BoA towards ESCB.      2/2  
T T Mboweni: The South African banking sector - an overview of the past  10 years Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the year-end media cocktail function, Johannesburg, 14 December 2004. *      *      * 1.  Introduction Over the past decade, South Africa has established a well-developed banking system which compares favourably with those in many developed countries and which sets South Africa apart from many other emerging market countries. At the end of 2004, we find ourselves with a more mature banking sector, with a moderate level of private-sector indebtedness and a respectable and first-rate regulatory and legal framework. South African banks are well managed and utilise sophisticated risk-management systems and corporate-governance structures in conducting the business of a bank. South Africa’s banks are regulated in accordance with the principles set by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Consequently, our banks comply with international sound practice and offer a sophisticated banking system to the public. Customers have online, real-time, nationwide access to bank accounts 24 hours a day, everyday of the year. South Africa’s political transformation, together with the relaxation of exchange controls and the liberalisation of African economies, has resulted in South Africa becoming an increasingly important financial centre. South Africa is now also well positioned to provide global services through the international offices of our banks and the presence of international banks in South Africa. 2.  Structure of the South African banking sector Currently, there are 38 registered banks in South Africa. This number consists of 15 South African controlled banks, 6 non-resident controlled banks (subsidiaries), 15 local branches of international banks, and two mutual banks. In addition, 44 international banks have authorised representative offices in South Africa. Representative offices, however, may not take deposits.  Five major groups continue to dominate the South African banking sector. These groups are the Absa group, the Standard Bank group, the FirstRand Bank group, Investec and Nedcor. In 1994, these groups represented 83.8 per cent of the total assets of the banking sector and, currently, they represent 87.4 per cent of the banking sector. The remaining 12.6 per cent of assets in the banking sector are currently held by the other 31 banks, excluding the two mutual banks.  Initially, the number of medium to small local banks increased steadily over the past decade. During, the latter part of 1999, however, these banks faced liquidity pressures, which led to many of these medium to small banks exiting from the banking system. This downward trend reached its lowest point with the placement of Saambou Bank into curatorship in February 2002 and the subsequent integration of BOE Bank into Nedbank. From the last quarter of 1999 to the end of March 2003, some 22 banks exited the South African banking system. It can be said, however, that this phenomenon was due more to a consolidation of the broader banking sector than a failure of the medium to small banking sector. Currently, small local banks constitute 3.1 per cent of the total banking sector assets, in comparison to 21.7 per cent in 1994.  As a result of the political isolation of South Africa in the mid-1980’s, international banks terminated their operations in South Africa. Immediately prior to the advent of the democratically elected government in 1994, few international banks were doing banking business in South Africa. Amendments to the Banks Act in 1994, however, allowed not only representative offices and subsidiaries of international banks to be established in South Africa, but also branches of international banks. Following the opening of South Africa’s financial system in 1994, international participation in the local banking industry increased significantly, from 3 per cent in 1994 to 9.5 per cent of total banking sector assets by the end of October 2004.    1/7  
3.  Periods of change in the banking sector Following South Africa’s re-entry into international financial markets in 1994, locally registered banks have increasingly been expanding their operations into other countries. At the same time, international banks have been expanding their operations into South Africa. Besides adding further depth and sophistication to the South African market, these foreign banks began to tap into the South African labour market. Consequently, the arrival of these predominantly resourceful and experienced banks posed formidable challenges to local banks. In a quest to survive and excel, South African banks had to devise means to adapt to the new terrain. As a result of the increased competition, lending margins have been placed under greater pressure, and several banks have had to expand their businesses and enter markets with slightly higher credit-risk profiles. Currently, the major banks offer a wide range of services to both individual and corporate customers. One-stop relationship banking, with an emphasis on universal banking, instead of isolated services, has gained in importance during the past few years. Nevertheless, several banks, especially small local and foreign banks continue to service niche markets, where they hold some form of competitive advantage. 4.  Trends in South African banks over the past decade Generally, the South African banking sector remained fairly stable during the past decade. The first part of the past decade was characterised by global financial turbulence and banking crises in many countries. In general, the South African banking sector showed itself to be remarkably resilient during the crises experienced. The latter part of the decade was characterised by a significant depreciation of the South African currency and, in 2002, we experienced our own banking instability. Fortunately, and owing particularly to the solid foundations upon which our banking system is based, 2003 and 2004 were marked by greater stability.  (i)  Balance-sheet structure The aggregated balance sheet of all banks in the South African banking sector grew from R344.6 billion as at end December 1994 to R724 billion as at end December 1999. By the end of October 2004, total assets had grown to a record high of R1.436 trillion. Loans and advances grew continuously over the past decade, from R270.8 billion as at end Dec 1994 to R 1.104 trillion as at end October 2004. Domestic deposits from the public remained the main source of funding for the banking sector over the past ten years and amounted to R888 billion in October 2004 (as opposed to R241.9 billion as at end December 1994). (ii)  Profitability The efficiency of the banking sector can be determined by expressing operating expenses as a percentage of total income. Currently, the international benchmark for efficiency is 60 per cent. In the past, South African banks were able to keep this ratio below or close to the international benchmark. The ratio, however, has increased from 60.2 per cent in 1999 to 67 per cent in 2002. The high volatility in efficiency in 2002 indicates that the South African banking sector was indeed experiencing problems with profitability in the first six months of 2002. This deterioration is confirmed by the return on equity of 5.4 per cent (smoothed over 12-months) and the return on assets of 0.4 per cent (smoothed over 12-months) as at the end of June 2002. Since 2002, however, the efficiency ratio has improved and, as at the end of October 2004, the efficiency of the banking sector was 65.2 per cent. By the end of October 2004, the return on equity and the return on assets of the banking sector had similarly improved.  (iii)  Capital adequacy The change in focus of the regulatory authorities from direct controls to a more market-based approach has been accompanied by an emphasis on proper capitalisation, sound risk-management procedures and greater disclosure. South Africa adheres to the capital-adequacy guidelines for banks promulgated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. The requirement to maintain capital equal to the full ratio of 8 per cent of risk-weighted assets was changed to a rate of 10 per cent by the   2/7  
Registrar of Banks in 2001. By end of October 2004, the banking sector as a whole had a capital-adequacy ratio of 13 per cent (up from 9.5 per cent in December 1994). (iv)  Non-performing loans Of great significance was a decrease in the growth of total non-performing loans during the past decade. After reaching a peak of R29.2 billion in March 1999, growth in total non-performing loans declined to R23.8 billion as at end December 2003. During 2004, total non-performing loans continued to decrease to a level of R20.9 billion. Provisioning by banks remained adequate throughout the past decade despite non-performing loans being high in the late nineties, as mentioned earlier.  5.  Reaction of the regulator to the small to mid-sized banking crises It is common cause that the South African banking sector experienced certain mini-crises over the past decade. None was more concerning than the instability experienced by small to mid-sized banks during the period of the Saambou problem. Saambou Bank experienced a liquidity crisis, emanating from negative market perceptions, a profit-warning announcement and the sale of Saambou shares by two of the bank’s executive directors. At the time, Saambou was the seventh largest South African bank and had both a large retail deposit base and a well-established branch network.  In order to prevent a crisis of confidence in the small to mid-sized banking sector, Saambou was placed under curatorship. Unfortunately, this led to further withdrawals, not only from the smaller banks but also from larger banks. This loss of confidence significantly affected the sixth largest bank at the time, BOE Bank, indicating that the lack of confidence could move up the scale and not only down the scale.  Since such a trend could not be supported, the South African Reserve Bank entered into consultations with the National Treasury, which ultimately issued a guarantee to all depositors that the government would fund their withdrawals. This action sent a signal to the market that the authorities were serious about maintaining the stability of the banking sector.  Several lessons have been learnt from the small to mid-sized banking crises. First, owing to the special nature of banks, all key players, including, for example, external auditors, analysts, the media and rating agencies, should appreciate the nature of banking and act responsibly when dealing with the banking sector.  Second, the regulatory authorities must also be mindful of the fact that all their actions, combined and separately, constitute signals to the market and that greater problems may result if a bank in distress is not handled in a manner that provides certainty.  Third, the regulatory authorities have also learnt to treat with circumspect institutions that apply for a banking licence, but which have only the interests of the individual shareholder and not the interests of the depositor base in mind when making business decisions. An institution can no longer be allowed to be registered to conduct the business of a bank and, then, simply to ride on the coat tails of the name “bank”, whilst at the same time not conducting deposit-taking business or not acting responsibly in the interests of the depositor base, but rather in the interests of an unobtainable share price. Fourth, the Registrar of Banks needs to be mindful of “boutique” banks that are not fulfilling the definition of the “acceptance of deposits form the general public” and, on the asset side of their balance sheet, are not acting “in the interest of the general public”. Fifth, as a result of the problems prevalent in the small to mid-sized banking sector during the past decade, and especially towards the latter part of the decade, the South African Reserve Bank adopted a policy framework for dealing with banks in distress. This policy framework serves to provide clarity on the process in place for not only dealing with banks in distress, but also preventing problems in one bank spreading to other banks. It is, however, only a framework to guide the approach taken, and the particular approach has to be decided on a case-by-case basis, depending on the specific circumstances.  Sixth, in addition to the policy framework for dealing with banks in distress, the Registrar of Banks emphasised the importance of sound corporate governance in banks. In order to investigate the standard of corporate governance within the South African banking sector, the Registrar appointed Adv J F Myburgh SC to conduct a review of the status of compliance with sound corporate-governance practices within the five largest banking groups in South Africa during 2002.    3/7  
Among Adv Myburgh’s findings were that, generally the banks investigated were committed to adherence to and application of high standards of corporate governance; the banks on their own initiative reviewed their corporate-governance principles from time to time; and corporate governance in the banks was generally sound but vigilance was required to ensure continued compliance with the best practice in corporate governance which is evolving in South Africa and internationally.  Myburgh’s recommendations were, inter alia, that the board of a bank should consist of no more than about 16 members; a bank’s board should not have more than about four executive directors; the majority of non-executive directors should be independent directors with immediate effect; and banks should aim for the majority of their directors to be independent directors within not more than five years.  The Registrar of Banks accepted the recommendations made by Adv Myburgh and is dedicated to reviewing the commitment to sound corporate governance in the banking sector on an ongoing basis and is currently reviewing corporate governance in the remaining “non-big five” banks.  It needs to be stressed, however, that the objective of regulatory and supervisory authorities world wide can never be to avoid the failure of financial participants, and, that, in a sound system, there will be failures. Instead, the objective is to strive for an optimal balance between, on the one hand, the cost of controls and intervention in order to address market failures and, on the other hand, the anticipated benefits of regulation and supervision. The need for a sound relationship and proper coordination between the fiscal authorities and the regulator can also not be overemphasised. 6.  Emergence of the “four-pillar” policy The four pillar policy relates to having a minimum number of substantial banks (so called “pillars”) on which the domestic banking industry relies and discourages the merger between any of those four banks. The primary reasons for such a policy relate to the maintenance of minimum levels of competition, in the interests of prudential and systemic stability, in order to avoid the spread of risk and to promote reliance on a broader platform of institutions.  Currently, Australia relies heavily on the “four-pillar” policy, which originated in 1990 from its previous “six-pillar” policy. New Zealand, which effectively has the same major banks as Australia, is protected by the Australian policy. The Australian “six-pillar” policy discouraged mergers between any of the four major banks and two major life insurance companies. The Australian government determined that it would be anti-competitive for the four big banks and two big insurance companies to merge.  In 1997, however, the Australian government scrapped its “six-pillar” policy after the Wallis Inquiry concluded that increased competition would achieve lower costs, better services and higher efficiencies for consumers. Nevertheless, the Australian government determined that there was insufficient competition to allow mergers among the big four banks and thus the “six-pillar” policy became the “four-pillar” policy. According to the South African Minister of Finance, who has responsibility for national financial policy, South Africa also follows a “four-pillar” policy. Recently, the Minister stated that South Africa maintains a “four-pillar” policy of having four big, locally owned banks regulated by the Office for Banks. The “four-pillar” policy in South Africa lay at the heart of considering the Nedcor Bank bid for Stanbic. The arguments advanced and conclusions drawn at the time conformed to that principle. Current indications are that a number of international banks are interested in acquiring one or two of our four pillars. Even if such interested was approved, it seems important to the Reserve Bank that there still remain four pillars upon which our banking system rests. The presence of internationally-owned banks will most certainly introduce more competition which in theory should benefit consumers. The authorities will therefore have to examine each application to buy into one of our four pillars on a case by case basis. The world is changing very fast and the regulatory authorities cannot be seen to be standing in the way of globalisation and rapid changes. These changes should be welcome as they are indicative of the increasingly positive outlook for South Africa. The authorities have therefore to face up to the task of anticipating and keeping abreast of changes to meet the new challenges and opportunities. ‘Nothing is stable except stability’ and progress is measured by ‘constantly changing when circumstances change’, as the great philosophers of old would say.   4/7  
7.  Current challenges for banking policy, especially in view of international banks’ interest in acquiring local banks Closely related to the consideration of a four-pillar policy in a country is a consideration of whether international ownership of any of those “pillars” should be permitted and, if so, on what conditions. In that regard, the banking system of New Zealand serves as a good example of a country that, whilst having predominantly non-resident owned banks, has maintained a sound financial system for decades.  Should international interest in our local banks culminate in international ownership, the supervisory regime would have to follow the internationally agreed framework of “home-host” banking supervision. This is already in operation in that South African-owned banks have a presence abroad and internationally-owned banks have a presence in South Africa. The success of such a system relies largely on both the home-country and the host-country regulator ensuring compliance with the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and the various guidelines flowing therefrom. In that regard, regulators seek to ensure that their requirements do not obstruct home-country requirements and, consistent with meeting their responsibilities, dovetail as much as possible with those requirements.  Maintenance of a sound and efficient financial system and an ability to respond to a crisis effectively are crucial prerequisites for a country’s economic and social welfare. Therefore, host-country supervisory arrangements are essential, as are structures for coordinating home and host supervision. Home-country and host-country supervisors should be able to rely on and support one another at all times. When banking groups have international shareholders, it is important for the host-country supervisor to be able to rely on the shareholder of reference in times of need. 8.  Challenges going forward Three important challenges face the South African banking system, including bank supervisors, in the forthcoming number of years. These challenges are the implementation of the New Capital Accord, or Basel II, as the Accord is commonly known; the provision of the broader access to banking services; and the full implementation of anti-money laundering measures. (i)  Basel II The principles of Basel II are intended to align capital-adequacy requirements more closely with the key elements of banking risks and to provide for banks to enhance their risk-measurement and risk-management capabilities. The revised capital framework is furthermore an attempt to adapt to new developments and instruments and to be neutral towards financial innovation. Although the aim is not to stifle innovation, the framework is also not intended to encourage capital arbitrage. Basel II will evidently bring with it a higher supervisory and compliance burden, because of the Accord’s greater complexity. The Office for Banks has embraced the principles contained within Basel II and is of the opinion that Basel II is suitable for application in both G10 and non-G10 countries, since it provides a menu of approaches suitable for both sophisticated and the least sophisticated banks. Implementation of Basel II will be one of the high-priority strategic focus areas of the Registrar of Banks in the forthcoming number of years. Basel II will be implemented within the South African banking sector on 1 January 2008. Parallel runs will take place during 2007. The Office for Banks has and will continue to direct resources towards developing a supervisory framework involving all approaches offered by the new Accord.  Basel II will have a significant impact not only on banks, but also supervisors, who will have to re-engineer their processes and tailor their organisational structures to meet the Basel II standards. In collaboration with other supervisors, the Office for Banks is currently developing its Basel II implementation strategy. This process requires, amongst other things, a thorough understanding of the provisions of Basel II, the design of appropriate supervisory processes and the development of complementary tools to discharge supervisory duties. Ultimately, the new capital-adequacy framework has the potential to improve risk management in banks and to align economic capital more closely with regulatory capital. Co-operation between banks and supervisors, between supervisors of different   5/7  
countries and between different banks is therefore essential for the successful implementation of Basel II.  The Accord Implementation Forum established by the Registrar of Banks and representing banks and various other stakeholders is functioning well and is assisting the banking sector and the regulator with identifying and addressing the risks that may arise prior to and during the implementation of systems designed to ensure compliance with Basel II.  There will be continued amendment of the regulatory framework and the supervisory process and procedures, as well as development of complementary tools, in order to cater for the requirements of Basel II.  (ii) Broader access to banking facilities  One of the most topical issues in the current South African financial landscape is the need to extend access to banking facilities on a wider basis than is currently the case. In South Africa, the regulation and provision of financial services to the poor has largely been based on exemption notices to the Banks Act. The South African Reserve Bank announced through the Bank Supervision Department’s 2002, Annual Report, that it envisaged amending the regulatory framework in order to allow for the establishment of different classes of banking institutions, such as second-tier and third-tier banks. Draft legislation has been published by the National Treasury in the form of the Dedicated Banks Bill and the Co-operative Banks Bill, as a means of providing access to the banking sector to interested participants and thus ensuring a flow-down of banking services to the wider community. It is essential, however, that the new legislation should ensure that the business of such institutions is conducted in a safe and sound manner, conducive to the orderly growth of the financial sector, whilst contributing to poverty reduction in both rural and urban areas. Comment on the Dedicated Banks Bill and the Co-operative Banks Bill may be provided until the end of January 2005.  (iii)  Anti-money laundering The Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (FIC Act), imposes duties on certain institutions to introduce anti-money-laundering measures, to train their employees, to report suspicious transactions to the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) and to retain client information. The banking sector has therefore begun a concerted campaign to comply with the FIC Act and to fulfill the sector’s obligations in terms of local legislation and international guidelines.  In May 2002, South Africa applied for membership of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an intergovernmental body that develops and promotes policies, nationally and internationally, to combat money laundering. South Africa was granted FATF membership in June 2003.  As from February 2003, banks and several other institutions have been reporting suspicious transactions that may involve money laundering to the FIC. Banks have to make detailed reports of all unusual and/or suspicious transactions to the FIC. In addition, banks have to report the number of such reports to the Registrar of Banks. Although this has been a challenge for banks, resulting in additional system and resource requirements, banks have shown a commitment to comply with their duties. The Bank Supervision Department has an obligation to monitor compliance by our banks with the FIC Act and other anti-money laundering guidelines. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements of the FIC Act, a circular was issued in December 2002. The circular provided guidelines on the types of measures that banks had to implement in order to prevent them being used to launder the proceeds of crime. In terms of the circular, each bank has to furnish the Bank Supervision Department with a detailed plan, with time frames by which the bank intended to achieve full implementation of and compliance with the FIC Act and the FIC Regulations.  The initial deadline of 30 June 2004 by which banks had to verify the identities of some 17 million clients was extended to a range of new deadlines, starting on 31 October 2004 for high-risk clients and ending on 30 September 2006 for the lowest risk clients.  The Bank Supervision Department, in its role as a supervisory body, will continue to monitor progress with the implementation of anti-money-laundering measures. It is also the intention of the Registrar of Banks to incorporate anti-money-laundering measures into the planned on-site visits to banks.   6/7  
9.  Conclusion In summary, therefore, the South African banking sector remains stable, and we are convinced that further growth of the industry may be expected in 2005. Such growth, however, will be accompanied by certain challenges. Besides preparing for the implementation of Basel II, South African banks will continue to be encouraged to follow international sound corporate governance practices. Furthermore, the Office for Banks remains mindful of the need for banks to ensure that the objectives of the Financial Services Black Economic Empowerment Charter are met. For the Charter to succeed, co-operation by all stakeholders is a necessity, and the South African Reserve Bank will continue to support and assist banks in meeting their objectives. Taking into account the strengths of our banking sector, we can look forward to a sector that can continue to establish itself as one of the most sophisticated and integrated banking sectors in the world.   7/7  
Timothy F Geithner: The Fed Challenge Remarks by Mr Timothy F Geithner, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the National Academy Foundation’s 2004 Dinner, New York, 8 December 2004. *      *      * Thank you, Gene, for that generous introduction. It is a pleasure to be here tonight to celebrate the National Academy Foundation and all of your contributions to this important mission. I am very pleased to accept this award on behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I want to compliment Sandy Weill on his commitment to education and the achievements of the NAF. And I want to recognize three important people from the New York Fed who are responsible for the Fed Challenge: Steve Malin, Lloyd Bromberg and Bob Diamant. Among these and other contributions to public service, Sandy serves as a member of the board of directors of the New York Fed. I want to tell you his reaction to a presentation early this year on our work in financial education. Sandy listened carefully to the description of the full array of New York Fed programs. Then, in his typically tentative and understated way, with the same soft approach he brought to building one of the most formidable financial institutions in the world, asked why the Bank didn’t limit its role in education to simply supporting the National Academy Foundation. His belief, with justifiable pride in the Foundation, was that there was no more important contribution the Fed could make and no more competent institution engaged in this effort than the Foundation.  Fortunately for the New York Fed, we have a long and productive collaboration with the Foundation. We provide support on curriculum design and professional development. We are working together to help create a new high school in the city with a finance theme. The NAF has adopted the Fed Challenge for its Academies throughout the country. And we benefit in turn by using the Academy’s work as a model for the economic and financial programs we support and initiate.  If you care about the economic future of America, you have to care about educational reform and the mission of the NAF. This mission has always been important, but it is particularly important today. Confidence in America depends importantly on success in the education mission.  Improving educational achievement will play a critical role in generating the innovations necessary to drive future productivity growth. And yet, US students remain math challenged, and we are awarding a diminishing share of the world’s PHDs in science and engineering.  Improving the quality of education is vital to improving the capacity of our citizens to manage the challenges that come from global competition, rapid technological change, and the greater share of the risk they now bear for saving for retirement. The average American with a college degree earns twice as much as his neighbor without a college education, which is about twice the premium that existed 40 years ago. Improving access to educational opportunity for all our citizens, regardless of race or the economic fortune of their parents, is critical to the credibility of the American ideal of equality of economic opportunity. As Larry Summers has noted, In our country today, a student whose parents are among the richest quartile of American is six times more likely than one from the poorest quartile to graduate with a B.A. within five years of leaving high school.  And improving the capacity of our present and future tax payers to make informed judgments about economic policy is important to improving the quality of policy decisions by our elected officials, national and locally. This is vital in an era where we face tremendous challenges in bringing our commitments and resources closer to balance.  Improving educational achievement, access to educational opportunity, and the level of public sophistication on economic issues are critical challenges with high returns to progress. This is why we will continue to invest in educational programs and why we are pleased to work closely with organizations as effective as the NAF in this noble cause.   1/2  
I take some comfort in the fact that, when NAF students think of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, they know we have an important role in monetary policy and financial stability. They know we sit on a large amount of the gold and dollar reserves of the world. But what they think is really cool is the Fed Challenge, and how they can win a place in the national competition. My wife said to me this morning that the Fed Challenge sounds considerably more fun and exciting than the real thing. I applaud all of you who contribute to this effort. And I thank the NAF for its tribute to the New York Fed.   2/2  
Niklaus Blattner: A look behind the scenes of system oversight Introductory remarks by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. *      *      * It is the task of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to contribute to the stability of the financial system. Implementation rests on three pillars: macroprudential oversight of the banking sector (Financial Stability Report), oversight of systemically important payment and securities settlement systems (system oversight) and crisis management measures. This is what I talked about at the last press conference. Today, I would like to give you a look behind the scenes of system oversight. Then I will turn to the regulatory environment, which we are also obliged to critically monitor and shape. System oversight: a look behind the scenes In the last few months, we had to define which payment and securities settlement systems are systemically important. Only these systems have to comply with the minimum requirements stipulated in the National Bank Ordinance. To be classed as systemically important, it is not sufficient that a system is significant to the national economy, ie we do not merely consider the number and volume of transactions settled through a system. Rather, we focus on whether the failure of a system jeopardises the economy’s supply of liquidity. This is the case particularly if participants in a flawed payment or securities settlement system have no other alternatives. The fewer alternatives available, the more serious the liquidity bottlenecks and counterparty risks. An additional aspect relates to the network. It comes into play when a system is the connecting link between other systems, such as in the case of the central counterparty SIS x-clear, which links the trading platform virt-x and the securities settlement system SECOM. The failure of such a connecting link can significantly affect operations at the upstream and downstream systems, even if the link itself is only of minor direct relevance to the market participants. Our analyses led to the conclusion that the following systems should be classified as systemically important: the interbank payment system Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC), the securities settlement system SECOM, the central counterparty SIS x-clear and the multi-currency payment system Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS). PostFinance is not classed as systemically important. This may be surprising given the economic significance of postal payment transactions, but it is a direct result of the existence of alternatives, ie bank payment transactions, which are instantly available should the postal payment system experience any serious problems. Of the systemically important systems, CLS has been exempted from the minimum requirements as it is already adequately overseen by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and because the exchange of information between the New York Fed and the National Bank runs smoothly. By strictly avoiding duplications, we can reduce the burden of oversight, ie the density of regulation, also in the case of SECOM and SIS x-clear. The operators of these systems are supervised as banks by the Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC). Cooperation between the SFBC and the SNB is facilitated as the provisions in the Banking Act and the requirements stipulated by the National Bank Ordinance are partly similar, and both authorities wish to minimise the regulatory burden. This is also in the interest of the systems that are subject to oversight. I should add that not only the SFBC, but all of the evaluated systems have the opportunity to comment on our classification. The classification will be finalised at the beginning of next year. Basel II: a never-ending story? The National Bank is involved in the implementation of the recommendations on the international convergence of capital measurement and capital standards, known as Basel II. The National Bank does not only provide a member to serve on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. As an authority committed to system stability, it also shares the responsibility of adequately implementing the Committee’s recommendations. The SFBC’s fundamental hypotheses are undisputed, namely that the current provisions are in need of reform and that the recommendations of the Basel Committee are to be implemented with   1/2  
moderation, while at the same time any dilution of the capital adequacy requirements aimed at reducing the insolvency risks has to be avoided. We are confident that the parties directly involved, ie the SFBC and the banks, will again succeed in agreeing, within the given time frame, on pragmatic and acceptable solutions. With a view to the future, I should note that the current reform will further increase the complexity of the capital adequacy requirements. Although the potential of capital adequacy regulation has not yet been exhausted, other possibilities should also be investigated in the future. Complementing the capital adequacy approach with improved liquidity management of the banks seems to be a particularly promising measure. Shortcomings in liquidity management may give rise to problems that cannot be resolved by adequate capitalisation. It is not surprising that such considerations are made primarily by central banks. After all, liquidity concerns are typical for central banks. On the macro level, maintaining the supply of liquidity is a monetary policy task. On the micro level, however, it is the task of each bank to bring its solvency into line with the risks. This requires that the liquidity risks be correctly assessed and managed, and that assets, which can if necessary be used as collateral, be made available. The central banks and supervisory authorities of the G-10 countries should, therefore, increasingly focus their attention on minimising liquidity risks. This is of particular relevance to banks that are systemically important and internationally active. Integrated financial market oversight: what now? In the meantime, the Federal Council decided on the further procedure regarding the Federal Act on Financial Market Oversight (FINMA Act). The Federal Department of Finance will prepare a statement by the end of next year and submit it to the Federal Council. The statement shall comprise the first two parts of the report by the Zimmerli Expert Commission (on the creation of integrated financial market oversight and sanctions). The third part of the project (examination of expanded prudential oversight) will be dealt with at a later point in time. The Federal Council has taken various concerns of the National Bank into account. As regards the division of tasks between the supervisory board and the management board in particular, the Federal Council has moved closer to the view held by the National Bank, which believes it important that the power of disposition remains with the management board. As a non-professional body, the supervisory board is inevitably faced with conflicts of interest, which could prove an obstacle to individual dispositions. However, the experience and know-how of the supervisory board can be fully exploited with regard to the deliberation of questions of principle, budget and important staff issues. Furthermore, we support increased budgetary autonomy of the Federal Financial Market Oversight Authority (FINMA), as we are convinced that a financial centre that is as complex and significant as the Swiss financial centre requires an authority with a supervisory and management board whose powers are equal to those of the corresponding bodies of banks and insurance companies. The National Bank backs the project regarding the FINMA Act. We continue to view the integration of financial market oversight as a means to improve oversight rather than as an end in itself. Should it emerge in the course of work - either with regard to sanctions or prudential oversight - that the planned reform is becoming so cumbersome that it jeopardises the present level of banking supervision, we reserve the right to reassess the project. Conclusion My explanations clearly reflected the National Bank’s wish to adopt a moderate stance with regard to public interventions. We are pleased that the Federal Council requests through the FINMA Act that the regulation consequences of new projects be assessed. The ongoing reform of capital adequacy requirements is driven by international standards (Basel II). It is the responsibility of the SFBC and the banks to find correct and acceptable solutions. Everything beyond this must be prepared by the G-10 bodies. The call for moderation directly affects the National Bank with regard to the oversight of payment and securities settlement systems. We contribute to minimising the regulatory burden by interpreting the term “systemically important” in line with the law, by closely cooperating with the SFBC and by taking into account the activities of foreign oversight authorities. We will continue on this path in the future, too.   2/2  
Jens Thomsen: Brief overview of the Danish economy  Statement by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of Denmark, at the meeting of the Danish Economic Council, Copenhagen, 30 November 2004. *      *      * The cyclical analysis of the Chairmanship of the Danish Economic Council is in line with other analyses: the Danish economy is in an upswing, driven by strong growth in domestic demand. This contributes to bringing down unemployment and raising labour force participation. The latest national accounts figures indicate that growth is slowing down, but these figures are often revised significantly and thus uncertain. It goes without saying that it is prerequisite to Danish economic development that the international cyclical scenario does not weaken markedly. Danmarks Nationalbank agrees with the Chairmanship that fiscal relaxation is not required. Fiscal policy must be formulated for the medium term, based on the 2010 plan. Short-term fiscal adjustments tend to have unwanted effects. Obviously, structural measures must be taken to keep the surplus on public finances at 1½-2½ per cent of GDP. Here, the report points out that the lack of new employment-policy initiatives gives cause for concern. Chapter 1.4’s discussion of wage competitiveness scarcely touches on the issue of productivity development. How can it be that Danish wages have been rising faster than those of our competitors for a number of years and the effective krone rate has risen, while the employment level has been high, and has recently begun to rise again, and we have enjoyed a sound (and rising) surplus on the current account? This combination is worthy of a few comments, including the issue of productivity growth, even if it is not obvious what is cause and what is effect. As far as excise duties are concerned, it should be emphasised that some of these are highly sensitive to cross-border trading. Therefore, changes in relative prices may have great consequences. The same applies to duties on pesticides. A ban on pesticides would be most effective if accompanied by a similar ban in our neighbouring countries. The proposal to introduce a tax allowance for maintenance and repair of one’s own home seems to conflict with the efforts to expand the tax base and reduce tax rates. The views advanced on the Stability and Growth Pact are pertinent. Clearly, the task is to increase the incentive to consolidate in the good times in order to avoid easing fiscal policy as seen in Germany and France in 2001 and 2002. Introduction of exceptions for certain expenses, such as investments, will add to the already significant technical calculation problems. Moreover, not all investments are equally appropriate for strengthening the future potential for growth. While the proposal on tradable deficit permits is interesting, it may be difficult to put into operation.   1/1  
Zdeněk Tůma: Education in the Czech Republic - the case of the missing generation  Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, on the occasion of graduation from the EMBA programme at CMC Graduation School of Business, Prague, 4 December 2004. *      *      * In recent years I have heard many strong statements about knowledge based economy. Today’s graduation is obviously an excellent opportunity for yet another speech on this issue but I fear it would be too general and therefore “empty”. Instead, I would like to contribute with my personal experience and observations.  We have almost forgotten that 15 years ago there were not any Czechs nor Slovaks educated in modern economics or business. Economic programs were focused on central planning and marxist theory of socialism before 1990. Nobody - with one exception - was allowed to study abroad since the 1960s. When my friend Martin Kupka returned from Geneva in 1989 from his studies, he brought the textbook on macroeconomics by Dornbusch and Fischer. He told me: “We should translate it into Czech”. At the same time, another group was working on the translation of “Economics” by Paul Samuelson. Later on, we translated the textbook on corporate finance by Brealey and Myers.  In other words, we started from scratch. It had two - though interrelated - aspects. First, we had only limited knowledge about what economics and business programs should look like. And second, there were no people with well-founded experience on how to run and lecture these programs. There was a generation problem - one generation was - and still is - missing.  Where we stand today and how we have coped with those drawbacks? There was no magic solution but I dare say that today we have almost overcome the problem of missing generation in economic education and that we have been closing the gap between us and the developed world fast. I see three important factors which contributed to this development. On the first place I would put the new generation of young and strongly motivated people. They created enormous pressure on those who - with their limited know-how - started to prepare new economic courses. This is my second point in this respect that there was a learning-by-doing process of creating new courses, mostly designed along the recent trends in economics and business education. Despite the fact we did not have any experience with these courses, we roughly knew which direction to go. Last but not least, the Czech education system received a strong support from abroad, both in terms of visiting lecturers and money. In some cases, these two aspects were interconnected, and completely new programs were gradually built up. Among all, let me name Center for Economic Research and Graduate Education, US Business School Prague and CMC Graduate School of Business.  I can offer another illustration of how far we have gone. I have been with the Czech National Bank for six years. But as an academician I was in contact with the central bank already at the beginning of 1990s. At that time, the staff was struggling with very basic issues: a new statistics and data on the newly born market economy, ways how the economy should be analysed and what kind of theory or model should be applied etc. The Czech National Bank was receiving a lot of help from the foreign central banks and international institutions. Today, we are at the level of state-of-art and we do not receive but provide foreign technical assistance. We assist directly to a number of countries as well as our experts are invited to IMF missions around the world. And yet our staff is based primarily on people educated in the Czech Republic.  I consider it as a good signal that we have reached significant achievements in economic education and that the problem of missing generation will soon cease to exist. I can only hope that we will continue with this process of catching up and that CMC will keep contributing to it.  What can I wish to you personally? Let me recall my recent visit to the Bank of Israel on the occasion of its 50th anniversary. We were having lunch with the Finance Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and we discussed necessary fiscal reforms. Mr. Netanyahu said that for pushing reforms through, one needs three things: the vision, the will and the political power. I can only add that combining these ingredients - the vision, the will and the power of knowledge - form the leader, regardless whether we talk about politics, managements, or science. Having in mind education and network you have gained   1/2  
during the EMBA course you have the best assumptions to succeed. I wish you all the very best in your further professional carriers.    2/2  
David Dodge: Financial system efficiency - a Canadian imperative Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Empire Club of Canada and the Canadian Club of Toronto, Toronto, 9 December 2004.  *      *      * Good afternoon. It is a privilege for me to address this joint meeting of the Empire and Canadian clubs, and I thank you for the opportunity to do so. I am particularly pleased to speak to you today because this is a bit of a red-letter day on the Bank of Canada’s calendar. Today, we released the latest edition of our semi-annual Financial System Review (FSR). This publication, which is only a couple of years old, examines issues that relate to Canada’s financial system. Each edition of the FSR takes a look at recent developments and trends in the financial system, as well as issues that have an impact on its efficiency, safety, and soundness. This is because the overall role of the Bank in the financial system area is to promote its safety, soundness, and efficiency. Today’s edition contains a number of articles that focus on the promotion of financial system efficiency and stability. And it is the issue of financial system efficiency that I will talk about today.  I will begin with a brief discussion of how the Bank of Canada contributes to the efficiency of the financial system at the macroeconomic level. Then, I will spend most of my time discussing how we can improve efficiency in Canadian financial institutions and markets; that is, the microeconomic aspects of efficiency. But before I do that, I should start by defining what I mean by “financial system” and “efficiency.” Then, I will explain why it is so critically important for Canada to improve in this area. When I talk about the “financial system,” I am referring to financial institutions and markets, the infrastructure, laws, and regulations that govern and support their operations, and the macroeconomic framework within which they operate. My message for you is that improving the efficiency of Canada’s financial system is imperative. But what is an efficient financial system? In economic terms, an efficient financial system is one that helps to allocate scarce economic resources to the most productive uses, in a cost-effective way. The ultimate goal is to have Canada’s financial institutions and markets match investors and their savings with appropriate, productive investments. Put more directly, if Canadians want sustainable economic growth and prosperity, our financial system must function as efficiently as possible. Let me explain why efficiency is so important. With an efficient system, investors can get the highest risk-adjusted returns on their investments and borrowers can minimize the costs of raising capital. Inefficiencies can drive a wedge between what borrowers pay and what investors receive. I’ll give you some examples of how inefficiencies can interfere with the saving and investment process that is so crucial to economic growth. If adequate information isn’t available, potential investors can’t tell whether a particular investment fits with their tolerance for risk. If financing costs are too high because of inefficiencies, borrowers won’t be able to secure the funds they need to expand. If competition isn’t encouraged, the various players in the financial system won’t have the right incentives to innovate. This is why it’s so critical for the financial system to work efficiently.  Efficiency and the Bank of Canada  I would now like to spend a few minutes on the Bank of Canada’s role in promoting an efficient financial system. In order to have such a system, we need above all a supportive framework of macroeconomic policies that minimize uncertainty and enhance confidence about the future value of money. This includes prudent fiscal policies, which are the responsibility of ministers of finance. It also includes effective monetary policy, which is the Bank of Canada’s responsibility.  We achieve effective monetary policy through our system of inflation targeting. One of the key benefits of this regime is that inflation expectations have become well anchored on the 2 per cent target, not just in the short term, but also in the long term. As a result, borrowers now pay a much smaller   1/4  
premium to compensate investors for inflation risk. This is particularly important at the long end of the yield curve. Reduced uncertainty has led to lower costs for borrowers and to a more efficient allocation of resources. The promotion of a safe and sound financial system that reduces uncertainties and systemic risk can also contribute to efficiency. We work in partnership with federal and provincial agencies, regulators, and market participants in this area, in order to actively foster the safety and soundness of the financial system. We also have a number of unique responsibilities. It is our role, for example, to oversee those payment, clearing, and settlement systems that could pose systemic risk. These systems have been designed to provide certainty that large-value payments or securities transactions will settle in real time. In addition, they have been designed to operate using a relatively small amount of liquidity compared with systems in other countries. This frees up resources that can be put to more productive use elsewhere. The Bank of Canada is also the “lender of last resort” - the ultimate provider of liquidity to the financial system. Indeed, we’ve just concluded a review of that role, and the details can be found in the FSR that we released today. There is also an international element to our efforts. The Bank of Canada works with partners in other countries on initiatives to strengthen the international financial system. The goal is to minimize the risk of a financial crisis in one part of the world spreading across borders. But that’s a topic for a whole other speech. So to summarize, Canada’s macroeconomic and prudential policies generally do the job they are supposed to do in supporting efficiency. But let me be clear - we are not complacent; we are always looking for ways to improve. Continuous improvement is essential.  Efficiency in financial institutions and markets  Now, I want to talk more specifically about the microeconomic aspects of efficiency in financial institutions and markets, including the promotion of competition and the provision of an appropriate legal and regulatory framework. Competition drives innovation and efficiency gains. And an appropriate legal and regulatory framework gives all investors fair access to necessary information, while minimizing the costs of raising capital. The evidence shows that Canada’s financial institutions and markets have generally been efficient when compared with those in other countries. But over the past decade, markets and financial institutions elsewhere have become - and are becoming - more efficient. To stay competitive in this environment, Canada’s financial system must also constantly increase its efficiency. If we don’t make this effort, the Canadian economy will suffer. The status quo won’t cut it. So what should our priorities be? I’ll talk about financial institutions first and then about financial markets. Efficiency and financial institutions  In terms of financial institutions, a quick look backward may show us the way forward. I want to go back 40 years, to 1964, and recall the Royal Commission on Banking and Finance, otherwise known as the Porter Commission. The Porter Commission was well ahead of its time, with groundbreaking analysis and policy recommendations. In the post-World War II environment, where extensive government controls on the economy were still thought desirable, Porter came out strongly in favour of greater competition, freer markets, and effective regulation that served to enhance efficiency.  In the wake of the Porter Commission, Canada revised its financial legislation in some crucial ways. Canadian banks responded to the new competitive environment by innovating and enhancing efficiency. Canadian institutions became world leaders, as financial institutions in many other countries were still operating under more restrictive and less-efficient regulatory regimes. Over the next three decades, Canada continued to lead the world. Successive revisions of legislation covering financial institutions encouraged greater cross-pillar competition in some areas, leading to lower costs and improved efficiency. But over the past decade, other countries have caught up and are forging ahead.  During this time, two trends changed the global environment for financial institutions. First, with the expansion of world trade, national markets became truly global. Financial institutions had to find ways to provide enhanced services to customers worldwide. Second, other countries - particularly the United States and the United Kingdom - began to align their regulatory frameworks with the   2/4  
competitive philosophy of the Porter Commission. The regulatory barriers that had held back competition, both geographically and among different types of institutions, began to fall rapidly.  Out of this more open and competitive environment came consolidation - not just among institutions but across pillars and jurisdictions. As a result, foreign institutions were better placed to exploit new technologies in order to enhance efficiency, and to offer new instruments and combinations of services to their clients. These two trends have led to great benefits for consumers worldwide, and they are continuing.  In these circumstances, Canada faces a difficult policy challenge. How can we enhance our policy framework to provide greater incentives for innovation by encouraging competition while, at the same time, giving our institutions the scope to improve efficiency? This is the challenge for Canadians in considering mergers, both within and across pillars, and the removal of barriers to foreign competition.  The questions about the best ways to enhance competition - to balance incentives for efficiency with other legitimate public policy concerns - are complex. And I don’t have simple answers. But efficiency must be at the heart of the debate. Because, in the end, an efficient financial system is key for the future - not just of the institutions, but of the Canadian economy as a whole. Financial market efficiency  Let me now turn to financial markets. When it comes to the competitiveness of global financial markets, size, depth, and liquidity do matter. So Canadian financial markets - whether equity, fixed-income, derivatives, or foreign-exchange - have an inherent disadvantage compared with those in New York or London. To compensate, Canadian financial markets have to be relatively even more efficient. So what can Canada do to improve the efficiency of its markets? One area that has received a lot of attention, not just in Canada but in many other countries, is securities regulation. The key issue is to reduce what economists call “information asymmetries” by as much as is practical. What that means is that our regulatory framework should aim - in general - at having market prices reflect all relevant information, and that all parties to a transaction should have fair access to that information. We can enhance efficiency by reducing information asymmetries up to the point where the cost of additional compliance would outweigh the benefits. Following events such as Enron, Parmalat, and Livent, it became clear that investors were not always receiving sufficient and accurate information. Corporate scandals prompted many an investor to say: “There oughta be a law!” - a law to make publicly traded companies disclose all information. But in the rush to write laws and regulations, too much attention has been paid to detailed rules that govern how companies disclose information, rather than focusing on what they disclose. We have seen a large increase in the costs of providing information - particularly in the United States - without commensurate progress towards improving the relevance of the information being disclosed. The concept of relevant disclosure is particularly important for a country like Canada, where public companies range in size from the very small to the large and multinational. The precise nature of what constitutes relevant information differs depending on the size and complexity of the firm. Corporate disclosure regulations should recognize this. For large, complex firms, more complex rules are required in order for investors to receive appropriate information. But for smaller firms, less-complex disclosure regulations - and lower costs of compliance - may result in the best cost-benefit balance. The Canadian Securities Administrators recognized this point in putting forward new proposals for guidelines for corporate governance that are based on a firm’s size. There is another consideration, and that is the need for some companies to have access to global capital markets. Firms that want to list on international exchanges will have to follow the disclosure rules that apply in those markets. And large Canadian firms that want to raise capital abroad need regulations here that are recognized as meeting international standards. But smaller, less-complex firms - which make up the vast majority of publicly listed companies in Canada - may not want to raise capital abroad. So it may not make sense for Canadian regulators to force these smaller firms to comply with the kinds of detailed rules that would be appropriate for large firms. Let me be clear. The principles at the heart of Canada’s regulatory framework must be as good as, or better than, those of any other country. But keep in mind that companies considered to be mid-sized in terms of capitalization in Canada would be regarded as micro-capitalized by international standards. Historically, Canada’s public markets have done very well in funding these smaller companies   3/4  
efficiently. This should continue in the future. So it is clear to me that our regulatory framework should take into account differing levels of size and complexity when establishing rules for disclosure.  The rule requiring CEOs to sign-off on their financial statements is a case in point. The principle behind the rule is to try to make sure that investors have sufficient and accurate information. Holding the CEO accountable is a good way to go about this. The principle can work equally well for large and small firms. But we need to be careful. For very large and complex organizations, setting out some detailed rules in terms of procedures may be helpful. However, we do not need a whole raft of complex rules that tell the CEOs of smaller firms what procedures they must follow before they can put their signatures on their financial statements. We need to be careful not to write rules that govern only the inputs that come before the CEO sign-off. Rather, we need to focus on getting the output right, so that the document that the CEO signs actually gives investors sufficient and accurate information. Efficiency dictates that Canada should have uniform securities laws and regulations, based on principles that apply to everyone. Some have taken this idea further and advocated for a single, pan-Canadian securities regulator. I’m not here today to weigh in on that debate. But I do want to stress that, whatever the structure of the regulator, we must strive for efficiency in regulation - the best regulation, at the lowest cost.  Now let me talk briefly about another important information issue, and that is the issue of price transparency in markets. Here, I am referring to timely, public disclosure of transaction details, such as price and volume. It is not difficult to see how this information leads to better resource allocation.  The appropriate level of transparency may vary from market to market. Generally, the more liquid the market, the higher the level of transparency it can support. However, the world is moving to greater transparency in all markets through the spread of technology. The Bank of Canada is conducting research and working with market participants and regulators on ways to increase transparency in Canadian markets, with due regard for liquidity, equitable access, and fair play. Together with price transparency, these are the ingredients that help to create efficient, well-functioning markets. It is important that we get transparency and regulation right. But we also need to devote the appropriate time and effort to making the most of whatever rules we write, including existing ones. This means focusing on a range of smaller initiatives that can enhance efficiency. For example, provincial and territorial legislatures need to make the Uniform Securities Transfer Act a priority. Such an act would provide a sounder legal basis for the holding and transfer of rights in securities that are held in book-entry form, and would replace the current patchwork of legal rules in this area. Another initiative is the Canadian Capital Markets Association’s focus on trade-matching to support progress towards straight-through processing.  There’s one more area where it is absolutely critical for Canada to continue to improve, and that is enforcement. There is a widely held perception that Canadian authorities aren’t tough enough in punishing fraud and enforcing insider-trading and other rules. That’s why it is encouraging to see that steps to toughen enforcement are being taken, by provincial securities commissions, by the Investment Dealers Association, by law-enforcement agencies, and by the federal government. These kinds of steps to improve enforcement must continue.  Conclusion Let me conclude. To improve the economic and financial welfare of Canadians, we need an efficient financial system. The Bank of Canada has been contributing to this goal by enhancing Canadians’ confidence about the value of their money and by reducing risks to the safety and stability of the financial system. Our Financial System Review is part of this effort.  But the effort must extend far beyond the central bank. I’ve raised some issues today that I think are critical to enhancing the efficiency of our financial system. None of these issues are new. They have been studied and analyzed thoroughly. But while Canada has been studying and analyzing, the rest of the world has been acting. It’s time for us to act, too. We have to get on with the job of improving efficiency. The future health of our economy and the prosperity of Canadians depend on it.    4/4  
Panayotis Thomopoulos: Post-Olympic Greece 2004 - infrastructural development and financial innovation Speech by Mr Panayotis Thomopoulos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Euromoney Conferences, Athens, 24 November 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a rare opportunity to be able to address a distinguished audience as this one on such a topical issue as the future of Greece in the post-Olympics era. In everyone’s mind there is the question whether Greece can sustain the relatively high level of growth achieved in recent years now that the demand stimulus coming from the preparations for the Olympics has come to an end. This is an important change for Greece indeed, coming on top of all the difficulties faced by the world economy such as the oil shock, the geopolitical uncertainties and the threat of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances. Trying to forecast the future is always a perilous activity and under today’s circumstances one might be inclined to take a pessimistic view. I would like to diverge from the pessimists and I will use my time to explain why Greece can continue on a path of strong growth if we can address the forthcoming challenges by adopting sound and market-friendly policies. To use a sporting metaphor, in the 1960s and 1970s Greece won the European gold medal with the fastest GDP growth, afterwards our successive coaches failed, but again since 1994 we came under the discipline of an excellent coach, the German inspired Maastricht Treaty and finally in 2004 we won the European Champion Football Cup (EURO). Indeed, Greece’s annual rate of GDP growth of 3.7% between 1997 and 2004 was the second highest in the EU, after that of Ireland, and one-half bigger than that of the euro area. I believe that we can retain again a position near the top if we put our best effort to it. Year 2005 will be a difficult one, as the necessary fiscal adjustment and high oil prices will constrain growth. However, over the medium-term, I do not see a danger of a severe slowdown or recession. Of course, we cannot continue to grow for extended periods at rates above 4%, so some deceleration is to be expected and may do us some good by helping contain inflationary pressures. Our growth rate may regress back to our long-term potential, which I estimate to be around 3½%. I want to note that the OECD in its medium-term scenario has recently reached the same broad conclusion - estimating an average growth rate of about 3½% per annum up to the end of this decade, which is some 1?% percentage point higher than the scenario presented for the euro area as a whole. Of course, if the international economic environment improves, especially EU growth turns out to be much higher than 2% Greece will also reach a higher growth path. On the demand side, both private consumption and investment should continue to be strong. The continuation of the Community support programmes, though on a declining trend, will help support public and private investment for quite a few more years. The on going investment in infrastructure, especially in the peripheral regions, will continue to underpin a fast rate of productivity growth, as the Olympics 2004-related investment has done for the Athens area. Businessmen and ordinary citizens can at last appreciate the fruits of all this endeavour and forget the discomfort caused as the various works were heading to completion, and I am sure many of our visitors today benefit from the renovated Athens area. The list of projects underway or planned, eg Egnatia highway, highway links with our northern neighbours and beyond, are essential and will provide the necessary complement to private investment, while business investment should also respond to the announced tax relief. Despite fears to the contrary, I do not see a danger for private consumption. Private indebtedness has indeed increased fast but its level is still quite low by European standards. Compared to the increase in the private wealth of Greek households, reflecting both the rise in asset prices and in the housing stock, the net private indebtedness has not increased much. Recently, we have started seeing a gentle deceleration of credit growth, which, I believe, is a sign of responsible behavior both by borrowers and banks. Despite horror stories in the newspapers, we are far from the position where indebtedness would threaten growth. As long as growth remains robust, households will see no reason to cut back their consumption habits drastically, although temporary minor adjustments cannot be ruled out. Indeed, in a phase of disinflation, as the one expected over the next couple of years with the aim to narrow the inflation differential vis-a-vis the euro area, a small adjustment in consumption trends may take place. BIS Review 74/2004 1 
The external sector should be able to assume a more prominent role. After a couple of disappointing years, there are already some indications that tourism is picking up, helped by the positive image of Greece projected by the Olympics and assisted by the improvement in transport infrastructure and the upgrading of hotel and tourist resorts in general. Moreover, the price fever associated with the Olympics seems to have subsided and hoteliers appear to be scaling down prices to more competitive levels, while bookings for 2005 are on the rise. In general, tourism will remain a buoyant source of growth for the Greek economy, especially if the government decides to allow shops to stay open all week-afternoons and to extend the opening hours of the archaeological sites and museums up to late afternoon so as to make again our city centres attractive. The authorities should have made a cost/benefit analysis in order to assess the significant overall economic gains that could be derived if, as in the rest of the civilised world, our museums and archaeological sites were open also in the afternoons. Shipping goes through an upswing, and the related balance of payments receipts will probably reach a record €12 billion in 2004, exceeding by a wide margin travel receipts, while the immediate prospects for shipping remain favourable. However, we have to note that although shipping may this year become the largest net export earner, its multiplier effect on the rest of the economy is smaller than that of tourism. And this because it employs about 80% fewer people than tourism and, owing to the high revenue per capita in shipping, the saving rate is much higher and correspondingly less is spent on home products. The emerging upturn in Europe will also help our exports of goods and services. On the supply side, the huge investments in recent years are now starting to bear fruit, while we should not forget the contribution of immigrants to both supply and demand. Immigrants have become an essential part of our production system, and - I would also add - of our society, while, at the same time, they are becoming a unique economic and political link with our neighbouring countries, from which they originate. They undoubtedly help the integration of the Balkan countries and contribute to the economic development of the wider region. Much has been said about the fact that Greece is a laggard in implementing the Lisbon strategy. This is partially true, but look at it from the other side, there is much more we can still achieve by embarking on the implementation of the Lisbon agenda. This should be a priority for policy makers. Liberalising the labor and product markets can bring benefits even in the short-run. Allowing greater labor flexibility can induce entrepreneurs and, especially, foreign investors to enter the market. Removing oligopolistic practices can be a spur to growth and help contain prices. Flexibility in labour market does not mean less protection but more protection to all workers. The strict labour laws, which are, sometimes, unfortunately, interpreted even stricter by judges, is an important factor behind the big underground economy. Unregistered labour has no job protection but is also less well paid than registered workers. The insider/outsider issue, which has reached big proportions in Greece, is also an important factor behind the recorded high unemployment rate, especially affecting young people. The relatively small proportion of registered workers also undermines the capacity of the pension system to pay in the future the full pension entitlements to to-days working population. Accordingly, the insiders may not even themselves be so well off at the end of the day as they think. More flexible labour laws which will bring to the surface the unregistered labour and the concomitant increase in social security contributions will also help to establish a sound pension system delivering all its commitments. Accordingly, it is up to the authorities to move in the right direction and also benefit from the reform dividend. One thing that should be clear to all is that the future will be different from the past. Growth in recent years has been based on domestic demand, fuelled by construction, overall easy monetary conditions and large deficits, as are now recorded. These favourable factors will play a smaller role in future, as the fiscal position moves gradually to balance or surplus and real interest rates increase, reflecting a decline of inflation and a rise in the nominal interest rate, if the ECB changes its monetary policy stance. So we have to give more prominence to external sources of growth and structural measures. We must adopt an “extrovert” policy that gives priority to improving our role in the world economy. Sometimes I hear arguments for import substitution as a source of growth. Let us be frank; for a small, country-based economy, as the Greek one, only firms which can also export can have the critical mass of production to remain viable in a highly competitive global economy. It is better to delete import-substitution from the Greek vocabulary. In reshaping our economy, we should focus on areas where we already enjoy a comparative advantage, and by this I have mainly services in mind. This does not mean that we should neglect agriculture and industry. I simply want to say that these two sectors have ceased to be pillars of growth. 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
The Greek agricultural sector has followed the international trend and has now shrunk to less than 7% of GDP, and will probably further decline close to the European average. Manufacturing’s share in GDP has stagnated and may from now on follow a slow downward trend. We should not be fooled that these trends can be reversed, nor should we try to engage in interventions that distort markets and incentives. In particular, the ongoing reforms of the Common Agricultural Policy and the final liberalisation of textiles trade next year will put further pressure on these sectors. Greek farmers and entrepreneurs can certainly improve the quality of their products and move to higher value-added product lines. They should use the window of opportunity offered now by the unusually low interest rates to embark on the necessary investments. But it should be clear that Greece is now an advanced economy, with a high per capita income by international standards, and cannot expect to remain competitive in labour-intensive and low value-added industries. The high productivity growth of the recent past has transformed the Greek economy but has also brought along new challenges. In a recent study by the OECD in the 10-year period up to 2003, out of the 30 OECD countries, Greece ranked fifth, after Ireland, Korea, Luxembourg and the Czech Republic, in the productivity growth table, with a 2.8% annual rate of increase in labour productivity, some 40% faster than the OECD average. We should invest in quality and develop a distinctive image of Greek products. We should also exploit our geographic location and the traditional orientation of our trade toward countries in South-Eastern Europe and the Middle East. We have long complained that we were in a difficult geopolitical position, reflecting the condition of our neighbors, but now we can enjoy that our neighbors in South-East Europe and the Middle East are becoming market economies and are growing fast. Our industry has been quick to seize on this opportunity and has re-oriented Greek exports toward this region, whose share of Greek exports has risen from less than 15% in early 1990s to about 25% last year. I was amazed to see that Bulgaria is now our fourth biggest customer, while Turkey has moved up to the sixth place. Greece occupies a very advantageous geographical position; especially northern Greece with its port Thessaloniki is bound to become again the indispensable transit link for trade and travel for all the Balkan countries. FYROM has no other sea outlet, but Thessaloniki also is closer to Sofia than the Bulgarian ports in the Black Sea, and the same applies for large regions in South-East Romania, South Serbia etc. Companies established in these regions will find it more convenient to use Thessaloniki as a trading port than other sea outlets. Especially, if one takes into account the queuing time needed to cross the Bosphorus, the economic advantage of the Greek ports is more than evident. This will be even more so when the EU co-financed trans-European transport networks, opening up the Aegean ports to our northern neighbours and beyond, will reach a maturity phase towards the end of this decade. Can Thessaloniki become the Rotterdam of the Balkans? Keeping all proportions I would reply YES, and its expansion in recent years and especially after 2007 when the road linking Turkey to the West (the Egnatia highway) will have been finished is a guarantee that Thessaloniki along with Northern Greece will be restored to its past trading and economic glory, to say nothing about the fact that it is a very pleasant, in many respects more than Athens, city to live in. Greece is in a special position in that its exports of services far exceed its exports of goods. In fact, our non-oil good exports are now somewhat less than tourism receipts and even less than those from shipping, while our total receipts from services cover more than four-fifths of our total non-energy good imports. Many foreign observers indicate, as a source of concern, Greece’s trade imbalance but they forget that -in the world we live in- services are growing faster. We should build on our success in these areas. It is well known that Greece is a major world power in shipping and by far the most important shipping nation in the European Union and, on the basis of new orders, it may increase even more its world market share over the medium term. For both economic and geopolitical reasons, Europe needs a strong merchant fleet, and here lies Greece’s important contribution to the Union. Greece, with a shipping tradition of more than three thousand years, should maintain its comparative strength in this area both for its own benefits and the European Union’s as a whole. Shipping is a sector subject to practically unhindered international competition; it is, therefore, necessary not to impose on it measures and regulations that could impair its competitiveness, apart from those required for environmental reasons. We should also look at ways to enhance the role of Piraeus as an international shipping center. From my previous remarks, it becomes clear that Greece can and should play a significant role as a bridge between the industrial countries of Europe on the one hand and South East-Europe and the Middle East on the other. We should aim to attract direct investment from foreigners, who will use Greece as their regional headquarters and for their high-end activities, while the more labor-intensive BIS Review 74/2004 3 
phases of production will be located in neighbouring countries with more abundant labor supply. Greece is well placed for this role. Our labor force is well educated, with a significant part of it having a working knowledge of a foreign language. Both the quality of life and infrastructure have improved enormously in the last few years, especially in the Athens region as a result of the major works undertaken for the Olympics, and now, as the government has announced, the attention will be directed to Thessaloniki. Undoubtedly, many other countries in the region, notably Turkey, may aspire to do the same but I think we have the edge. Greece has an open society, accustomed to working within an international environment. Indeed, many Greeks have spent years abroad working or studying, and this is an asset for them and for the country. Many have also ties to the countries of South East Europe and the former Soviet Union, as well as to Middle East countries where they had lived and whose languages and business environment they know. Don’t forget that not so long ago more than 300,000 Greeks were living in Egypt. The other very important advantages often cited are related to Greece’s membership of the EU for nearly a quarter of a century. Greece offers: 1. legal certainty, as the rules and laws it applies are the same or very similar to those in the other more industrialised EU countries; 2. macroeconomic stability and the strong currency of a euro area member; 3. a friendly business environment; 4. a resilient economy and society that have proved their worth under normal conditions but also in turbulent economic periods (e.g. oil shocks, speculative attacks against the drachma, abrupt rises and declines of the stock exchange that would have forced many other economies to bend on their knees). 5. a sound banking system, with an extended network in all the Balkan countries. Banking is the oiling mechanism of the capitalist systems and if the oil is not of a good quality sooner or later the engine will come to a stop. Turkey’s banking crisis and the related foreign exchange crisis a few years ago is a reminder. From the early 1990s the Bank of Greece, as the supervisory authority, laid down the rules and brought pressure to bear for the modernization and strengthening of the banking sector. To-day we coordinate our efforts with the commercial banks to promote the necessary adjustments in line with Basel II. The new International Reporting Financial Standards and Accounting Standards, should make the banking system even more flexible, strengthen its capital base and improve its internal control and risk management systems. Given also the significant presence of Greek banks in the Balkan countries the Bank of Greece has signed Memoranda of Understanding for cooperation with the supervisory authorities of these countries. Greek firms have also risen to the task of responding to globalisation not by adopting a defensive strategy, but by embracing globalisation themselves. There have been very significant direct investments by Greek firms abroad, especially in the Balkans. This is particularly evident in the financial sector, where Greek banks now occupy top positions in all our neighboring countries. About 5,000 Greek firms, mostly small to medium-size enterprises but also a few large ones, are now operating in the Balkan countries and Greece is between the three biggest investors in the region. This inevitably entails some delocalisation of part of Greece’s manufacturing and trading units. However, so long as they retain in Greece their high value added activities (their headquarters, their commercial and their research activities etc), this delocalisation in the long run helps both the host and the home country economy. I always try to give an example: The UK lost some 3.5 million industrial jobs (50% decrease) between 1978 and 2003 and gained over this period some 3 million jobs in the financial sector (100% increase); as the value added in the latter may be 4 times higher than in industry, the total gain for the economy has been enormous and is the main explanation of the success growth story of the UK in the last couple of decades. I have repeatedly stressed the example of London as a financial center, and all factors favours Athens for becoming a regional financial center, not only for the Balkans but even for countries further away. Likewise, Athens and Thessaloniki can become trading centers for companies operating in the wider area. Attracting foreign firms should form a central part of our future strategy. In the foreign direct investment league, especially in manufacturing, Greece unfortunately comes close to the bottom in Europe. But this hides the fact that many foreign firms, either completely on their own or in alliances with Greek firms, operate in Greece, but usually under the trademark of the original Greek owner, even if he has died long ago. This special partnership has to develop further, because each side complements the 4 BIS Review 74/2004 
other and cross border alliances are an essential support for growth, especially in the case of smaller countries. Though, as I said, even if up to now Greece’s performance in the area of foreign direct investments has been quite disappointing, I believe things are about to change. After many years of sustained effort there is now a new, pro-business mentality, as evidenced by the wide political consensus on the need to further promote market-friendly reforms and the recent lowering of corporate taxation is in the right direction. Above all, we need to reduce bureaucracy and combat decisively all cases of improper practices. On the latter issue, we should adopt a policy of “zero tolerance.” We should establish clear and simple rules for the conduct of business, which should not be amenable to interference from politicians and public servants. The “rules of the game” should be transparent and the same for all. In a recent OECD study on the business sector, Greece, though not the worst performer, unfortunately ranks among the countries with most bureaucratic impediments: large number of licenses and certificates required from different authorities both in order to open a new business but also even when operating for years, big delays in issuing them, lengthy judicial procedures, retroactive tax controls, sometimes going back to more than 10 years etc. I believe that, if the authorities tackle in an efficient and pro-business manner these problems and simplify the system, a big obstacle to success will have been overcome. To this end, the authorities should not weigh the supposed political cost, since over the medium-term the political cost of inertia is much greater. Even if some mistakes are inevitably made when trying to change long established practices, reform always pays in the medium to long run. I don’t underestimate the cost, since reforms meet resistance from the few but well-organised bodies that have every interest in perpetuating the anomalies. Against this resistance, those who are expected to benefit from the reforms are not so militant and organized, since they represent a broad spectrum of people but lower benefits per person. Besides, benefits from reforms are not always immediately visible and thus those expected to benefit do not appear to be as combative as the opponents of reforms. Greece’s post Olympic advantage lies in services. Especially I see Greece as the main provider of modern and high value-added services in the Balkans and even beyond. I identified tourism, which moreover, can now draw significant benefits by using the Olympic infrastructure for the organisation of big international conferences and other events. The expansion of shipping and related activities, the development of a regional financial sector in Greece, the establishment of foreign trading companies should henceforth also be the pillars of a fast rate of growth. Last but not least the proposed opening of higher education to private funded institutions should lead to an improvement of the overall educational standards, while bringing to Greece foreign students from the wider region. In addition to the export earnings, a big proportion of foreign students will stay in the country and will instill dynamism to the economy, as well as they will strengthen the links between Greece and the countries of their origin and raise Greece’s position in the world. To sum up, I see the forces that have sustained Greek growth until recently (namely fiscal stimuli, unprecedented low real interest rates and significant EU co-financed infrastructure projects) will weaken slowly and should be replaced by new sources of growth: a more extrovert business sector, which is already starting to reap the benefit of its recent investments abroad, an administrative machinery friendly to entrepreneurship and lower taxation, as well as greater flexibility in the labour and product markets. All these factors can underpin a continuing high rate of productivity growth in the years to come. BIS Review 74/2004 5 
Caleb M Fundanga: Economic and environmental growth of Africa  Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 2nd Green Accord Media Forum, Rapolano, Italy, 3  November 2004. The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Zambia’s website. *      *      * 1. Introduction  The world community faces unprecedented ecological challenges in the twenty-first century. Many political and business leaders have embraced the idea of sustainable development, calling for economic growth without destroying the natural environment or depleting the natural resources on which future generations will depend. Yet the concept has remained controversial, and implementation has been difficult. The task for policy makers and corporate leaders will be to find ways to meet both economic and environmental goals in the coming decade, without sacrificing either (Post-Lawrence-Weber, 1999). In Africa, environmental issues are also frequently sidelined on most policy makers’ agendas due to insurmountable economic and social problems that the continent continues to face. Notwithstanding the economic and social hardships, as Africa constantly strives towards attaining economic development, environmental sustainability remains a key area of concern (UNEP, 2003) although usually remote to most economic policy makers. In addition, environmental sustainability is hardly seen by many in Africa as an underlying factor in economic development yet it is so critical that, if adequately and promptly addressed, will have positive secondary effects on other crucial areas pertaining to economic development and people’s welfare.  In this paper, I attempt to examine the interrelationships between environmental growth and sustainable economic growth from the African perspective. The paper is organised as follows; section 2 examines the current economic disposition of Africa, and attempts to determine its relationship with environmental developments. Prominence is given to the components that affect environmental sustainability, namely (i) pollution and (ii) degradation. The latter will prove to present a relatively high risk to environmental sustainability in Africa. Section 3 presents a further analysis on the effects of the environment on economic growth, and that of economic growth on the environment. Section 4 tackles issues of Africa in the world economy and its environmental prospects. Section 5 provides current solutions aimed at mitigating and/ or reducing the various negative externalities related to environmental pollution and degradation such as national, regional, and international environmental management policies. Recommendations that are considered necessary to foster environmental friendly economic development are also given as input for further improvements in environmental management in Africa.  2. Economic disposition of Africa  With an estimated total population of 835,479 thousand people representing 13% of the world’s estimated 6,395, 557 thousand people,1 and spanning the 53 countries of Africa, the continent faces numerous challenges predominantly on the economic, social, and political fronts. Despite these difficulties, Africa recorded a growth rate of 3.6% in 2003, an increase from 2.7% recorded in 2002. The increasing trend in economic growth is expected to continue into 2004 [African Development Bank (AfDB), 2003]. Yet the challenge remains to meet the targets set by the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) aimed at reducing the number of the world’s poor by half by the year 2015. Unfortunately, improvements in some economic indicators may not be sufficient enough to enable the majority of African countries to meet the MDGs targets.2 Specifically, single digit economic growth rates are not sufficient for tackling the widespread poverty in the continent. According to the African Development Bank, only Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, and Mauritius will attain the specified targets. The majority of the population of Africa is located in rural areas where agriculture and dependence on natural resources remains the predominant means of livelihood [United Nations                                                       1  As of 10/22/2004, Source: Encyclopedia Britannica Book of the Year 2004. 2  United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) Fact Sheet, Global Environment Outlook – 3, Africa, GEO 3, Nairobi, Kenya, 2003. BIS Review 74/2004 1 
Development Programme (UNDP), 2003]. Soil, grasslands, freshwater sources, and oceans play a critical role to sustain crop cultivation, grazing land for livestock, and fisheries.  The energy sector equally plays an important role in the African economy due to the dependence of all national economies on oil for their production activities. On one hand, significant dependence on oil exports from countries such as Angola, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Nigeria and Libya is becoming increasingly pronounced.  Consequently, rising oil prices have contributed towards augmenting revenues of these oil-producing nations, while on the other hand threatening the revenues of the other nations that only use but do not produce oil. In spite of the energy obtained largely from hydro and some geothermal and solar sources in Africa, the population continues to lag behind the rest of the developing world in terms of access to electricity. Approximately 77.5% of the sub-Saharan population has no access to electricity, with the majority of the population relying on biomass (dung and firewood) for domestic energy needs (OECD/ ADB, 2003).  To a large extent, economic growth in Africa is still largely driven by production of raw materials that are hardly subjected to meaningful industrial processing. This source of economic growth has a direct dependence on the use of natural resources mainly in agriculture and mining. The lack of value-adding processing largely underpins the historical low levels of economic growth.  3. Effects of environmental growth on African economic growth  3.1  Environmental issues in African economic growth  Environmental issues ought to be an important area of concern for leaders and policy makers, when making policy decisions about human development and economic welfare, especially those in the developing world. Many growth sectors are in effect directly or indirectly related to the environment. A study by Jha and Whalley (1999) argues that the main environmental issue generally affecting the developing world is degradation, as opposed to the common belief that pollution is the principal factor of environmental decay which is predominantly applicable to industrialised countries. Degradation comprises of the following key areas; soil erosion, declining soil quality due to pesticide residue, exploitation of open access resources due to ill-defined property rights, and congestion and traffic. Other perverse forms of degradation are deforestation and desertification. While Africa continues to suffer economic stagnation, the factors that result in environmental degradation are continually on the increase. Some of the factors, such as burning of fossil fuels which release carbon dioxide, are possible causes of global warming, although to a lesser extent when compared to emissions of greenhouse gases by industrial activities. Specifically, the predominant ways that these factors affect the ecosystem are as follows;  Soil erosion involves the washing away of tracts of land due mainly to human activities. Such activities, while providing a source of livelihood for many, do not have safeguards to preserve the land for long-term use. Typical activities include clearing of land for crop growing and animal grazing. Related to soil erosion is the declining soil quality due to pesticide residue. This in turn leads to more clearing of virgin land once fertility reduces on existing land.  Exploitation of open access resources due to ill-defined property rights presents environmental management in Africa with tremendous challenges. Most of the natural resources in Africa tend to be viewed as a common good for the entire population. As a consequence there is open access to especially land under what is commonly referred to as traditional system of land tenure. It is because of this that rampant clearing of tracts of land go unrestricted hence resulting in degradation.  In urban areas, ill defined land ownership is responsible for mushrooming of shanty compounds, illegal dumping of waste, etc.  Congestion and traffic is related to the population growth rates and urbanisation. In most of Africa, modern economic activities are concentrated in urban centres. These tend to be the export enclaves that support African economies. With an obvious economic tendency for the population to gravitate towards points where they can maximise economic welfare, the urban areas have found themselves faced with congestion, which in turn overstretches utility service facilities resulting in poor sanitation and rampant epidemics such as respiratory diseases, cholera, etc. In addition, the general increase of 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
the population implies not only increased pressure on natural resources but also more carbon dioxide released through the human respiratory process.  Deforestation is currently a serious concern for Africa, with forests being lost at an annual rate of more than 5 million hectares (United Nations Environmental Programme [UNEP], 2003). The growing demography of Africa has resulted in the clearing of land in order to accommodate for more houses and areas for cultivation due to the significant dependence of the majority of the population on agriculture. According to UNEP 2003, 60% of the tropical forest areas that were cleared in Africa as a whole between 1990 and 2000 were converted to permanent agricultural smallholdings. The cutting and not replacing of trees contributes to global warming. Worse still is the burning of forests to clear land for grazing or agriculture which also releases carbon dioxide.  Desertification is another area of concern for the continent. Over 45% of Africa is affected by desertification, while 55% is at high-to-very-high risk of erosion (UNEP 2003). Desertification is compounded by the other major environmental concern of deforestation. In fact, studies have shown that mortality rate, maternal health, and girl child education in the region are directly linked to environmental changes such as deforestation. In rural areas, households rely on females to fetch firewood, therefore, continued deforestation implies longer walking distances for women and girls. These result in complications in pregnancy, other ailments, as well as less time for girls to do school work. Studies have also shown that women and girls in Africa spend an average of three hours a day fetching water, hence expending more than a third of their daily intake of food (UNDP 2003).  Although only 26% of the oil produced in Africa was used locally in 2003, energy consumption increased by 44% in Northern African countries (ADB and UNEP, 2003). However energy consumption of liquid fuels comes at a cost. The carbon dioxide (CO2) pollution as a result of energy consumption in Africa was approximately 3.5% of the global emission of CO2, (UNEP, 2003). Growth in demand in the fishing sector has ultimately resulted in the threat of the sustainability of particular coastal and marine populations. To-date the per capita fish catch worldwide has remained static since 1972, however, this measure for Southern Africa has declined significantly (UNEP 2003).  Globalisation has resulted in the specialisation of economies in areas in which they have a comparative advantage. The prevalence of cheaper labour costs has led African countries to primarily move towards the role of producing goods in labour intensive sectors such as agriculture and mining. The demand for cash crop exports from African countries by the developed world has equally soared. However the use of pesticides in cash crop production in order to maintain certain international standards has the potential to reduce soil quality due to toxic residue build up. Future population growth, expansion in the agricultural sector, and general economic expansion in Africa will see heightened competition for water resources among these sectors. Competition for water resources between households, industry, and agriculture is expected to increase in future, as currently 25% of the population is living in areas already facing severe water stress (UNEP, 2003).  Although Africa’s exports at the global level are very small at about 2%, the concentration of the exports in the extraction sector is cause for concern on the environment. It means that the more Africa is integrated into the global economy the more the consequences for extraction activities on the environment will become pronounced, unless mitigating measures are taken. In addition, multinational businesses are quickly realising the existence of less strenuous environmental standards in most of the African countries, which themselves are desperately seeking for Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). As a result, these businesses are rushing to invest in these economies and realise profits but may never be available to attend to the possible redress of negative effects their business activities leave on the environment. In this respect, as African policy makers and other stakeholders pursue economic growth, it is important to appreciate the benefits presented by the natural ecosystems and diverse forms of wildlife and other species. Despite the economic benefits of constructing roads, mining areas, and farming blocks, there exists a real threat of the destruction of large areas of natural habitats.  The emergence of industries and the effect of urbanisation in Africa, has largely contributed towards increased air pollution in many towns and cities. The incidence of smog and respiratory diseases in these areas has increased (UNEP, 2003), and is set to continue this trend in the foreseeable future.  Africa does not contribute significantly to the emission of pollutants arising mainly from combustion in complex chemical processes of industries. This is so because of the low industrialisation characteristic of the continent, whose economy is still trapped in the shackles of economic stagnation. Sadly the BIS Review 74/2004 3 
rate, at which industrialised nations are emitting especially greenhouse gases, implies that Africa will also soon begin to experience effects of global warming. The effects of global warming, which include floods, hurricanes and general weather changes that can also affect agriculture production, with prospects to damage material wealth and property will negate the little gains that African economies have attained thus far. To complicate the situation further, majority of African economies do not have buffer resources to enable them rebuild infrastructure that may be damaged from the effects of global warming. Consequently, in respect to effects of global warming, the tendency in most of Africa will be increased poverty, exacerbation in poor sanitation and outbreaks of epidemic.  Ignoring environmental sustainability, even if doing so leads to short-run economic gains, can hurt poor people and undermine long-run poverty reduction (UNDP, 2003). The two areas, economic growth and the environment are interrelated. Therefore developments in one coexist with developments in the other. The exclusion of accounting for the value of nature in economic indicators such as the Gross National Product (GNP) and the Human Development Index (HDI), gives a subordinate role of nature in promoting growth; in addition to this, property rights to natural capital are frequently difficult to establish (Dasgupta, 2002). Dasgupta’s analysis of World Bank estimates of genuine investment in countries, discovered that the accounts used were incomplete, as they did not include measures such as water resources, air and water pollution, and biodiversity among other measures. In addition, Dasgupta pointed out that shadow pricing strategies aimed at measuring the social worth of goods and services in an economy were questionable. Despite these setbacks, the author was appreciative of the pricing model. Dasgupta further stated that GNP and the Human Development Index as measures of economic growth at times provide contradicting evidence. Evidence supporting the findings of Dasgupta is shown by the change in the Sub-Saharan net savings rate from positive to negative in most years between 1976 and 2000, when the costs of environmental degradation and natural resource depletion were taken into account (UNDP 2003). Another measure of environmental deterioration in this case pollution, is the UNDPs Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS), however this system does not take degradation into account (Jha and Whalley, 1999).  The relationship between economic growth and its impact on the environment is ably demonstrated by the Kuznets Curve. The Kuznets Curve states that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between economic growth and the environment. Negative environmental externalities increase steadily proportionately to economic growth up to a turning point during the initial stages of economic development (see Chart below). Once the turning point is reached, the economy then begins to place more emphasis on the importance of the environment, by devoting resources to negate further negative effects on the environment. As a consequence, environmental pollution and degradation begin to decline since the country has the capacity to invest in environmental friendly technology. Similar results were found by Grossman and Kruger (1995).  Source: Robert T. Deacon and Catherine S. Norman*, Does the Environmental Kuznets Curve Describe How Individual Countries Behave? University of California, Santa Barbara April 5, 2004  4 BIS Review 74/2004 
However critics of the model [Common, 1995, Shafik 1994, Selden and Song, 1994, and Lopez, 1994], argue that there may be irreversible environmental damage before the top of the curve is reached, the model does not hold for all environmental indicators. Elasticity of substitution between factors of production, pollution and consumer utility must be taken into account.  Empirical evidence from South Korea (Lim, 1997) shows that the relationship between economic growth and environment cannot simply be explained by a trade-off or inverted U-shape relationship. The result can be attributed to the worsening (increase) in indicators such as CO2 and industrial waste as per capita income increases in contrast to other indicators such as water quality and domestic waste which experience a U-shaped relationship. Other factors such as pollution due to transportation were found to possibly be lower when people live closer together (Selden and Song, 1994).  Globalisation has resulted in the spill over of technology and knowledge from developed countries to several middle-income and many industrialising economies via Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Research and Development (R&D) efforts, thereby leaving developing countries lagging behind (Panayotou, 2000). Panayotou further notes the failure to provide evidence that the occurrence of lax environmental standards in emerging economies leads to FDI, on account of the fact that investment decisions by manufacturing plants and other multinationals to invest in countries is based on factors such as political stability, favourable economic policy, labour quality, and infrastructural developments.  It is therefore clear that economic development is not without costs. In fact, the much desired economic growth if not carefully balanced with the need to protect the environment may result in permanent adverse effects on the environment for a country and the world.  Specific to Africa, the application of these models and research findings lends itself to further caution. With the continental economy still facing numerous problems to the extent that most national economies are yet to provide sufficiently for their nationals, it is unlikely that a point would soon be reached in Africa’s economic growth, at which adequate resources become available for commitment to environmental concerns. In other words, thought needs to be given to the social background against which utilisation of resources from economic growth will depend. The various human and social challenges such as poverty and epidemics confronting the continent may well explain the relatively low emphasis by policy makers on environmental concerns when compared to their western counterparts. That said, however, it must be recognised that in respect to the ecosystem, the globe is one and benefits that accrue to one corner due to environmental preservation, accrue to the entire globe. In this regard, measures need to be developed to quickly put Africa’s high potential economic growth on a path that is environmentally sustainable. Deliberate actions need to be taken in successfully transferring environmentally friendly technologies to Africa. A case in point is the use of solar technology, for which achievements thus far are promising. Most of Africa is endowed with solar energy, and transforming it into usable energy would substitute the widespread use of wood fire energy by the majority of the continent’s population. In addition, because this is proven technology no more resources need to be devoted to Research and Development. Further, solar energy circumvents the costs related to the generation and distribution of yet another clean source of energy, hydro-energy. In addition to generation, distribution of hydroelectricity presents Africa with a unique challenge of supply network or grids due to the vast landscapes that constitute the rural setting where majority of the population resides. This is part of the wider infrastructural constraint that the continent is yet to overcome.  4. Africa and the world economy  In the real sector, a number of African exports experienced an overall increase in prices in 2003. International gold prices increased, much to the benefit of the continents top producers, South Africa and Ghana. Likewise, oil prices increased during the same period leading to higher revenues for countries such as Nigeria, Equatorial Guinea, and Chad (ADB, 2003). The developments in the Middle East, Iraq in particular have resulted in soaring oil prices reaching highs of about US$50 per barrel, due to the insecurity and uncertainty pertaining to the global oil supply. Both gold and oil prices are expected to maintain high prices throughout 2004. Increased foreign assets obtained from export earnings from the real sector will in effect improve the capability of oil exporting African countries to release more funds towards the achievement of their environmental goals. In line with the expectations of the Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) initiative, many heavily indebted African states have cut their fiscal expenditure and are focussing on staying within their set targets. Attainment of the HIPC initiative completion point, will lead to the much needed debt BIS Review 74/2004 5 
cancellation by Paris Club members resulting in an overall improved financial position of these economies. Failure to reach the target will however prolong reduced fiscal expenditure. Despite the long-term economic benefits of the HIPC initiative in achieving the MDGs, short and medium-term growth strategies of development concerning the environment and other areas will be constricted.  4.1  Prospects of economic growth  The prospects for economic growth in Africa remain bright. The African Union (AU) is currently making efforts towards ensuring political stability in the continent aimed at promoting both foreign and domestic investor confidence. International support of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) had led to some increase in aid in 2002; the trend was expected to continue in 2003 (OECD, ADB). The future outlook in the performance of the real sector is set to improve due to:  • low production costs (labour, electricity, and water, among other inputs);  • comparative advantage in areas such as specialised agricultural production;  • Numerous investment opportunities are available in the mining sector, which remains largely untapped, despite the richness and variety of minerals in Africa. The scope for improvement of environmental sustainability in Africa, hence economic growth is extremely vast;  • Expansion of markets through regional integration within Africa with necessary networks will facilitate for increased capacity utilisation among existing and potential productive businesses; and  • Additional areas of improvement include the expansion of hydroelectric power facilities along the major rivers such as the Nile, Congo and Zambezi to provide a viable source of clean energy to the majority of the population, which presently primarily relies on biomass fuel.3 For the African continent to embrace the potential benefits of globalisation, it is vital for African countries to implement supportive fiscal and monetary frameworks that promote investment. Prudent policies in these areas provide an important contribution to macroeconomic stability, a key prerequisite for economic growth. In addition, African countries must now commence the process of adding value to their export products as they compete and interact with a global market.  5. Environmental protection  Due to the high dependence of rural communities on common property, it is necessary for local governments to implement environmental policies in order to protect the rights of the poor, who are the most affected when the quality of the environment worsens. Data from villages in Zimbabwe estimate the proportion of household income from common property as high as 40% (Dasgupta, 2002).  A number of environmental protection campaigns are currently being executed in several African countries. One such campaign is the National Soil Fertility Action Plan, which is currently being prepared in 23 countries. In addition to this development, 15 National Action Plans have been submitted within the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Natural resources need to be maintained in order to provide a livelihood to largely communal rural communities, which for the most part depend on forests, and other open natural resources for their survival. It has been shown that in Tanzania the poor derive as much as half of their cash incomes from the sale of forest products, such as charcoal, honey, firewood and wild fruits (UNDP 2003). This is true for most Sub-Saharan African countries In addition, most methods used to purify minerals such as gold by most small-scale rural people involve pollution of rivers with toxic chemicals.  Regional institutions in Africa have worked towards the implementation of development programmes aimed at reducing pressure on natural resources in the various areas of the continent. General concerns for all regions in Africa primarily encompass the problems of deforestation, scarcity of water resources, access to clean water sources, and access to non-pollutant energy sources such as electricity. Primary concerns of the northern and some parts of the eastern, western, and southern                                                       3  The World Summit on Sustainable Development (Rio +10), African Preparatory Conference for the World Summit on Sustainable Development Nairobi, 15-18 October 2001. 6 BIS Review 74/2004 
sub-regions however include the effects of desertification on human development and economic growth.  Regional government policies in Tanzania, have led to implementation of environmental management policies aimed at promoting waste management, urban planning, and impact assessments for large projects. Government authorities have created designated protected areas aimed at conserving forests as well as supporting community-based income. This initiative is also being implemented in Zambia. Africa now has a total of 1,254 protected areas, or 7% of the landmass.  The Southern African Development Community (SADC) plays an important role in the implementation of programmes aimed at improving the environmental sustainability of the region. Acknowledging the importance of water in development, the SADC Water Sector Coordination Unit was established in 1996. Prior to the formation of this Unit a Protocol on Shared Water Course Systems was ratified by the majority of the SADC Member States. This Protocol aims to promote the availability of fresh water resources in the region. In addition, a Forest Policy and Development Strategy, was implemented in 1997 by the SADC forest sector to address the issue of forest protection in the region.  In order to protect marine life, agreements such as the Oil Spill Contingency Plan have been developed. The sustainability of fisheries resources is also now monitored by control agreements, and a Sustainable Fisheries Livelihoods Programme has been developed in West Africa. Other regional Protocols adhered to by some African states include cooperative efforts to implement programmes that aim to combat desertification by the Arab Magreb Union (AMU), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), Inter-State Committee to Combat Drought in the Sahel (CILSS), and Southern African Development Community (SADC).  International Agreements such as the Vienna Protocol, which called for the formation of a co-operative framework and policy structure aimed at protecting human health and the environment from adverse effects of human activity which modify, or are likely to modify the ozone layer4 are also observed. The Vienna Protocol was, effectively signed by 46 African countries. The Montreal Protocol which was signed by 47 African countries called for the implementation of cost effective alternatives to ozone-depleting substances, and the Kyoto Protocol which was signed by 4 African countries5 out of a total of 84 countries globally, aims to curb greenhouse gas emissions that result in global warming. Despite the ratification of these protocols by some African countries, it is worth noting that rich countries with 16% of the world population emit 51% of the worlds green house gasses (UNDP, 2003). The Kyoto Protocol is yet to be implemented due to non-ratification by some key developed countries, who happen to be the emitters of substantial amounts of the worlds greenhouse gases (Russia ratified the Protocol in September 2004).  A United Nations Forest Forum (UNFF) was established in 2000 to promote the management, conservation, and sustainable development of forests. The institution effectively serves to monitor national, regional, and global developments of forests. United Nations Organisations such as United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), and the World Bank have done a commendable job in implementing multiple projects that aim to promote environmental sustainability in Africa. These organisations provide both financial and technical support to programmes designed to promote environmental sustainability in Africa. African governments have pledged to support such programmes.  6. Recommendations  From the foregoing, it is clear that environmental protection goals should be realised in order to achieve sustainable economic growth. Effective environmental protection policies relating primarily to the effects of degradation and depletion of the environment need to be implemented and maintained by institutions and individuals at all levels of society namely, local governments and national, regional,                                                       4 Environment Canada, International Relations, International Agreements, 1998 http://www.ec.gc.ca/international/multilat/ ozone_e.htm5  Kyoto Protocol, Status of Ratification, Last Modified 29th July 2004, http://unfccc.int/resource/kpstats.pdf BIS Review 74/2004 7 
as well as international institutional bodies. This is even more critical for Africa which is also faced with unique constraints such as rapid urbanisation, poverty, poor legislation and inadequate capacity to implement and enforce legislative controls where they exist.  The trend of population growth in developing countries, estimates that 95% of the total world population growth will occur in Africa, Latin America, and Asia over the next 30 years (Post-Lawrence-Weber, 1999). The resulting increasing strain on natural resources due to the imminent population boom in Africa if not checked, will cause many setbacks to economic growth and human development. It is therefore advisable that stricter environmental policies be implemented in these countries so as to offset encounters with such negative developments.  The anticipated future demographic pressure on urban areas due to a shift of the expanding population to the cities and towns in search of jobs will ultimately result in increased levels of air pollution, and pressure on transportation facilities, urban sanitation, access to clean water supply, and waste disposal. The total population of Africa is projected to reach 1,941 million by the year 2050, from approximately 885 million in 2004 (Ashford, 2004). According to statistics collected by UN-Habitat 2002 and UN 2002, they indicate that out of a world total of 923,986 thousand urban slum dwellers, 869,918 thousand (94.1%) were from developing countries, with Africa accounting for 187,563 thousand or 20% (UNDP, 2003). It is important for local governments to ensure adequate planning policies in order to accommodate the predicted rising population. Local governments must also ensure the implementation of effective policies meant to regulate the activities arising from globalisation on the African economy such as the expansion in the number of urban industries, and the need for land for cultivating commercial crops, as well as to support the need for increased areas of subsistence farming.  Another fundamental aspect that needs urgent attention is the issue of collecting more accurate data on environmental pollution and degradation and related statistics on the environment. Items such as farming methods employed, the pace of clearing of land for settlements, and charcoal burning, are presently not included in existing statistics. Appropriate measurements will provide a more precise indicator of the weight and quantitative value of negative environmental externalities on economic development in Africa. Chinese policy makers have now adopted the use of “green GDP” (The Economist, August 21st 2004), which takes into account the environmental costs on economic development. A well-defined weighting system of the role of the environment on economic growth will ultimately result in more attention being conferred to environmental sustainability and development of appropriate policies necessary for effective environmental management to support sustainable economic growth.  7. Conclusion  While pollution largely affects developed countries, environmental degradation is a more pertinent feature for developing nations. Studies have shown that environmental sustainability is linked to factors of economic development. Therefore advancements in one cannot occur without advancements in the other. Environmental degradation in Africa is exacerbated by poverty due to the reliance of the majority of the poor on natural resources. In the world today, about 900 million people live in absolute poverty in rural areas and depend on the consumption of natural products for their livelihood (UNDP, 2003). Unfortunately, most of the activities and methods used in deriving economic value from natural resources are not environmentally sustainable. Moreover, the resultant economic benefits, in most instances, only accrue to current consumption and not sustainable development from which resources for addressing negative consequences on the environment could be drawn. In Africa, most activities include unplanned quarrying, spontaneous trench digging for small-scale mining, shifting cultivation, indiscriminate cutting of trees for energy, inappropriate small-scale mineral processing using water and poor waste management, including indiscriminate killing of wild animals (poaching) in game parks.  The way forward in addressing these issues relates to the implementation of supportive government policies regarding environmental management and environmental sustainability. Regional and international policies on environmental management, governance, and conservation have an important role to play in this area, as environmental decisions of one economy may adversely affect other economies. The achievement of environmental goals will facilitate the achievement of other MDGs. Equally important are transfers of technology that is friendly to the environment as globalisation takes root.  8 BIS Review 74/2004 
Caleb M Fundanga: The Bank of Zambia and the insurance industry   Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the end of year cocktail party for the Zambia State Insurance Corporation Limited clients, Lusaka, 1 December 2004. *      *      * The Master of Ceremony  The Registrar - Pensions and Insurance Authority  The Board Chairman-Zambia State Insurance Corporation  The Board Chairman-Zambia State Insurance Pension Trust Fund  Madam Managing Director - Ms Muyenga  Distinguished Invited Guests  Ladies and Gentlemen  Good Evening!  I wish to thank the Managing Director of Zambia State Insurance Corporation Limited - Ms Muyenga, for inviting me and my wife to be the Guest of Honour at this end of year cocktail party. Despite the fact that the Bank of Zambia is not directly associated with the insurance industry, this function gives me a rare opportunity to say something about the relationship between the Bank of Zambia and the insurance industry.  In the past few years, the Bank of Zambia has taken keen interest in the operations and performance of the insurance companies and pension funds. This is because insurance companies and pension funds have a direct impact on macro-economic variables, since most of them are leading players in the Government securities market. Whenever the Government wishes to raise funds, it is these institutions together with commercial banks that provide them.  Ladies and Gentlemen, many of you will agree with me that the recent downward trend and stabilisation in the macro-economic variables, such as interest, inflation, and exchange rates, has induced high levels of investor confidence in our economy. As many of us are aware, a stable macroeconomic environment is one of the critical ingredients for achieving sustainable economic growth and, ultimately, poverty reduction, in our country.  In this regard, allow me to reiterate what I have been saying at other fora that the insurance industry plays a critical role in the economic growth and development of any country. Here in Zambia, the insurance industry, with gross annual premiums of approximately K273 billion for life and non-life business, and about K550 billion for pensions, controls colossal sums of money which could be used for investment locally; and if properly regulated could contribute to developing a strong financial sector in Zambia.  However, the problem has been that the insurance industry has been under-regulated for many years. In this respect, it is high time that regulations are put in place to harmonise the operations of this important industry. I have several times been told that the Insurance Act of 1997 is inadequate in many areas such as licensing, separation of life and non-life business and investment outside the country. I have similarly been told that the Pension Schemes Regulation Act of 1996 is equally deficient.  To make matters worse, the Zambian public has insufficient knowledge of insurance matters. In addition, the industry itself has failed to co-operate to enable it handle mega risks and stop the externalisation of insurance funds.  Unlike the Bankers Association of Zambia (BAZ), whose existence and strength is cemented by the banks themselves, the insurance industry has a very loose arrangement about how it should promote a common front. There is neither a written nor binding memorandum of understanding among the insurance companies to foster cooperation on some of the thorny issues confronting the insurance industry today! However, I must acknowledge here, that there is an organisation called the Insurers Association of Zambia (IAZ), whose membership is compulsory but which may not be very strong in guiding its membership.  BIS Review 74/2004 1 
Ladies and Gentlemen, from my observation, the insurance and pension industry in Zambia is facing many challenges. These include:  1) Amendments to the Insurance Act of 1997 and the Pension Schemes Regulation Act of 1996 so that laws and regulations that impose stricter corporate governance practices and structures in all institutions managing pension and insurance funds are introduced;  2) The Investment Act must be harmonised with the Insurance/Pensions Acts in such a way that all insurance companies formed or already formed must have local ownership/equity partnership. This would greatly contribute to minimising capital flight and huge repatriation of dividends;  3) Need for the establishment of a national re-insurance company to avoid capital flight;  4) Insurance companies need to harmonise their operations so that clients benefit from fair competition. In other words, data on operations for all insurance companies should be captured easily for planning purposes; and  5) Along the same lines, the insurance companies should focus on their core-insurance business, as this has the effect of reducing outflow of capital.  If insurance companies had an avenue for co-operation amongst themselves, some arrangements to compensate for fore-gone income on ceded commission could be worked out under the co-insurance programme. In this regard, I call upon my counterparts at the Pensions and Insurance Authority (PIA) to strictly supervise the industry in order to ensure, among other things, the proper investment of the insured funds. On our part as the Bank of Zambia, we would like to assure you of our continued support, and our doors are open for consultations.  As I do not want to take much of your leisure time, I wish to conclude by thanking you, once again, for according me the opportunity to share my thoughts with you. To this end, I wish you all a Merry Christmas and profitable New Year. Please, have a pleasant evening!  I thank you. 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
Bodil Nyboe Andersen: The significance of Basel II for Danish banks Speech by Mrs Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Annual Meeting of the Danish Bankers’ Association, Copenhagen, 1 December 2004.  *      *      * At all recent annual meetings of the Danish Bankers’ Association the various speakers have commented on the Basel framework. This framework sets the international standards for the capital adequacy of the banking organisations.  In the 1970s the G-10 countries set up the Basel Committee, whose secretariat is at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Located in Basel, BIS is often called the central bank to central banks.  In the 1980s the Basel Committee started its work of formulating international standards for the capital adequacy of banking institutions. In 1988 this resulted in the Basel framework - now called the Basel I framework. This is still the basis for the requirements of the size and structure of the capital of banking organisations in more than 100 countries all over the world.  The strong expansion and increasing complexity of the financial markets and banking organisations since the Basel I framework was drawn up have made it necessary to formulate a more sophisticated framework. The Basel Committee therefore took on the drafting of new international standards, and the first proposal was put forward in 1999.  This work has proved to be more complex than expected. The Committee has on several occasions issued consultative papers inviting the financial world, authorities and other stakeholders to comment on the drafts put forward.  This process has been quite comprehensive, but also highly valuable, since it has given all countries and parties the opportunity to table suggestions and constructive criticism. In this way, a number of special circumstances could be taken into consideration.  The consultations have by no means made the process less protracted, nor have they simplified the proposal. Nonetheless, on 26 June 2004, the Basel Committee closed the file and reached a decision on the new international standards. The framework now fills more than 200 pages, while Basel I comprised 30 pages.  On the basis of these standards the European Commission has put forward a draft directive for a new capital adequacy framework. The directive is expected to be adopted in 2006, and to come into force in 2007-2008. The new standards are of course considerably more complicated than the 1988 framework. A noteworthy departure from the current framework is that individual banks will be able to choose between two different principles for compiling the capital required to cover credit risks. Larger banks may base their capital requirement on an internal risk model, while others may opt for a simpler standard method closer to the current principles.  The purpose is to allow for the differences between small local banks and large international institutions that apply sophisticated risk management tools.  As always, the bank’s board and management are responsible for capital adequacy, including a necessary buffer to ensure sound operations. Basel II sets out firmly and clearly the principle that the supervisory authorities must perform an overall evaluation of each individual bank’s need for capital. The board and management’s assessment of the need for capital must be discussed with the supervisory authority, which in the end may require the bank to hold more capital than the equivalent of the minimum requirement of 8 per cent.  Finally, the Basel II framework also includes standards for the disclosure of information relating to risk and capital adequacy.  The idea behind the disclosure requirement in the set of standards is that the soundness of banking institutions is evaluated not only by the supervisory authorities, but also by market participants. Monitoring by the authorities and the market in combination enhances the certainty that signs of weakness will be spotted in time, avoiding potential crises. Avoiding financial crises is, of course, the whole purpose of the exercise. BIS Review 74/2004 1 
The banks play an exceptional, central role in society. This is the background to the extensive regulation of banking activities.  One sometimes hears the remark that regulation by the authorities is a special burden imposed on the banks. This leads to the argument for uniform international regulations, to ensure a level playing field. This is the purpose of the Basel framework.  Often the banks also point out that the authorities should remember that banks are business enterprises that need some scope for manoeuvre in order to be competitive.  One could pose the theoretical question of how the banks would behave in the absence of regulation by the authorities.  In our time, this question is so hypothetical that there is no clear answer. However, it is thought-provoking that back in the days when the banks were not subject to any regulation - before the first Danish banking act in 1919 - capital adequacy was generally far higher than today. Around the mid-19th century capital and reserves were approximately 40 per cent of the balance-sheet total, and by around 1900 a good 20 per cent. In the 1920s this had fallen to around 12 per cent. Today, the banks’ net capital is an average of approximately 6 per cent of the balance-sheet total. A comparison of this nature should naturally not be taken too literally, although it may lead to the realisation that regulation should not be perceived as a burden, but perhaps a valuable asset!  On 1 January 2005 the EU’s new accounting regulation comes into force. It introduces the international accounting standards (IAS) and will also affect the banks’ financial statements. The fact that - in the special EU version - it also poses some particular problems for mortgage-credit institutes should also be mentioned here.  With IAS, the previous Danish accounting principle for financial enterprises to state securities at market value will no longer apply in every case. Danmarks Nationalbank regrets that under the new rules some elements of a securities portfolio can be subject to cost measurement.  So far there has been agreement in Denmark that market value is the most regular principle. However, this now has to defer to the need for uniform rules within the EU, where the market valuation of securities has not been consistently applied.  The interplay between the IAS rules and Basel II is especially significant for Danish banks. So far, we have applied a prudent principle to the compilation of losses and provisions. Instead, the IAS rules introduce a neutrality principle for the assessment of the provision requirement.  The term itself states the case: the banks must no longer be quite so prudent in their evaluation of the need for provisions. This may require substantial provisions to be carried back, reducing the banks’ buffer against potential losses. To put it another way, the change of principle may release substantial funds in Danish banks. Added to this, on the introduction of the Basel II rules a reduction of the capital requirements of Danish banks can be expected, since loans to households as well as to small and medium-sized enterprises are subject to a lower risk weighting under the new framework. These loans weigh relatively heavily in Denmark.  In overall terms, this is a considerable relaxation of the capital requirements and provisions. So it is important that the boards and managements of the various banks consider carefully how much capital they need in order to ensure an appropriate buffer in case of unforeseen adverse events.  In order to promote this process, the current bill for a Financial Business Act anticipates the Basel II framework. Already in 2005 the requirement is introduced that the banks must assess their need for capital and engage in dialogue with the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority in this respect. The Bill does not require the disclosure of the results of these deliberations. Since these are provisional rules prior to the full implementation of the Basel II framework there can be arguments against disclosure. The few years involved can be perceived as a running-in period during which the previous dialogue between the banks and the Authority concerning provisions is supplemented by a dialogue on capital adequacy.  Danmarks Nationalbank would like to emphasise, however, that the assessment of the need for capital should be disclosed when the full Basel II framework is implemented.  2 BIS Review 74/2004 
The financial markets and the financial products are becoming more and more technically advanced and sophisticated. New products are constantly appearing to match customers’ changing needs and preferences.  In overall terms this is good for both business enterprises and households. Choice is always a good thing - so that everyone’s needs can be catered for. For large groups of especially households it can be very difficult, however, to pinpoint exactly what is needed, and even harder to understand the various products and the risks they entail, and make the right choice. This applies especially to life’s major financial decisions, not least financing the purchase of a home and choosing the right pension scheme.  This is where advisory services come into play. Bank employees devote a lot of effort to advising households. It is, however, important that clients understand that there is no certain answer to the question of how e.g. interest rates and share prices will develop in the future. The adviser may have certain expectations, but nobody can know for sure. Today many banks do a lot to emphasise that they are profit-driven commercial enterprises. This means that their employees must be good at selling their products. For this reason, some banks have incentive structures to reward successful salespeople.  Undoubtedly the interests of the bank and the private client may coincide, but it is hard to believe that this is always the case. This applies to many types of professional advisers - from insurance brokers to pharmacies, opticians and banks. Denmark is now harvesting the fruits of more than 20 years’ stability-oriented economic policy during which major structural reforms have been implemented.  As a result, we have favourable growth, low inflation, a large current-account surplus and a surplus on government finances. Unemployment is low in international terms. After rising for two years the curve seems to be on the way down as the unemployment level has stabilised, or is dropping slowly, depending on whether people in job creation schemes are included or not. The krone is extremely stable against the euro and both short-term and long-term interest rates are only marginally above the euro interest rates.  So what are the challenges to economic policy? Although no short-term economic measures are called for, significant structural challenges are waiting in the medium and long term. Our life expectancy is longer, which is good news, even though it is often presented as a problem. Nonetheless, the consequence is that the demand for welfare benefits will rise. Greater affluence will also make us demand more in terms of the quality of these services.  Moreover, in years to come more people will retire from than join the labour force, while many groups would like more time away from work. There is no obvious way of reconciling these aspirations. The government has therefore set up a Welfare Commission to investigate all of these issues.  Before the Commission’s reports are published I would like to take this opportunity to express the hope that all groups of society: the business community, stakeholder organisations, politicians and ordinary citizens, will read the reports with an open mind towards discussing the issues raised. We need a serious debate without avoiding or skirting these issues. Pointing to other countries that face even bigger problems is not the solution either. At a time when the economy is flourishing and no short-term measures are required it is important that we make a start on debating the long-term economic structures.  BIS Review 74/2004 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: A stability-oriented monetary policy as a necessary condition for long term growth Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the UNICE Competitiveness Day, Brussels, 9 December 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a pleasure for me today to address such a distinguished audience, which best represents the European entrepreneurial capacity and dynamism. Today I would like to discuss first the general role of policy institutions in a developed market economy. I shall then dwell more specifically on how the conduct of monetary and fiscal policy in the euro area contributes to foster high and sustainable output growth and job creation. Finally, I shall stress the importance of structural reforms in labour and product markets in ensuring that our economy is endowed with the degree of flexibility that is needed for firms and workers to be able to withstand successfully the challenges that the contemporaneous, highly interrelated world economy poses to us. The determinants of sustainable long term growth The determination of the factors that increase the individuals’ standard of living is the main issue that scholars have analysed since economics was born as a modern science more than 250 years ago. The evolution of the economic theory has greatly furthered and deepened our understanding of this issue. Nevertheless, one core conclusion remains today as important as it was in the late eighteenth century: the amount of goods and services produced in any given economy grows at its highest possible rate when the rules of market economies are applied.  We have learned that this prescription cannot possibly be translated into a pure laissez-faire doctrine, because when the production and the exchange of goods and services is carried out without a proper legal and institutional framework the potential of the economy would not be fully exploited. For this reason, societies need to equip themselves with the right framework, which enhances the collective welfare by clearly defining and ensuring property rights and ensuring the efficient supply of public goods. This means in particular that economic policy must ensure that individuals have the necessary incentive to earn their income by working and producing goods and services which other individuals need. It also means that enterprises must take their decisions on the basis of market signals without relying on subsidies or being protected from competition. This will foster the accumulation of human and physical capital and a high level of employment, which are the determinants of long term growth. To fulfil this objective, economic policy must create and maintain a “stable” macroeconomic environment, ensure an appropriate level of flexibility of the economic system and provide incentives to work and invest in both physical and human capital in order to maximise employment and output growth.  In Europe and more particularly in the euro area, the stability of the macroeconomic framework and the flexibility of the economic structures are two guiding principles of economic policy that are enshrined into the Treaty and the Lisbon Agenda, respectively. How can these principles be best applied in practice? The role of a stability oriented monetary policy  Let me start by illustrating the role that the ECB’s monetary policy plays in fostering long term output growth in the euro area. The EU Treaty establishes the maintenance of price stability as the primary objective of the ECB. This objective refers to the general price level in the euro area and the ECB has made it clear that it aims at keeping inflation (as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices) below and close to 2% over the medium term. The ECB does all what is necessary to be credible in the delivery of price stability - in line with its definition - over time, including in the medium and long term. By credibly maintaining price stability, the ECB brings about a decisive contribution to long run output growth, and it does this through several channels.  BIS Review 74/2004 1 
First, price stability ensures the transparency of the relative price mechanism, thus enhancing the efficiency of resources allocation. In an environment of price stability economic agents can more easily discern the change in the relative value of each single good and service produced as well as that of labour and capital. In a situation of increasing inflation, instead, resources could be wrongly allocated to the production of goods and services whose relative demand has not increased. Furthermore, households may have difficulties in discerning the relative price of goods and services thus choosing a consumption bundle that turns out to be suboptimal. Preserving price stability also contributes to fostering private consumption. Lower inflation supports private consumption via its positive impact on the real value of households’ income and wealth.  Another important channel through which price stability fosters economic growth consists in the reduction of borrowing costs for individuals and firms. As we all know, inflation erodes the purchasing power of the nominal return on long term loan contracts or bonds. In case of high and uncertain inflation, savers or those who lend their liquid funds would then require a higher rate of return from borrowers, in order to compensate for the higher risks related to the uncertainty about future inflation. This inflation risk premium implies that in an economy with high inflation, less investment projects with a rather high rate of return will be profitable. In such circumstances, capital accumulation will be lower than it could have been in a situation of price stability and the output growth rate is consequently reduced.  Financial market developments during the past few years are indeed a testimony to the success of the ECB’s stability oriented monetary policy in securing low and stable long-term inflation expectations and thereby low interest rates in the euro area. Over the period between 1995 and 1999, the latter is the year when the euro replaced the national currencies of eleven EU member states and the ECB started to run a single monetary policy, long-term inflation expectations, as measured by Consensus Economic Forecasts, swiftly converged towards the “below 2 per cent level”, which is the ECB’s definition of price stability, from levels much higher still in the mid-1990s. Such a high degree of credibility was reflected in the developments of euro area long term interest rates, which by the beginning of 1999 had declined to around 4%, which was the level prevailing for the most credible and stable currencies, thus resulting for a number of countries and economies in a decline of around 9 percentage points since the beginning of 1995.  Since 1999 the ECB’s stability-oriented monetary policy and, overall, the ECB credibility in delivering price stability has been remarkably successful and has contributed to maintain financing costs - from the short term to the long term up to 30 years - at historically low levels. Inflation expectations have remained at low levels and have not been significantly affected by short-term developments in actual euro area headline inflation. Furthermore, in the period since the start of the single monetary policy, the fluctuation of key macroeconomic variables has declined significantly. In comparison with the average level of the first half of the nineties, the volatility of long-term inflation expectations (as measured by the Consensus Economic Forecast) has declined by more than one half. From a longer term perspective, when compared with the average levels recorded in the 1980s and the first half of the nineties the observed volatility of inflation and long term interest rates declined by around three quarters. Furthermore, over this latter period the decline in the volatility of both real GDP and employment figures by more than one quarter should also be associated with the contribution of successful stability-oriented macro-economic policies in the euro area. The ECB manages monetary policy in a systematic and transparent manner so that private agents are in the best possible conditions to gauge the likely evolution of interest rates in response to economic developments. First of all, the ECB is very clear about its monetary policy strategy. In addition, the ECB informs the public through the monthly press conference held just after the first Governing Council meeting of the month where the economic and monetary diagnosis of the ECB and the decisions taken by the Governing Council are displayed and explained almost in real time. The ECB has been a pioneer in this domain and has been followed by other central banks keen on increasing the transparency of their actions and decisions. This transparency is one further element contributing to macroeconomic stability and long-term growth. In an environment where the predictability of interest rates movements and their likely relation with key macroeconomic developments is relatively high, firms can better manage their balance sheets. This reduces both their vulnerability to economic shocks and their risk management costs and creates the condition for better decisions as regards domestic and foreign investment. Finally, I would like to stress the importance of maintaining price stability in enhancing the functioning of the labour market and contributing to sound nominal wage developments and competitive unit 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
labour costs, which fosters firms’ competitiveness, growth and job creation. In a credible regime of low inflation workers do not ask for extra-wage increases to compensate for inflation risk and firms and trade unions know ex-ante that firms will not be able to pass higher wages on to consumer prices. This helps to avoid excessive nominal increases, thus enhancing the ability of firms to efficiently manage their production costs and create new jobs. At the current juncture, it is important that there are no second round effects on wage and price settings arising from the recent increase in oil prices. Such effects have not been observed till now. All economic agents know without any doubt that we are very vigilant in this respect; and we trust that it is this vigilance and our credibility that are decisively contributing to prevent second round effects.  The role of a stability oriented fiscal policy Of great importance for the maintenance of macroeconomic stability and long term growth are sound public finances. The Stability and Growth Pact, which complements and further specifies the EU Treaty, provides a set of rules for the national fiscal authorities with the aim to ensuring fiscal soundness, by avoiding excessive deficits and safeguarding government finances, as defined by the attainment in the medium-term of budgetary positions “close to balance or in surplus”. Far from being a straightjacket on national policymakers, these rules derive from the experience accumulated in past decades showing that increased debt ratios - as well as the implicit debt associated with social security systems in ageing societies - cast a permanent shadow over long term output growth and constantly limit the scope for fiscal policy to act as a stabilising instrument.  Although its implementation has been far from satisfactory, we should see that the Stability and Growth Pact brought about significant improvements in the fiscal performance of the EU over the years. In other major economies outside Europe fiscal deficits reached very high levels in the recent economic slowdown, and the ratio of debt to GDP in these countries is now on a very worrisome path. In contrast, the euro area public finances weathered the economy cyclical downturn with aggregate deficit to GDP ratios remaining between 2% and 3% and with debt to GDP ratios only moderately rising. While this is less than what the ECB - as well as the Council and the Commission - had hoped for, it is a significant achievement for Europe where in the early 1990s average deficit to GDP ratios of above 5% were still recorded. The euro area is now in a better starting position, in terms of macro-economic policies, compared to a number of major economies to emerge from the phase of economic slowdown. These achievements are from time to time forgotten in the ongoing debate on the Stability and Growth Pact, and they demonstrate how important it is for Europe not to weaken this Pact.  As the ECB has repeatedly clarified on several occasions, it is important that the Stability and the Growth Pact and the excessive deficit procedure remain key cornerstones of the Economic Union. Let us never forget that we cannot have a Monetary Union (MU) without and Economic Union (EU), to make a coherent and economically rational EMU. This implies that both the Pact and the excessive deficit procedure are respected in their current form. Their implementation could be improved, in particular as regards the preventive arm of the Pact, ie the implementation of those rules aiming at avoiding that excessive deficits arise in the first place. Experience shows that if financial markets are uncertain about the future soundness of fiscal policy, at some stage long term interest rates are likely to increase. This tends to exert a negative impact on private investment and physical capital formation. Ultimately, unsound fiscal policies reduce production, output suffers a permanent loss and consumption possibilities are diminished in the long run. To be sure, being in a monetary union, like the euro area, does not shield countries that are expected to follow an unsustainable fiscal course from sooner or later being forced to pay higher credit risk premia on their government bonds relative to more disciplined countries in the union. The Treaty explicitly prohibits that individual governments, which run policies that are not sustainable, can be bailed-out by other governments or by the ECB. In recent years budgetary developments in the euro area have not been fully satisfactory and there is growing concern among market participants and observers that consensus on the importance of fiscal discipline is weakening in the euro area. While fiscal accounts in the euro area have been affected by the sluggish economic growth experienced in the past two or three years, it is undeniable that, in general, the resilience of fiscal deficits in the euro area is mainly due to high - and, sometimes, very high - structural public expenditure, which, by definition, are not dependent of the cyclical developments.  BIS Review 74/2004 3 
It is of crucial importance that euro area member states take advantage of the ongoing recovery and focus on the pursuit of balanced budgets or surpluses in the medium term. Such a policy would contribute to ensuring that the conditions for long-term growth in the euro area are strengthened and to meeting the challenges arising from an ageing population. Empirical evidence supports the conclusion that comprehensive fiscal consolidation programmes, if appropriately designed and credible, can have favourable effects on confidence, investment conditions and thereby on output growth even in the short term. Notably, if fiscal reform is based on the consolidation of public expenditure rather than on an increase in taxation, the adjustment in fiscal accounts would tend to support both private consumption and investment - because the current and expected after tax disposable income of household and firms increases.  Comprehensive and credible expenditure-based fiscal stabilisation programmes would in particular have positive supply effects as well. A number of empirical studies suggest that there are two main reasons why this can be the case. First, lower expected deficits reduce long term market interest rates, which creates more opportunities to invest and increase the productive potential of the economy. Second, following the reduction in labour taxation that is possible when public expenditure is reduced, the expectation of higher after-tax income induces higher labour supply and mitigates wage increases, thus boosting the country’s international competitiveness and job creation. The role of structural reforms  A stability oriented macroeconomic policy framework is not sufficient to ensure that high long-term growth is achieved. When private agents take their decisions over consumption, saving and investment, they should also not have impediments in the form of unnecessary and excessive regulations. A sound monetary and fiscal policy framework has to be complemented by structural policies that make the economy more flexible and dynamic.  Since March 2000, when the European Council launched the Lisbon agenda, European national governments, parliaments and social partners have become increasingly aware of the importance of implementing a substantial, courageous and far-reaching agenda of structural reforms. The ECB, from its side, fully endorses the Lisbon agenda and shares its objectives. We also agree with the main conclusion of the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok that - in preparation of the mid-term review of the Lisbon Strategy - has stressed the advantages of sharpening the focus on the key issues in order to revamp the structural reform process in Europe. Indeed, in the last decade, euro area countries have made some tangible progress with their structural reform programs. Competition in product markets due to, for example, a lower level of state aid and de-regulatory measures has increased, especially in network industries. This resulted in significant downward price effects in some sectors like telecommunication. The ECB is supporting strongly governments that are courageously embarking on reforms and does not underestimate the difficulty to implement them. In particular it has proven to be more difficult than previously expected for European governments and social partners to implement labour market reforms that could strengthen the positive employment trends recorded in the EU in the second half of the 1990s.  Breaking the reform deadlock is of the utmost importance, also in light of growing role played by new economies in the international market place that exposes European firms to new and challenging competitive pressures. It is not my intention today to provide suggestions to government, parliaments and social partners about specific policy actions, but it is clear to me that in the area of labour market reform, increasing flexibility and suppleness with a view to maximize job creation and to augment the capacity of outsiders, like unskilled youth, to enter the job market is of the essence.  In another domain there is a number of countries where the lengthening of retirement age, allowing workers to work longer hours per week and the reduction of non-wage costs of labour - like labour income taxation and social security contributions - are necessary to increase labour supply and demand, thus raising the productive capacity of the economy. Recent events involving a number of important euro area companies demonstrate that social partners are aware of the collective benefits induced by a better management of resource utilisation, as workers and employers could agree on measures that would preserve competitiveness and consolidate jobs.  Moreover, other measures facilitating workers reallocation, reducing both employment traps - due to generous unemployment subsidies and high marginal income taxes - and costs related to adjustments 4 BIS Review 74/2004 
in the labour force are often useful to increase the resilience of the economy to unforeseen shocks. A more flexible economy will make it easier for the corporate sector to maintain competitiveness without large cuts in employment.  Finally, a more flexible cost structure will increase the expected rate of return from private investment in both physical capital and research and education of the labour force. Hence, both the productivity and the quality of the labour force employed will increase, thereby setting the stage for virtuous dynamics that lead to higher output growth. Conclusion  All policymakers are called to play their role in making the euro area a more dynamic economy. By maintaining price stability, and by being credible in delivering it over the medium and long term, the ECB makes its own indispensable contribution to foster growth in the euro area. The rate of potential economic growth very much depends also on the other policy actors. It requires fiscal policy to be sound and sustainable, and it requires reforms ensuring that the structure of the economy is flexible and supple enough to augment the growth potential of Europe and to allow economic agents to respond smoothly to economic shocks.  In a very rapidly changing environment, where new technological advances, not only in the IT area, are extremely powerful and seem to be comparable only with the start of the industrial revolution, where creativity and conceptual innovations are flourishing in all economic sectors, particularly in the global financial system, and where economic globalisation is rapidly transforming the very structure of the world economy, the euro area and its 306 million fellow citizens are called to adapt in order to take advantage of the opportunities offered by this new world and to respond to new challenges. A lot has been done in Europe over the last 20 years: the combination of the bold single market endeavour starting in the mid eighties and of the single currency starting at the end of the nineties are perhaps the most striking historical set of structural reforms at the level of a continent in peace time. We have proved we were able to move and to restructure. We still have a lot to do as Wim Kok is wisely and strongly recommending. In this respect, permit me a last remark: at the moment I am speaking most of the reforms that are necessary at the level of our continent have been implemented with success in some European economies, generally on the basis of a bi-partisan consensus and with a large accord of the entrepreneurs and of the unions. Benchmarking in each particular domain of structural reforms the entire euro area and the European Union on the best European performers might well be the most powerful tool to make the necessary progress. Let’s just do it! I thank you for your attention.  BIS Review 74/2004 5 
Ewart S Williams: Challenges facing the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies Opening remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at the Thirty-Sixth Annual Monetary Studies Conference, jointly hosted by the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago and the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies, St Augustine, 1-4 November 2004. *      *      * On behalf of the Management and staff of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, I wish to extend a warm welcome to all the participants (especially our guests from the Caribbean and further afield), to the Thirty-sixth Annual Monetary Studies Conference. The Central Bank is especially pleased to be collaborating with the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies to jointly host this Conference, in this our 40th Anniversary year. I should note that this Conference has existed for almost as long as the Central Bank and has become an important fixture in the conference agenda in the Caribbean. It, in fact started as, the Regional Programme of Monetary Studies, in 1968, under the leadership of Sir Alister McIntyre, (who was then, Director of the Institute of Social and Economic Research on the St. Augustine Campus of the University of the West Indies). As Dr. Jackson indicated, the first Conference was really intended to focus on the implications of the new sterling agreements following the devaluation of the pound sterling to which most of our currencies were pegged. The agenda also included a few other topics: (i) financial accounting in the Caribbean; (ii) the operation of insurance companies; (iii) the development of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Area; and (iv)  the design of an ideal accounting framework for the plantation economy. It’s interesting, but many of these continue to be burning issues today. For many years this conference continued to be staged, in a process of close collaboration between the regional Central Banks, University of the West Indies and the University of Guyana, but essentially administered by the University. And here we need to pay tribute to those “essentially unpaid co-ordinators” who did yeoman work in keeping the programme alive: Professor Compton Bourne, Maurice Odle, Adlith Browne and Ramesh Ramsaran. In May 1995, UWI and the Regional Central Banks signed a formal agreement to establish the Caribbean Centre for Monetary Studies (the CCMS). The core mission of the Centre is to provide CARICOM Central Banks with timely economic intelligence as well as monetary and financial policy advice by: (i) conducting relevant research; (ii) developing a regional repository of monetary, financial and economic information; (iii) disseminating its research findings through Seminars, Conferences and Workshops including, of course, this Annual Monetary Studies Conference. It is widely recognized that the Monetary Studies Programme and the CCMS have served the region well. Perhaps one of the most enduring contributions of the programme has been the provision of a training ground for many of the regions’ noted economists. In fact, several of our prominent regional as well as national policy makers have “cut their teeth”, in the programme. Over the years, the CCMS, for its part, has developed an impressive range of publications covering both theoretical and policy issues. The CARICOM Economic Performance and Convergence Report one of its main outputs, provides important comparative information about regional economic performance, and has proved to be quite useful in the deliberations of the Committee of Central Bank Governors. The Centre also has established a network of research associates, drawn from the regional and international community. The relationships cultivated by this network have allowed for the provision of joint research with relevance for the Caribbean region. BIS Review 73/2004 1 
CCMS broke new ground a few years ago with its Annual Senior Level Policy Seminar which provide an important forum for the discussion of practical issues of importance to the business community. These seminars have been a tremendous success. Globalisation and the rapid evolution of the regional financial environment have created new challenges for Caribbean Central Banks in their quest to maintain monetary and financial stability. It is my view that the CCMS has a critical role to play in helping us address these challenges. And I think that the CCMS could provide this critical support in a number of ways. Firstly, I think that CCMS could contribute more to economic and financial intelligence at the regional level through the expansion of regional databases that provide up-to-date information on financial sector performance. Secondly, I think that the CCMS must get involved in joint research with the regional central banks on the urgent issues that confront us - issues such as the conduct of monetary and financial policy under different exchange rate regimes: as exchange rate management: issues of monetary and financial sector policy co-ordination in the context of the CSME. Of course, I am fully aware of the kinds of challenges that the CCMS itself faces, not least of which is the financial resource constraint. The Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago is a strong supporter of the CCMS and I feel that all the regional central banks should be prepared to finance the Center at a level that facilitates the recruitment and maintenance of high-quality staff. UWI has been a strong supporter of the CCMS but the University may also have to do more if we are to maintain a high quality center for monetary research. And finally, the time may have come when we need to look to the private financial community - the banks, the insurance companies and so on - to contribute to the financing of the CCMS, if even for paid research. Let’s face it, we all stand to benefit from the work that could emanate from a well-staffed, well-resourced and high quality regional center for monetary and financial studies. With these few words, Mr. Chairman, I would like to wish all the participants a most stimulating and successful conference. 2 BIS Review 73/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 30 November 2004. *      *      * Madame la Présidente, Membres de la Commission Economique et Monétaire, j’ai l’honneur de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui dans le cadre de notre dialogue régulier. Je me réjouis beaucoup de ce dialogue qui place l’Union Economique et Monétaire européenne au premier rang parmi les économies industrialisées en ce qui concerne la fréquence et la profondeur du dialogue entre le Parlement et l’Institut d’Emission. Je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation de la situation économique et monétaire actuelle. Ich möchte außerdem zu aktuellen Themen der Fiskalpolitik und zum Fortschritt im Bereich der Strukturreformen Stellung nehmen, insbesondere im Hinblick auf den Lissabon Prozess und jüngste Produktivitätsentwicklungen in der Wirtschaft des Euroraums. 1. Economic and monetary developments After the positive developments in the first half of 2004, more recent data have indicated that growth dynamics moderated somewhat in the second half of the year. Real GDP growth in the third quarter of 2004 is estimated to have been 0.3% quarter on quarter, following growth rates of 0.7 % and 0.5 % in the previous two quarters. Although it is difficult to interpret with certainty the estimate for the third quarter given the lack of a breakdown by components, it appears that the contribution of net exports was negative, the inventory built up was strong and private consumption growth remained sluggish. These developments seem to be related in particular to the effects of the increase in oil prices, which has reduced real disposable income in the euro area and has also dampened global economic growth. Despite the adverse impact of the oil prices, a number of conditions remain in place for the euro area to continue to grow in 2005, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than previously anticipated. On the external side, while global growth is moderating, it nonetheless remains robust. In this context, euro area exports should continue to benefit from favourable global demand conditions. On the domestic side, investment should be supported by the global environment, the very favourable financing conditions in the euro area, solid profits and greater corporate efficiency gained through business restructuring. Finally, there is scope for private consumption to strengthen, in particular if uncertainties surrounding the extent and pace of the implementation of structural reforms are reduced. The outlook for economic activity, both globally and domestically, continues to be surrounded by uncertainties, in particular as a result of present and possible future developments in oil markets which can dampen the strength of the recovery both inside and outside the euro area. In any event, it is important that second-round effects in wage and price-setting be avoided. In addition, it would be essential to refrain from taking measures which would prolong the necessary adjustment process. Finally, monetary policy must remain firmly committed to the objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. Over recent months, oil price developments have also had a significant impact on consumer price inflation. In November, annual HICP inflation was estimated by Eurostat to have been 2.2%, after 2.4% in October. In addition, increases in indirect taxes and administered prices earlier this year have had a notable effect on consumer prices. Looking ahead, inflation rates are likely to remain above 2% for the coming months, but should moderate thereafter in the absence of additional upward shocks. The information available does not suggest that stronger underlying inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area. Wage increases have remained moderate over recent quarters. In the context of moderate economic growth, this trend should continue in the future. There are a number of upward risks to price stability. Such risks are mainly associated with oil price developments, uncertainty regarding future increases in indirect taxes and administrative prices, and potential second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In this respect, it is BIS Review 73/2004 1 
essential that long-term inflation expectations remain solidly anchored to our definition of price stability and are not affected by current upward movements in HICP inflation. Our monetary analysis also calls for vigilance regarding upside risks to price stability over the medium term. The shorter-term dynamics of M3 growth have strengthened over recent months. This seems very much related to the low level of interest rates in the euro area. This very low level of interest rates also fuels private sector demand for credit. In particular, the demand for loans for house purchases is strong, supported by strong house price dynamics in several euro area countries. The growth in loans to non-financial corporations has also picked up over recent months. As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few years, there remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. This could pose risks to price stability over the medium term. In addition, persistently high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could also become a source of unsustainable asset price increases, particularly in property markets. Such developments need to be monitored carefully. I would now like to make a few remarks on fiscal policies. Many governments are currently in the process of finalising their 2005 budgets. While a number of countries have managed to maintain sound budgetary positions over recent years, five euro area countries are expected by the Commission to have deficits close to or above 3% of GDP during this year and next. This is a disappointing development. It reflects an insufficient commitment to address the existing structural imbalances. The current economic environment should be utilised to embark on comprehensive budget consolidation where needed. This would send a strong and confidence-inspiring signal that the objectives of sound public finances and a growth-friendly environment are being pursued. Turning to the European fiscal framework, we remain convinced that there is no need to change the text of the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact. Having said that, we do see room for improvement in the way the fiscal rules are implemented. In particular, there is a need to ensure the pursuit of prudent fiscal policies in good times and for a stronger focus on public debt and sustainability. In this respect, some of the Commission’s proposals concerning the so-called “preventive arm” of the Pact are welcome and warrant further consideration. As regards the so-called “corrective arm” of the Pact, however, the ECB is concerned about proposals that could undermine the nominal anchor of 3% for the deficit-to-GDP ratio. This anchor of the fiscal framework is essential for maintaining expectations of fiscal discipline. This contributes to macroeconomic stability, economic growth and employment creation. The excessive deficit procedure and the Stability and Growth Pact remain a foundation for trust and confidence in EMU. In this respect, reliable and timely government statistics are of vital importance to the credibility of the budgetary surveillance process. The European accounting rules must be fully respected when recording all types of expenditure and revenue. This should be done in a manner that is consistent and stable over time and homogeneous across countries. The procedures must not be vulnerable to political cycles, as stated by the ECOFIN Council. Countries should consider the quality and integrity of their statistics as a matter of priority. 2. The need for structural reform in the euro area Let me now turn to the Lisbon agenda. The European Council intended to reinforce the process of structural reforms as from 2000 onwards. However, almost five years later, the European programme to become “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world [..] by 2010” has not been implemented as promised. In this regard, the recent report by the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok, which provides an independent assessment of the Lisbon strategy and contributes to next year’s mid-term review of the strategy, expresses an urgent call for renewed impetus. It proposes a stronger commitment of national governments and a sharpening of the Lisbon strategy’s focus by placing particular emphasis on the acceleration of employment and productivity growth “via a wide range of reform policies as well as a wider macroeconomic framework as supportive as possible of growth, demand and employment.” The ECB welcomes the conclusions of the High Level Group as well as the subsequent ECOFIN reaction, which is also supportive. Concerning the role of macroeconomic policies in fostering the success of the Lisbon process, I would like to stress that an independent monetary policy aimed at 2 BIS Review 73/2004 
delivering price stability and being credible in that delivery over the medium and long term, together with a fiscal policy in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact to maintain fiscal sustainability, are the best contributions that macroeconomic policies can make to facilitate the implementation of reforms. Price stability is a necessary condition for being effective in fostering sustainable growth as well as of supporting employment and social cohesion, thus supporting the Lisbon objectives which, in turn, are another necessary condition for enhancing growth and job creation. Consequently, as was concluded by the ECOFIN Council in its first reaction to the Kok report, the macroeconomic framework needs to be supportive of stability and growth. As for increasing the incentives to implement reforms, the ECB has in the past pointed to the supportive role of a more transparent and effective benchmarking based on sensibly defined quantitative indicators. Apart from creating peer pressure and accountability on the side of policymakers, benchmarking can be a crucial driver of public discussion in the EU, raising public awareness about the benefits all European citizens could derive in terms of growth and job creation from these necessary reforms. This is a reasonable approach to further the implementation of the Lisbon strategy in a context where structural reform is the responsibility of Member States. In the absence of sufficient progress in structural reform, weak productivity growth has contributed to the low growth performance observed in the euro area in recent years. In the 1980s, the annual growth rate of labour productivity per hour worked was on average 2.3% in the euro area. It significantly decelerated during the 1990s to reach an average of 1.2% over the period 1996-2003. As a consequence, the gap with the United States has widened over recent years. More specifically, since the mid-1990s, the gap in labour productivity growth between the United States and the euro area was on average 0.7 percentage point when measured per hour worked. However, it was nearly twice as large when measured per head due to considerable divergences in trends in average working hours between the two economies. Alongside further progress on reforms directed towards higher rates of labour utilisation in the euro area, developments in recent years reinforce the need to implement policies aimed specifically at boosting labour productivity. In this respect, one of the main priorities of the Lisbon agenda is to encourage innovation and technological diffusion, which are among the key factors affecting long-term productivity growth. First, policies should aim at easing regulations. Regulations limiting product market competition or hindering labour market adaptability have negative repercussions on innovation and technological advancements. EU countries made significant progress in product market reforms during the 1990s, but significant barriers to competition and innovation remain, in particular in the service sectors, which urgently need to be tackled. The ECB would strongly back the Commission’s initiatives in that respect. Second, policies should promote investment in research and development, which is also an important driver of innovation. Third, policies should aim at improving human capital. Technological advancements imply that labour skills change over time. Therefore, measures favouring the continuous development of human capital contribute to further innovation, facilitate the use of advanced technologies and allow technical change to translate into more jobs. To conclude, the Lisbon agenda incorporates the relevant priorities to promote long-term productivity growth as a key condition to making Europe more competitive and dynamic. The ECB supports governments, parliaments and social partners who are courageously implementing these necessary reforms. I am now ready to answer your questions. BIS Review 73/2004 3 
Hermann Remsperger: Research matters – SDGE models and the financial sector Speech by Professor Hermann Remsperger, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at a workshop entitled “SDGE models and the financial sector” hosted by the Technical University of Darmstadt and Deutsche Bundesbank, Eltville, 26-27 November 2004.  *      *      * I am often asked what role the Deutsche Bundesbank will be playing - in five or ten years’ time - not just in the Eurosystem but internationally as well. My answer is always the same. Over the longer term the importance of the Bundesbank will to a large extent depend on how we position ourselves in the field of research.  I am not saying that because so many distinguished researchers are gathered here today. Nor am I saying it because I am responsible for our research centre.  No, I want to emphasise the role of research because in the field of monetary policy, we are faced time and again with new questions which call for theoretically and empirically founded answers. At the same time there are the familiar old problems such as the stability of the demand for money, which have to be continually re-analysed.  This strive for knowledge is gaining importance also because the influence of National Central Banks within the Eurosystem depends predominantly on the weight of their arguments.  The meetings of the ECB Governing Council are not a debating club for doves and hawks where everyone knows in advance what the others are going to say about interest rates. It is precisely at monetary policy meetings that one has to have a very good idea of where the wind is blowing from in terms of research.  So it comes as no surprise that two focal points of our research agenda are closely tied to monetary policy considerations. One is dedicated to “Goals and effects of monetary policy”. In the context of the monetary transmission process, for instance, we examine the influence of corporate heterogeneity on the effects of monetary policy. In addition, we concentrate on the role of output gaps, exchange rates and monetary aggregates in monetary policy.  The other focal point is concerned with analysing how monetary policy is influenced by several long-term developments in the real sector of the economy. Globalisation of production is one of many examples in this area. Research papers on labour and capital supply as well as on potential growth are further important examples.  However, I do not want to create the impression that central banks are only concerned with monetary policy or with the next interest rate decision. As a rule, central banks direct their attention to both price stability and the stability of the financial system as both subjects are very much intertwined. In my opinion, this simple observation has far-reaching implications for a central bank’s research programme.  If a central bank’s research is to develop on well-organised lines, it has to be “ from the top down”, with the objectives as the primary focus. You all know, that price stability has long been established as the first objective of central banks and therefore price stability has been and will remain the first objective of central bank research. As I see it, financial stability has now become the second top issue for central bank research.  Alongside and in cooperation with other departments, our research centre takes an active role in this field. For example we look at the implications of changes in the German financial system for financial stability, the implementation of lending of last resort functions and the link between the soundness of the banking system and its credit supply.  In addition, other projects are dedicated to the role of financial intermediaries in the business cycle in Germany . Furthermore, we investigate the best framework for implementing stress tests for the financial system in Germany . On top of this there is no doubt that the financial stability issue has a very important international dimension, which is a big challenge for further research.  Last but not least our research concentrates on the refinement of econometric models and forecast methods. In this regard, we are particularly interested in promoting the development of “dynamic BIS Review 72/2004 1 
stochastic general equilibrium models” for the use within the Bundesbank. These models have become a backbone of theoretical as well as empirical analysis.  In modern economic research these approaches provide a consistent framework which connects theoretical foundation with empirical evidence. We at the Bundesbank are aware of the necessity to include these methods in our tool box of economic methods.  Consequently, our research programme contains several projects which will use general equilibrium models. As an example, based on earlier papers by Jana Kremer, Giovanni Lombardo and Thomas Werner, the interaction between monetary and fiscal policy, is to be illustrated in more detail. Another project will deal with the cyclical behaviour of beliefs in DSGE models.  The sheer scope of these research topics constitutes a major challenge for research management. Essentially, this is a matter of how research within a central bank is to be organised. I believe research centres like ours at the Bundesbank are essential for creating synergy effects.  But let me also emphasise how much we appreciate the support of our external research professors. They are Professor Jörg Breitung of Bonn and Professor Harald Uhlig of Berlin. We have already benefited a lot from their advise and hope for further fruitful collaboration. And we also benefit from our research council which follows our work with a critical eye and makes valuable recommendations.  Among the members of the research council are Jürgen von Hagen, Martin Hellwig and Manfred J M Neumann. Both Peter Kugler and Axel Weber have now left the council. Peter Kugler’s successor is Professor Jürgen Wolters of Berlin . And our President has been succeeded on the research council by Charles Goodhart. Given this council membership I am sure you will agree with me when I end by saying that research really matters at the Bundesbank.  Against this background, I am very pleased to welcome you to this workshop on dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models and the financial sector. The workshop is being hosted by our Economic Research Centre together with economists from the Technical University of Darmstadt.  2 BIS Review 72/2004 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global leadership development Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Official Launch of ICLIF Alumni Association and ICLIF Leadership Competency Model, Kuala Lumpur, 30 November 2004. *      *      * ICLIF Alumni Members, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is my great pleasure and honour to welcome you to the official launch of the Alumni Association of the International Centre For Leadership In Finance (or ICLIF) and the ICLIF Leadership Competency Model (ILCM). ICLIF Alumni Association It was just over a year ago that we witnessed the Official Launch of ICLIF on 28 October 2003. Within this period, ICLIF has already made considerable progress in meeting its objective to provide a more focused and coordinated approach towards the development of world-class leaders in the financial services sector in Malaysia and in the region.  To-date, ICLIF has successfully concluded two sessions of its flagship Global Leadership Development Programme or GLDP, in addition to a Directors’ Forum and a seminar on Scenario Planning. Besides providing participants with an opportunity to learn from the “top thinkers” from world-renowned institutions and industry practitioners and experts, one of the key strengths of ICLIF’s programmes lies with the unique opportunity for the participants to establish strong social and professional networking and build lasting fraternity bonds. The launch of the ICLIF Alumni Association has been designed to play this role. For this purpose, all participants, faculty members and facilitators of ICLIF programmes will automatically be accredited as members of the Alumni Association. With the rapid changes taking place in the financial and corporate landscape in the country and the greater integration in the region and the world, networking among leaders and captains of industries is most valuable in contributing towards greater understanding and in increasing the potential for collaborative efforts that are of mutual interest.  The establishment of the Alumni Association represents an important part of ICLIF’s commitment to provide a platform for members to maintain active networking and productive collaborative alliances. It is also in line with our philosophy that leadership development is a continuous journey. The Alumni Association would thus provide a forum for continuous sharing among its members. Alumni members will also receive automatic notification and invitations to all ICLIF programmes and activities that will be organized in the future. As the members of the Alumni are spread across the region, ICLIF will leverage on Information and Communication Technology to help members stay connected. To facilitate networking opportunities, a special section has been created on ICLIF’s website to cater for the activities of the Alumni Association. This would include the facility to disseminate information among its membership, including the publication of an alumni directory, highlights of important events and latest developments that may be of interest to its members. The Centre will serve as the secretariat to support all activities undertaken by the Alumni Association. As we advance forward, the reputation, image and stature of the Centre will depend on the performance of its participants and their contributions to the environment and the organisations they represent. ICLIF regards its alumni members as important and looks forward to your continuous support to building ICLIF into a regional centre of excellence for leadership development in financial services.  While ICLIF has put in great efforts in working with leading international consultants and the best schools in the design and delivery of its leadership development programmes, we see this as an evolving process. In this context, we see alumni members as an important sounding board in providing feedback to enhance the relevance and effectiveness of ICLIF’s programmes. As beneficiaries of BIS Review 72/2004 1 
ICLIF’s programmes, the alumni members are the best intermediaries in making ICLIF better known to the industry. Ladies and Gentlemen,       ICLIF Leadership Competency Model One of the first initiatives by ICLIF upon its inception is to develop a unique leadership competency model that will analyse and enhance the understanding of what makes for great corporate leaders in the regional context. The Competency Model was developed through a participatory process involving strategic insights by industry leaders in the country and the region. This was achieved through behavioural-event interviews as well as benchmarking exercises based on literature research and the database of leadership competency models of world class companies.  The preliminary model was further refined in a Validation Seminar attended by visionary and prominent leaders with proven track record of business performance excellence from both the private and public sectors. The Model forms the foundation to guide the philosophy and drive the design and delivery of ICLIF’s leadership development programmes. I wish to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the industry luminaries who have given so much of their time in participating in the validation seminar for the ICLIF Leadership Competency Model. Let me share with you some of the interesting findings of the consultants in assessing our leaders based on the competencies identified in the Model. Among the positive findings of the exercise was the observation by the consultants that many of the leaders interviewed exhibited strong competencies in the area of focus, drive, execution, negotiations (and deal making) and entrepreneurial drive. These are all competencies resulting from high achievement needs and high achievement values. There is also a high sense of national pride and desire to enable Malaysia to meet the challenges of 2020. Participants also displayed a strong sense of performance drive for excellence.  There are areas of competencies that, however, require further development. The review detected some degree of performance complacency by some respondents, as reflected by a lack of drive to achieve and the lack of desire to benchmark against the global best. Participants seemed quite satisfied with what they had personally achieved. In the studies of how joint ventures between multinationals and local firms sometimes fail, one of the main reasons cited was the misalignment of the ambitions of global multinationals and local partners. The results showed that while global multinationals had unlimited appetite for growth and ambition, fuelled mainly by shareholders’ demands and driven by professional managers, local joint venture partners may have achieved their personal goals as professional managers and thus reached a plateau in their ambitions.  Another area of shortfall was in cognitive energy as reflected in the low desire to putting energy into the thinking process and to pushing the mental discipline when the issues gets a little more complex.  Another important issue was in the area of Talent Management. Although the leaders interviewed spoke about the importance of leadership and talent management, there was little or no supporting evidence of action on this important area. Also, there was a need for systems to be in place for constructive, honest and candid assessments about the capabilities and potentials of subordinates who may someday assume a leadership position in their organizations. Such feedback is vital for the development of the intellectual capital and management capabilities of senior management to drive strategic direction and operational excellence in the industry to pave the way for the development of their future leaders in the industry.  Those observations and insights have brought to the fore the importance of leadership competencies in articulating the combination of essential skills, attributes and behaviours required by leaders for the successful and effective performance on the job. It is our hope that the ICLIF Leadership Competency Model will be a constant source of reference, inspiration and impetus to our leaders in building a dynamic organizational culture and in meeting future challenges. In order to better position ourselves in this more challenging environment, one that is more globalised, more integrated, more competitive and more complex, we need to play a more pro-active role in strengthening our own organizations, we need to prepare ourselves for difficult periods, we need to also contribute towards the development of the environment in which we operate, the markets and the 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
financial infrastructure and finally and importantly we also need to invest in people, in their skills, to enhance our organisational capacity to bring about institutional development so as to enhance our respective organizational effectiveness. Leadership is an integral part of this process. Our investment in ICLIF hopes in some part to contribute to achieving these goals.  Alumni members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is now my privilege and pleasure to officially launch ICLIF Alumni Association and ICLIF Leadership Competency Model. BIS Review 72/2004 3 
Erkki Liikanen: External financing condition, the exchange rate and policy tradeoffs for central banks Speaking notes by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, for the second high-level seminar of the Eurosystem and Latin American central banks, Rio de Janeiro, 26 November 2004. *      *      * Let me start by saying that the debate on appropriate exchange rate regimes has been surprisingly lively over the last few years. My impression is that this debate is partly boosted by the fact that economic theory has proved to be rather lame in guiding policymakers on exchange rate regime choice and many countries have experienced severe foreign exchange crises in recent years. In this connection, the role of free capital movements in determining the performance of exchange rate regimes appear to have been at the core of recent policy discussions. In the 1990s, too many economies, I believe, were victims of economic crises. The fall of tightly managed exchange rate regimes in East Asia, Russia, Brazil, Turkey and Argentina resulted in a massive decline in living standards in these countries. These crises also brought the issue of optimal exchange rate regimes to the core of the international policy agenda.  While there are no simple recipe for the optimal choice of a currency regime in any country, one can safely emphasise the importance of consistency within the exchange regime and its underlying macroeconomic policies and economic fundamentals. It is easy to agree with those who have pointed out that no regime can ultimately substitute for sound macroeconomic policies. In this short talk I will try to argue that, in the current environment of high capital mobility, sound fiscal policy and the choice of exchange rate regime are even more important. I will illustrate my point by highlighting the general developments in emerging markets and by two examples from Finland’s neighbouring countries.  I believe that free capital mobility is the key factor underlying not only the appropriate choice of exchange rate regime, but also understanding the recent crises in emerging markets. There is a broad consensus today that the sudden reversal of capital flows played a central role in triggering recent crises. Compared to more advanced economies emerging markets seem to be more prone to institutional and financial sector weaknesses. Consequently, they are less capable to manage these large capital flows. Capital flows often depend not only on domestic fundamentals and policy management, but also on external variables. Higher interest rates in the US or crises in other countries can bring about abrubt changes in financial conditions and trigger crises in emerging markets.  But domestic policy management is very important as well. Recent studies, including one made at the Bank of Finland, show that excessive borrowing by the government or private banks seem to be key reasons for the recent crises. Today - with free capital mobility - high level of indebtedness of the government or domestic banks make countries highly vulnerable to changes in investor confidence and may easily lead to sudden capital outflows and a subsequent crisis. Indeed, public debt, foreign indebtedness of banks or even M2 to reserves are all important indicators of crisis vulnerability.  Here I would like to stress the importance of sustainable fiscal policy. To illustrate my point, I would like to discuss the positive developments in Estonia. The country has used succesfully a currency board arrangement through the turbulent period in the 1990’s. In Estonia, the average budget deficit was less than 1% of GDP in the period between 1992 and 2001, and the public debt level was only 4% of GDP. As the appetite for risk declined and many emerging market countries ended up in crises, in Estonia there were practically no assets from which the sudden capital outflows were able to occur. Indeed, Estonia even navigated nicely through the crisis in the neighbouring Russia.  Interestingly, Estonia - along with the two other Baltic countries - have all been able to combine 1) a fixed exchange rate, 2) liberalisation of the capital account before having a well-functioning financial system, and 3) very large current account deficits. At the same time they have gone through deep structural and institutional change. This raises an interesting question. How have they been able to manage such a combination that would usually be regarded as inconsistent? In addition to sound fiscal policy, small domestic financial markets have been crucial. In Baltic countries there are hardly any inter-bank markets. The banking sectors have been sold to foreigners, and, consequently, banking supervision has been outsourced to a large extent. After the boom and BIS Review 72/2004 1 
bust of 1997, the Baltic stock exchanges have generally stagnated. Not only are these economies extremely small, but their degree of monetisation is very low. As mentioned, public debt is absent or very small. As a result, there are very few assets and markets for speculative capital flows in Baltic countries. Partially, this reflects sound fundamentals, but mostly it is an unintended consequence of policy decisions. Unfortunately, I don’t know how easily these Baltic experiences can be repeated in other countries. Let me continue with fiscal policy and by discussing another interesting example. Namely, the recent economic developments in Russia. The crisis in 1998 was mainly caused by excessive government borrowing. Before the crisis, budget deficits in Russia were between 5-12% and the public debt level exceeded 50% of GDP. Again capital flew away from government bonds and other Russian assets, and the crisis materialised.  But since 2000, the Russian government has run fiscal surpluses and the debt level has been decreased to less than 30% of GDP. Today nobody seriously predicts a currency crisis in Russia, and the economy has grown comfortably between 5 and 7% per year. Of course high oil prices have a played an important role. In fact the Russian authorities have used the windfall oil revenue fairly wisely. For example, the Russian authorities have recently established a oil stabilisation fund.  Our beautiful host country seems to be following a similar path to recovery. After the crisis in 1999, successive Brazilian governments have run up sizeable budget surpluses and the public debt level has been decreased. Maybe more remarkably, the authorities have improved the institutional framework of fiscal policy. The fiscal responsibility law and the voluntary fiscal commitments have improved the credibility of the fiscal policy nicely. Consequently, the interest rates have fallen, investments are rising, and GDP is growing satisfactorily by around 5%. Hopefully, this tight fiscal policy will continue now when the capital inflows and economic growth are recovering. If the fiscal consolidation continues and is imitated by others, this Brazilian success story will contribute positively to the stability of the whole region.   Given the capital mobility and the need for sound macroeconomic policy, how should emerging economies chose their exchange rate regime? Rigid exchange rate regimes may enhance monetary policy credibility and lower inflation with little costs particularly in countries with low exposure to international capital movements. But as a recent IMF study indicates, these economies are often developing countries.  Nevertheless, in emerging economies with relatively large financial markets and large capital movements, rigid exchange rate systems might be quite a risky choice. As we have seen, fixed and other rigid exchange rate regimes are highly vulnerable to sudden capital outflows and crises. Especially if the domestic fundamentals are not perfect.  Nowadays many emerging market countries have chosen a regime where the currency floats but the authorities, in practice, still target an exchange rate level. This fear of floating may well be a adequate exchange rate regime for many emerging economies. In these countries credibility is still low, dollarisation is high and the intermediation of monetary policy is unstable. But as the countries develop economically and institutionally, a more flexible exchange rate and proper inflation target may well represent a less costly regime choice.   To conclude, it is difficult nowadays to isolate oneself totally from external shocks and sudden capital movements. But the authorities in emerging markets can render their economies less vulnerable by running sustainable fiscal policies and choosing a suitable exchange rate regime. To build a sounder banking sector might be more challenging. Again it is very difficult to isolate the banking sector from capital movements, but the authorities can demand large capital requirements. Authorities could also supervise the currency mismatches in the banking sector properly. More capital and less foreign currency liabilities might render the economies less vulnerable to sudden capital movements and crises. 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
Klaus Liebscher: Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI)  Opening remarks by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 29 November 2004.  *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen,  It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to Vienna and to our Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI). I am very happy to welcome, in particular, the President of the European Central Bank, Monsieur Jean-Claude Trichet, who is going to take the floor in a few minutes to deliver the keynote speech, and the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Weber, who will hold this evening’s dinner speech. Jean-Claude, Axel - a very warm welcome to both of you! I also would like to welcome all fellow governors who followed our invitation - let me thank you for your highly valuable contributions to this conference. It is also a privilege for me that the Special Coordinator of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, Mr. Erhard Busek, will give an introductory statement later this morning.  We are also very glad that we have again attracted many distinguished speakers and renowned experts from academia, from national as well as international institutions, and from the banking sector.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  About one year ago, I was welcoming you here to our last “East-West Conference”. We had come together to debate “The economic potential of a larger Europe - Keys to success” and thus revisited the most important topics of previous East-West conferences, such as human capital formation, financial stability, and the specification of a suitable policy mix or structural reforms. I am very proud to be able to say that the Oesterreichische Nationalbank has been following the transition process very closely from the very beginnings.  Already in 1989, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank started to build up an international platform - comprising seminars, workshops and conferences - to discuss questions that are related to the transition process and to the European integration. By 1995, the East-West Conference was established as an annual event of the OeNB in Vienna that highlighted numerous aspects of mutual interest year after year. In the setting of the 2003 East-West Conference, finally, we pre-celebrated the historic event of the EU’s enlargement towards the East - truly a major milestone in the European integration process.  And just one month ago the process of European integration was taken one step further yet again: On 28 October 2004, the Heads of State of the 25 member states and the three accession countries -Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania - signed the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, which now needs to be ratified by each EU country. As a result of this process of integration in the second half of the 20th century and up to today, the European Union has reached a high degree of stability and prosperity. One may safely assume that in the first half of the last century people would not have dared to dream of this period of peaceful convergence across Europe.  Despite the successes, one has to acknowledge that much remains to be done for strengthening and advancing European integration. To single out just some of these major challenges, in March 2000, the EU Council of Heads of State and Government agreed on a new strategic goal, the so-called Lisbon strategy, for the European Union with regard to the next decade - let me quote - “to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion.”  However, there is a lack of clear and decisive progress in achieving these objectives, as recently pointed out by a report written on behalf of the European Commission. The subdued pace of economic recovery in the euro area puts the spotlight on its structural inefficiencies with frictions both in the labour and in the product market. The EU single market has to be fully implemented in order to enhance productivity and employment, and overall, economic growth and prosperity. The future European Commission, the European Council and the governments of the individual member states should now clearly embrace the Lisbon strategy and speed up their structural reforms in order to strengthen their international competitiveness, foster economic growth and support employment. BIS Review 72/2004 1 
The EU, the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro are Europe’s strategic responses to global competition and associated challenges it poses. EMU represents a key step in completing the Single European Market. Today, the euro area has already established itself as a stable monetary anchor in the global economy. However, it is essential not to rest on our laurels.  It has to be acknowledged that we have to work hard to keep and assure the success of EMU in the future. Several governments of euro area member states have repeatedly had difficulties to fulfil their responsibilities and obligations with regard to fiscal rules. For the stability of the euro and the credibility of the monetary union, it is essential to comply with the fiscal rules set by the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), which provides a clear, transparent and simple framework. Today’s discussion about making the SGP rules more flexible as a short-term remedy to the fiscal problems occurring in some Member States is counterproductive and at odds with the Maastrichtconsensus. In my mind, the SGP works as it is. The problem has been in its implementation. It is not the Pact itself which has disadvantages or which has failed. It is the missing will of several governments to fulfil their responsibilities and obligations - they failed. Thus, should the rules be made exceedingly complex and contingent on too many exceptional economic circumstances, this will clearly weak the SGP in its implementation and credibility. Therefore, I would like to stress that a return onto a path of long-term sustainable public finances is necessary in order to foster the public trust in this pillar of the EMU stability architecture and to cushion possible effects of the Lisbon structural reform agenda as well as to moderate the challenges of ageing societies in Europe. Where and how does Central and Eastern Europe enter this picture? The deepening of the European Union came along with the widening of the European Union. Since the fall of the Iron Curtain 15 years ago, the Central and Eastern European countries have made impressive and successful, and often painful, experiences of transition to market economies; efforts there have been crowned by their accession to the EU. Membership includes the commitment to the eventual adoption of the euro.  The creation of the euro area was based on the sustainable fulfilment of the Maastrichtconvergence criteria, and they will be applied to future euro area entrants in the same way. These criteria form a coherent package based on a set of economic indicators that is neither negotiable nor subject to change. From a legal perspective, this ensures continuity and equal treatment, from an economic perspective, the logic of lasting convergence has not changed and is all the more important when countries are at different stages of economic development. As was pointed out in the last Convergence Report of the ECB, new Member States still have some way to go and nominal and real convergence with the Euro area differs considerably in some of the new Member States. Therefore, reform efforts and implementation of sound policies, especially in the fiscal field, are still required on the way to monetary union. In this light, a weakening of the Stability and Growth Pact would certainly send a wrong signal to any new EU country.  I have no doubts that the success of European integration in the past will continue into the future. As mentioned before, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB) very closely tracks and analyzes the process of European integration of Central and Eastern European countries. To keep the interested public informed about economic topics pertaining to this region, we hosted the “East-West Conference” year after year and published a “Focus on Transition” twice a year. Since the process of European integration has permanently closed the divide that used to run across Europeand since the new Central and Eastern European EU Member States have successfully completed most transition steps - and therefore can no longer be labelled transition economies - we had good reasons to update the names of two of our most important products. Our conference and our publication are complimentary products. Therefore we decided to choose a common name.  This year’s conference is the first to take place under the new name: “Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI)”, a name which reflects the growing-together of Europe. In parallel, we relaunched the “Focus on Transition” as ”Focus on European Economic Integration”. The first issue was published recently. Hand in hand with the renaming we also have renewed the structure and content of our products, an effort that was greatly aided by the results of a reader survey conducted this year. We will continue to investigate economic topics relevant to the new Central and Eastern European EU countries, such as the adoption of the euro. Furthermore, we used the opportunity to extend our geographical focus to the region of South East Europe.  2 BIS Review 72/2004 
This year’s “Conference on European Economic Integration” entitled “South Eastern EUROPEAN Challenges and Prospects” is dedicated especially to this part of Europe; which comprises, as we understand it, the countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro. Since the eight Central and Eastern European countries joined the EU, the EU integration process has clearly shifted South East. Apart from Romania, Bulgaria and Croatia, which are next candidates for accession, all other South Eastern European countries now have an accession perspective, as recently stated by the European Commission. The Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe has been assisting the difficult catching-up process of this region. We will hear more on this pact later today. For completeness, let me shortly mention the case of Turkey. Last month, the European Commission recommended to start accession negotiations with Turkey. Based on the report and recommendation from the European Commission, the European Council is expected to make a decision on December 17. Ladies and Gentlemen,  Let me perhaps shortly illustrate why the OeNB has such a pronounced interest in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, and more and more in the region of South East Europe. With the enlargement, Austria moved closer to the geographic centre of the European Union. EU integration comes along with economic integration. Economic and financial relations between Austria and the Central and Eastern European countries have substantially deepened since the end of the Cold War.  Central and Eastern European countries have developed into one of the prime destinations of Austria’s foreign direct investments. Austria is the main foreign investor in Slovenia and the third largest in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia. Austrian companies situated in the EU’s new Central European member states employ more than 220,000 persons. At the same time, Austrian companies are doing more and more business in South Eastern Europe.  Austrian banks, in particular, play a major role in the banking sector in this part of Europe. In Albania, the Austrian share of total banking assets reaches an impressive 51%; in Bosnia and Herzegovina almost 50%; in Croatia the share amounts to around 40%. Due to strong involvement of Austrian commercial banks in South Eastern Europe and its impact on the financial stability of the Austrian banking sector, it is essential for the Oesterreichische Nationalbank to monitor and analyze this region more closely. At the same time, we aim at providing a better understanding of this region, which for some people, even for some experts from Central and Eastern Europe, is still “terra incognita”. So far, not much research has been devoted to this region. However, South Eastern Europe promises not only to be the major focus of European integration dynamics in the coming years but it is already among the fastest growing regions on the continent.  We very much hope that the programme we have put together for our Conference on European Economic Integration will offer new insights into, and a better understanding of this region whose political and economic perspectives are most heterogeneous. This morning will start with a presentation by the President of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude Trichet. We are looking forward to your profound and inspiring keynote speech, Jean-Claude, and greatly appreciate your participation in our conference. After that, our idea for the first session was to give an overview of both the political and the economic situation in South Eastern Europe. With the introductory statement of Erhard Busek we can expect to get some first-hand knowledge about the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe.  The afternoon of our first conference day is dedicated to issues of monetary and exchange rate policy.  Today’s conference will be concluded by President Weber, who will give a dinner speech on the changes in the focus of European economic integration. Between the two sessions, the winners of the OeNB’s Olga Radzyner Award will be announced. This award was established to commemorate Olga Radzyner, the former Head of the Foreign Research Division of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, who died in a tragic flight accident in August 1999. The Olga Radzyner Award is bestowed on young economists from Central and Eastern Europe for excellent research focused on monetary and finance issues in economics. The second day starts with a session on FDI and trade as pivotal elements for catching up and improving competitiveness in South East Europe, followed by a session on serious regional challenges: high joblessness, poverty and brain drain. To highlight the foothold of Austrian banks in BIS Review 72/2004 3 
this region, the last session will be dedicated to banking in South Eastern Europe and the leading role of Austrian commercial banks.  Ladies and Gentlemen, We hope that this conference will make an important contribution to setting the stage for future interest in, research into and public awareness of this focus of emerging Europe.  Let me now pass on to our distinguished key-note speaker, President Trichet.  Jean-Claude, the floor is yours! 4 BIS Review 72/2004 
Antonio Fazio: Regulation and supervision in financial markets Presentation by Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Frankfurt European Banking Congress 2004, panel discussion on “Regulation and Supervision in Financial Markets”, Frankfurt, 19 November 2004. *      *      * 1. Development and integration of financial markets in the euro area The introduction of the single currency has given a decisive impetus to financial integration in Europe. The integration of the money market has been rendered possible by the creation of TARGET, the European payment system. The launch of the new-generation system based on a single platform is scheduled for 2007. The euro has had a particularly significant impact on the European market for private-sector bonds; there has been a considerable increase in the number of even medium-sized firms placing issues outside their home country. The home-bias of equity portfolios has diminished. In the main industrialized countries the medium-term growth in the quantity of money, and hence in the volume of bank deposits, is in line with that in nominal GDP.  The faster rate of expansion in the aggregate volume of financial assets, that is the process of financial deepening, is the outcome of the direct relationship established on the financial markets between the firms and the public sector issuing securities, on the one hand, and the investors purchasing them, on the other. In Italy, between 1995 and 2003 the volume of funds raised directly on the financial markets by firms issuing shares, bonds and other instruments grew from 20 billion euros to 65 billion. The amount of households’ financial wealth consisting of corporate securities increased from 180 billion euros to 470 billion, that is from 19 to 36 per cent of GDP. Similar developments have taken place on other markets. The stability of the banking system, the protection of the savings it intermediates and their efficient allocation are entrusted to the banking supervisory authority, as well as to market discipline. In order to strengthen, in this new context, the safeguards for savings invested in securities, steps must be taken to ensure more effective controls on financial markets and firms issuing securities, if necessary by forging Europe-wide links. 2.  Banks and financial markets During the 1990s the large-scale process of consolidation and consequent growth in the size of banks encouraged the spread of the universal bank, which combines retail and wholesale business and simultaneously performs both commercial and investment banking services. The banks themselves have greatly stepped up their role in the distribution of third-party financial products, insurance policies, investment funds and corporate bonds. Credit risks and market risks have diminished with their progressive transfer away from banks’ balance sheets, but other types of risks have emerged. The reputation of a bank is inevitably and increasingly affected by the quality of the products it supplies to its customers. There has also been an increase in both legal and operational risks. The banks’ increasing role in the distribution of third parties’ products makes it crucial to monitor for conflicts of interest. It is extremely important that conduct should be ethical. The integrity and completeness of the information provided to the public must be guaranteed and internal controls must be reinforced. Staff incentives must be designed to prevent the risk of improper conduct. BIS Review 72/2004 1 
3.  Supervision International cooperation between banking, insurance and financial market supervisory authorities is strengthening. In view of the close links between the systems of the major areas - in the first place those of central and western Europe and the United States, but also to an increasing extent those of eastern Europe and Asia - supervisory cooperation has spread to the global level. In Europe, the nationally based organization of banking supervision is in conformity with the cardinal principle of the single European market, founded on minimum harmonization and mutual recognition. Supervision on a national basis permits the authorities to operate near the entities subject to control. It favours a constant exchange of information and direct contact with intermediaries. This is particularly effective if it is also realized by means of a widespread presence in the territory and through on-site inspections. Banking supervision is rooted in the legal and administrative systems of each country, not least owing to the possible involvement of public money in crises.  Europe has equipped itself with a well-structured system of multilateral cooperation and bilateral agreements between the national authorities responsible for supervising the banking and financial markets. Spurred by the guidelines set by the Ecofin Council meeting of Oviedo in 2002, in 2004 the application of the Lamfalussy reform was completed, extending to the banking and insurance sectors bodies and legislative procedures that had already been introduced in the securities field. The reform process sees national authorities and European institutions engaged in speeding up the approval of harmonized European regulation, ensuring its uniform application in national law and further strengthening cooperation among the supervisory authorities. 4.  Derivatives In the last four years the cyclical slowdown of the global economy, stock market turbulence, the failure of large companies operating at international level and the default of sovereign states have subjected financial systems to strong pressures in both advanced and emerging economies. Banks have demonstrated a great capacity to absorb the destabilizing impulses. Both in Europe and in the United States, the ratio of losses on loans has been lower than that registered during the recession of the early 1990s. There have been no significant episodes of instability. The greater soundness and flexibility of the system derive above all from the reorganization and capital strengthening of intermediaries prompted in many countries by the public authorities since the second half of the 1990s. The strong expansion of the bond market, which has allowed firms to supplement bank loans with funds raised directly from savers, has contributed to the stability of the system. The shocks that have hit the international financial system have been absorbed thanks also to the development of the derivatives market. At the end of 2003 the notional value of over-the-counter derivatives was approximately 200 trillion dollars, nearly twice as much as at the end of 2001. Interest rate derivatives account for about three quarters of the entire derivatives market. In the last few years credit derivatives have grown especially fast; in the middle of this year the notional value of credit default swaps was of the order of 5.4 trillion dollars. The greater scope for managing risks has made it possible to avoid compounding the difficulties of the real economy and the international political tensions with financial instability. For these reasons as well, the recent phase of cyclical weakness has been shallower than in similar periods in the past. The use of derivatives is not without its own risks. In an environment characterized by abundant liquidity and low interest rates the sharp decline in volatility recorded in recent months on the financial markets of the leading countries is connected to some extent with the search for higher profitability by major international financial institutions through the purchase of high-yield instruments. Intermediaries appear to have increased the supply of derivative instruments that provide protection against possible changes in the value of financial assets, thereby lowering option prices and volatility, and to have taken on the related risks. 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
To forestall the potential adverse effects of the growth of derivatives markets, a high level of professionalism on the part of market participants is indispensable. The role of regulatory authorities and central banks is of fundamental importance. Supervisory regulations and practices, accounting standards, and the information that intermediaries have to provide are continuously updated, both at national level and in the sphere of international cooperation, to keep up with the development of the markets and contain the systemic risks that are associated with the potential benefits offered by the growing use of derivatives. 5.  Conclusions Efficient intermediaries, developed financial markets, capable of channeling funds towards firms with favourable growth prospects, improve the allocation of resources and stimulate investment and saving. But the very efficiency of the financial system, its stability depend ultimately on the strength of the real economy, on its ability to grow and compete. The economy of the euro area is afflicted by a loss of competitiveness that reflects structural weaknesses in several fields. Productivity growth is unsatisfactory. It is necessary to remove the factors of an institutional, legal and fiscal nature that hamper flexibility in the use of labour and capital. In Europe the efforts to consolidate the public finances must be continued, not least so as to loosen the constraints that are holding back economic activity. The action of the Eurosystem aimed at guaranteeing price stability provides an essential condition for a firmly-based economic recovery. BIS Review 72/2004 3 
Glenn Stevens: Economic and financial conditions December 2004 Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian Business Economists and the Economic Society of Australia (NSW Branch), Annual Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 14 December 2004. *      *      * 2004 turned out to be a year of considerably stronger output in the global economy. According to the international panel of private forecasters recently polled by Consensus Economics Inc, global GDP1 will have risen by 5 per cent in 2004. This does not include the recent round of data revisions in Japan, and so may be adjusted down a little. Even so, it is hard to see how the outcome will not be at least a full percentage point above the long-run average and as strong as any year in the past thirty. Graph 1  Click to view largerAs always, there were short-term departures from the established trend. The US “soft patch” in mid year followed a brief period when price statistics in the US had people worried about inflation. The number one topic of discussion the previous year, of course, had been deflation. There were also periodic concerns that the attempts to engineer a slowdown in China might over-achieve, resulting in a slump of global significance. The various short-term concerns were overdone, as is so often the case, but were to be expected given that an innumerable army of analysts, commentators and financial market players extensively debate every twist and turn of the economic data, many of which turn out to be statistical noise. A more genuine reason for some discomfort is perhaps that, despite vigorous global growth in total, there is a feeling that it is a little lop-sided, with some areas participating less than fully. The euro area, for example, has struggled to “gain traction”.                                                       1  As measured by the IMF's PPP-weighted approach.   1/7  
In 2005, some slowing is envisaged but forecasters apparently expect growth still to be better than average. It might be revised down a bit in the near term reflecting some softer recent data. But even a noticeable downgrade would leave growth at about average, which would be quite a reasonable outcome. In the course of expansions lasting a number of years, it is quite common for there to be the odd slower year; they can’t all be above average.  One factor affecting people’s expectations will presumably be energy prices. Measured against the SDR, so as to avoid valuation effects of the decline in the US dollar, the average oil price in the second half of 2004 was about 50 per cent higher than the average over the period 2001-2003. Assessing the implications of this change requires us first to ask why it occurred. The oil shocks of the mid and late 1970s resulted from OPEC actions to drive up the price by restricting supply. In such a scenario, costs of production for industrial users of energy are raised, which means some combination of higher prices and lower profits ensues. Possibly some of the capital stock is rendered uneconomic. For households, the rise in oil prices reduces purchasing power, so imparting a contractionary impact on other areas of demand.2  The situation when the disturbance emanates on the demand side is different. The initiating shock here is expansionary in nature: somewhere in the world, there is unexpected strength in energy-intensive production of goods and services. Prices rise, but so does output. Admittedly, output would have risen even further had the supply of oil been perfectly elastic, but a demand-driven rise in oil prices is a sign of global growth strength, not weakness. Graph 2  Click to view largerThat is the bulk of the story in the past few years. With global GDP having grown by about 12 per cent over the past three years, oil demand is estimated to have increased by about 6½ per cent over the same period. Granted, there have been periods of pressure on prices driven by uncertainty over current or future supply, but the main story is one of demand.                                                       2  A key assumption of this analysis is that there is only limited short-term scope to substitute towards other sources of energy or to otherwise use oil more efficiently, which is reasonable for the short term though not the long term. It also assumes that the income gain accruing to oil exporters does not lead to demand expansion in those countries sufficient to offset the contractionary impact in the oil-importing countries.   2/7  
There is, of course, an important compositional element too. Much of the additional growth in demand is coming from the Asian region. This means that traditional big users of oil in the developed countries are competing for resources in a way they had not been accustomed to doing in the past. A rise in the oil price could well seem to them quite like the supply shock scenario - higher prices and lower output. Hence, if oil prices were to remain quite high, economic prospects for some of the western industrial countries, particularly those whose economies were not especially robust to begin with, could be more noticeably affected than would be the case in, say, China or India. A really serious adverse shock from this source looks less likely now, however, than it did a month or two ago, with oil prices having declined quite sharply from their peak. Financial markets have certainly responded in a fairly relaxed way to these developments. Bond yields remain fairly low by historical standards, particularly given the back-drop of a tightening cycle by the Federal Reserve. This is a rather different response to some other episodes where oil prices have risen substantially, as shown in the table below, which suggests that a persistent rise in inflation is regarded as unlikely. This may reflect an expectation that the adverse effects on growth for the industrial countries will inhibit any lasting inflation impact, but is also consistent with the idea that neither growth nor inflation may be affected by very much or for very long.  Change in US 10-year Government Bond Yield 1 year into oil price rise Beginning of oil price rise Change in bond yield (bps) September 1973  +104 December 1978  +118 June 1990  –19 February 1999  +113 October 2003  –28 Source: US Federal Reserve, Global Financial Data  The latter view probably fits more easily with the fact that markets are demanding relatively little compensation for credit risk. A significant weakening of growth in the industrial countries would surely have some adverse implications for emerging market countries, and lesser quality corporates. If that were expected, we would presumably see it reflected in risk spreads - but we do not see that. At present, then, markets apparently do not anticipate much in the way of adverse impact from the energy price changes. Either that, or there is a tension between various markets, the resolution of which will be fascinating to watch. But the main point is still that the current level of oil prices is mainly a sign of global demand strength - it is just that some of the strength is in different places from historical patterns. For Australia, a global growth situation that is strong enough to be exerting upward pressure on energy (and other resource) prices, and where growth is weighted towards Asia, seems for the moment to be quite a favourable one. ***** According to the national accounts, Australia recorded moderate growth in 2004. It looks like GDP growth over the four quarters to December will be less than 3 per cent unless there is a big surprise for the December quarter or upward revisions to previous quarters. Let me leave aside the apparent contrast with the picture painted by the various business surveys, which is considerably stronger, and for the moment take the figures as given.  That leaves growth running more slowly than was anticipated earlier in the year. But if output growth fell slightly short of expectations, it was not due to apparent lack of demand. Growth in domestic final demand has run at something like 5 per cent over the past year, and an average rate of nearly 6 per   3/7  
cent per year over the past three years. And growth in global demand for things Australia produces has, over the past year or two, been generally as strong as at any time in the past few decades.  Graph 3  Click to view largerIf demand growth is so strong, why hasn’t the economy grown faster? Have we hit capacity limits? Indicators of capacity utilisation available in business surveys are certainly at or close to the highest levels seen in the past 15 years. This is a feature across surveys, and has been for some time. In the labour market, the rate of unemployment is at its lowest for more than 25 years. Other measures of under-utilisation of labour are not at two-decade lows, but have nonetheless declined a good deal. A significant proportion of firms refer to difficulties in finding suitable staff. Areas of skill shortage have emerged. Observable upward pressure on wage and salary rates is minor at this stage, though there are reports of non-wage employment costs rising in some sectors. The clearest evidence of hard capacity constraints is probably on the export side. In some parts of the resource sector there was a significant volume of investment in the second half of the 1990s, but a subsequent period of weak commodity prices saw investment decline to very low levels. Hence, the increase in demand in the past two years apparently left some producers without the capacity to take full advantage of the conditions by shipping higher output, though of course they have enjoyed higher prices. The rise in prices presumably reflects pressure on capacity globally, which suggests that producers everywhere were surprised. There have also been reports of capacity constraints in some of the key areas of transport infrastructure, such as ports and rail. A decline in exports of some fuels was due to a rundown in reserves, a capacity constraint of another sort.  At the margin, the weakness of manufactured exports might reflect the strength of domestic demand, which for some producers may have presented an opportunity for sales in an easier market than some foreign alternatives. It might reflect the rise in the exchange rate (ie demand rather than supply), though the export weakness dates from a time when the exchange rate was much lower. So where does this leave us? There is no hard and fast answer, but there are reasonable grounds for thinking that the Australian economy is now operating closer to full capacity than it has for some time. We don’t want to overstate this: it could not be claimed that physical limits have been reached across the board (though apparently they have been in a few areas). The best forecast for inflation, moreover, remains one of only a gradual increase over the coming two years, and no recent price or wage data have cast any doubt on that view. But it does seem to be getting a bit harder to coax above-average growth from the economy.   4/7  
In the thirteenth and fourteenth years of expansion, this is not surprising. Most of the easy gains in lifting output by reducing cyclical slack are by now behind us. It just means that very strong demand growth is now less likely than before to foster rapid output growth and more likely, at some stage, to risk pressure on prices, even though that does not seem imminent at the moment. It was therefore appropriate to have the somewhat less accommodative monetary stance of the past year and to signal in recent Statements the likelihood - assuming the economy evolved as expected - of higher interest rates at some stage. A continuation of a robust expansion will, it seems, be increasingly dependent on enhancing the supply side: growing the capital stock, more effectively matching the supply of and demand for both skilled and unskilled labour, and innovation to lift the productivity of all the factors of production.  ***** I have talked about exports, but not as yet addressed the issue of Australia’s current account deficit. But since it has been in the news recently, is there anything useful to be said? The risk in this is that people may misinterpret my remarks as indicating that the current account deficit is, per se, something to be addressed by monetary policy. So I shall state clearly that it is not. Actually, whether the current account position should be an objective of any policy is not obvious - that would need to be argued. But whatever one’s view on that question, let me be clear that the current account is not, and should not be, an objective for monetary policy. We have had that debate in Australia. It was settled more than a decade ago, and I do not wish to re-open it.  With those preliminaries, let us see what can be said about recent trends. The trade arithmetic is well-known. It may therefore be of more interest to examine the financial counterparts - that is, to look at the changes in saving and investment behaviour. The table examines, from this perspective, the six episodes of current account widening over the past 25 years.  Cyclical changes in Australia’s saving-investment position Per cent of GDP  ∆Saving ∆Investment Of which dwellings ∆Net ∆CAD Dec-79 to Dec-81  –0.9  3.9  0.7  –4.8  –4.8 Dec-83 to Jun-86  –1.0  1.9  0.2  –2.9  –3.1 Mar-88 to Mar-90  0.3  1.5  0.7  –1.2  –3.1 Dec-93 to Mar-95  –0.8  0.7  0.2  –1.5  –3.5 Jun-97 to Mar-99  –1.4  2.9  0.7  –4.3  –4.0 Sep-01 to Sep-04  –1.3  3.0  1.7  –4.3  –4.7 Source: ABS  In the majority of episodes, the share of national income being saved declines. In every episode, investment increases. In each case, part of the rise in investment is dwelling investment. But what is striking is the prominence of dwelling investment in the latest episode. The size of the run-up is much larger than in the other five episodes. As of the middle of 2004, moreover, according to the national accounts, dwelling investment was almost 7 per cent of GDP,3 higher even than the feverish pre-GST peak, and a full percentage point of GDP higher than at the other peaks in the past 40 years.  Graph 4                                                       3  This figure excludes the transfer expenses associated with investment activities, which for dwellings grew to be about 1½ per cent of GDP by mid 2004 (but has since fallen due to the decline in real estate turnover).   5/7  
 Click to view largerThis was not obviously related to population growth, which was not unusually high in the recent period. The number of new dwellings constructed was not unusual compared with previous booms. What is new is that the quality and size of dwellings, both new dwellings and those being renovated, are higher than in the past. That is to say, the community has much higher standards for accommodation than was formerly the case, and is investing additional resources accordingly. Was this a good investment? For that part of the investment undertaken in expectation of commercial returns, some reservations must be recorded. Rental yields are now low compared with history, and hence capital gain is presumably required for an acceptable return to be earned. But with assets generously priced, and signs that capital values are in fact declining, there is a good chance many of these investors will find themselves disappointed.  For owner-occupiers, the question of whether it was a good investment has no clear answer. Unlike investment for business purposes, which is presumably undertaken in expectation of a cash return, the main return from a higher quality dwelling stock for owner-occupiers will be an enhanced flow of dwelling services, which is not received in cash. These households were confident that their future income would be sufficient to afford that higher consumption of dwelling services, paid for in the form of higher debt servicing. We can’t know as yet whether or not that judgement was correct.  Is the rise in the current account deficit associated with this, in itself, a problem?  To assess that, it is helpful to ask two questions: • what are the risks? and  • who is running them?  In cross-border capital flows, the main complication is that someone is bearing exchange rate risk. If a current account deficit turns out to be a problem, it is usually because domestic entities have borrowed foreign currency unhedged. At some point the exchange rate falls, leaving the financial position of borrowers under strain, as both the principal value and the debt servicing cost of the loan are higher in terms of the local currency in which the borrowers earn their income. But in this case the borrowers’ obligations are in Australian dollars, not foreign currency, and the same is true for the intermediaries who funded the loans (and hedged their risk). Foreign suppliers of capital are, in fact, bearing the exchange rate risk. So if there is a problem here, it is not that Australian households borrowed from foreigners, in particular, to fund investment in the dwelling stock, it is that they borrowed from anyone to do so. The risk they are running is not exchange rate risk, it is simply that their future income may not be as high as expected, leaving it harder than they anticipated to   6/7  
service their Australian dollar borrowings. This is another way of saying what we have said a number of times: that a position of higher leverage leaves households more vulnerable than they would otherwise have been to a negative shock to income. How serious a risk this ultimately is remains to be seen, but the same degree of concern would, in my view, be there regardless of the state of the current account.  In saying this, I am mindful that those who are bearing the foreign exchange risk might wish to change that exposure, or just slow the rate at which they accumulate it, for one reason or other, at some time or other. What would be the implications of such a change in view?  It is fairly extreme to assume that there would be a total ‘sudden stop’ of capital flow, as occurs periodically for some emerging market countries operating under fixed exchange rates that become unsustainable. In all Australia’s experience under the floating exchange rate over the past two decades, that has never occurred. Even in the days of greatest concern about the external accounts in the 1980s, substantial capital inflow into Australia continued - the equivalent of between 3 and 6 per cent of our GDP per annum. What did occur, on occasion, was that the cost of foreign capital rose, mainly in the form of a decline in the foreign currency price of Australian assets - ie a fall in the exchange rate. Were concern about the current account position to emerge at some point in the future, a similar result might be expected. Having said that, no one can know if such an adjustment will occur, let alone when. But if it did occur, the experience of the past decade suggests we would be able to cope. We have absorbed substantial exchange rate movements, without the economy being derailed. So it seems to me that rather than fretting about the current account deficit per se, it is more sensible to focus on the underlying imbalances in the economy. The current account outcomes may be pointing out those imbalances - indeed the high current account deficit of the past couple of years does point to the housing story - but it was the behaviour driving the imbalance, rather than the nationality of those supplying the funds, that was the issue. Conclusion At this time of year, it is often tempting to think that the year was full of the unexpected. But as these things go, 2004 was not especially exciting. Despite various risks, global economic growth went pretty well. It was not derailed by geopolitical uncertainty, SARS, financial crisis or by “global imbalances”. In fact, it offered an external environment for Australia that has seldom been bettered. At home, the economy turned in a steady performance. Unemployment is lower than a year ago, confidence and profits are high, inflation contained. Even if growth seemed, on the official data, a little lower than expected, it was not for want of demand, suggesting that the focus on supply-side improvements - always very important - should come even more to the fore. The most significant imbalance - a credit-funded boom in purchase of housing - began to unwind in about the most benign fashion one would dare imagine. One can only hope that 2005 turns out to be similarly uneventful, at home and abroad.  No doubt there is something unexpected coming down the road. In time we shall see what it is. But for now, I wish you all a very merry Christmas, and a prosperous (and uneventful) new year.    7/7  
Ardian Fullani: Bank-business relationships - a new chapter Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the meeting organised by the Bank of Albania in cooperation with the business community of the country, Tirana, 13 December 2004. *      *      * Honored participants! I regard today’s meeting as a special opportunity to both communities, the banking one and the business one, to open a new communication and cooperation, a new relationship based on reciprocal trust and benefit. From a naïve viewpoint, it seems that our final goal, price stability and country’s financial stability would appear different from your goal, the maximization of profit from the activity you exercise. However, going into more details, we would notice that both communities represented in this hall with their decisions and achievements make the work of each other easier, towards the indisputable idea that no economic growth could exist without economic-financial stability.  It is easier for you to make important decisions for growing your business in a stabilized economic environment where inflation rate is low. Otherwise, you would feel insecure, especially concerning the perspective of your business. Also, in the case of the country’s financial stability and presence of a consolidated banking sector, you would feel more convenient and naturally the flow of free financial funds would be addressed to qualitative growth of your businesses. On the other hand, a fragile financial system, with insecure unsupervised segments would increase the potential for powerful shocks, which in one way or another would affect not only the business but also the overall savings. Below I will treat some complicated theoretical issues. Simultaneously, I would not like to offer an apology or to make propagandistic declarations. Along with the purpose I have to introduce some recent initiatives of the Bank of Albania in the viewpoint of its new vision, I will briefly treat the awareness of your community to enhance the cooperation with the banking system, including the Bank of Albania, the institution I govern.  I hope you have recently had the chance to hear and debate about cash reduction in economy, about the acute need the banking system has for the creation of some important information registers, as I also hope you share the same opinion with me that the banking system has made obvious progress recently. I take advantage of the opportunity to declare right from the beginning that it has not to do with propagandistic campaigns but with concrete projects, which will make the banking business more useful, naturally not only for you but for the overall population at large. Protection of the value of your savings is our constant commitment.  Allow me to briefly treat some issues I mentioned above: 1. Lending to economy Last week I had a meeting with the banking sector directors, where we discussed about developments and perspectives of lending to economy. It was agreed by all that there is much space in this direction, while banks requested more specific information in terms of economy sectors, where investment is made and is projected to be made. Of course, this information would assist banks in the process of dealing with the requirements and at the same time would assist them even in projecting the future of their business. Viewed from the above context, I would strongly encourage you to address banks more and more so to absorb their financial funds. But, at the same time, more transparency, more clarity is needed in the relationships you have and will have with the banking business for being successful.   1/3  
2. Credit information bureau  The establishment of credit information bureau is a program initiated by Albanian bank association, for the accomplishment of which much work and institutional coordination is needed between actors of interest, such as business, banks, public institutions and the Bank of Albania. The credit information bureau is expected to facilitate not only the information problems existing between banks and businesses, but also the interbank information that is so much important from the viewpoint of using the scale economies. The Bank of Albania will facilitate the conditions for the accomplishment of this project. 3. Automated Electronic Clearing House system After the successful implementation of the Real Time Gross Settlement system, the Bank of Albania has recently inaugurated the initiation for implementing a very important project related to the Automated Electronic Clearing House system. The operation of this new system will lead to a significant acceleration of payments for the banks’ customers, and due to the absence of this element businesses remained away from banks. I would like to use this opportunity to make businesses aware of the advantages the operation of this system provides, since both the systems will contribute, among others, in reaching international standards of ATM and POS per number of population. The challenge for the banking system and businesses, as well as for the Bank of Albania, remains the public encouragement in using them. 4. Cash reduction in the economy Some of the above-mentioned steps imply and contribute directly and indirectly in the reduction of cash economy. But the Bank of Albania plans to undertake further steps in this respect, in collaboration with other important institutions like the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Economy. In this context, first step has been the channelling of wages payment to a part of the public institutions through bank accounts. I hope that this process will know further intensive developments in 2005, to be extended not only to the central institutions but also to the local ones. But the banking system attitude won’t be passive. On the contrary, its role will be active, that is banks will tend to address to households and businesses with clear and ready products, with quick and efficient services. I estimate that in 2005 the banking system will be more attractive, given the estimations on the latest developments of the banking system either in terms of the increasing number of branches or the additional banking services provided to the customers. I think that optimistic signs of the current year will be followed by vigorous actions of the banking system on the payment operations through electronic cards, and I would like to express in this spirit that solutions of the banking system should be in the favour of a unified card. Evidently, steps in this direction will be more complex and naturally some of them require an interinstitutional cooperation. The Bank of Albania is preparing now the path towards a massive use of electronic cards in Albania. Credit card service will contribute not only in reducing cash in the economy but its final goal remains the reduction of the informal economy. 5. The need to get more information The good orientation for the right decision-making, for an institution such as the Bank of Albania, requires an overall information, inter alia, on the production performance, employment situation, expectations and ambitions that businesses have for the future and for a range of other indicators that relate to the economic activity on a national scale. I think that it is not a secret to anyone of us to state that this information is rather rare, causing that many times our decision-making be not effective enough and not in conformity with the Bank of Albania capabilities.  This is the reason why we deem that you may be a valuable window of information that would help us a lot in reaching more accurate conclusions on the current and expected developments of the country. Considering that your business potential is considerable and global, there will be a possibility to have a clearer picture on the performance of the country’s economic activity, not only in the metropolis but also all over the country. For this purpose we are designing a new strategy for its branches in the districts. These branches will reflect a clear picture of the Bank of Albania and will serve not only for   2/3  
the collecting and depositing of cash but also as stations for the gathering of information on the economic and financial activity of the district, preceding the analyses and studies that will serve not only to the design of a clear macroeconomic policy but also to the modernization of elements for the transmission of this policy from the higher authority to the lower authority and vice versa. On the other hand, do not forget that you will have in exchange the opportunity to conduct professional analyses regarding the branch where you perform your activity, with accurate expectations about markets, businesses and consumer demand. Therefore, even with your credit provider, the banking business will be more confident in making decisions and finding potential clients. I would like to emphasize that the invitation I address to you today is very sincere, real, away from propagandistic clishés. To sum up, I would like to confirm that these communication relations which I appeal for today would resist the time only if they would rely on sincerity, confidence and reciprocity. I do guarantee that.     3/3  
Jean-Claude Trichet: Press briefing on the “ECB Financial Stability Review” Opening remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 15 December 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, welcome to this special press briefing on the publication of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review 2004. Let me start by saying that in publishing this Financial Stability Review the European Central Bank (ECB) is joining a growing number of central banks around the world that are addressing their financial stability mandates in part through the periodic issuing of a public report. Under Article 105 (5), the Treaty establishing the European Union assigned to the Eurosystem the task of contributing “to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system”. In this vein, the purpose of publishing this review, which represents the common view of the Governing Council of the ECB, is to promote awareness in the financial industry and among the public at large of issues that are relevant for preserving and enhancing the stability of the euro area financial system. By providing an overview of sources of risk and vulnerability to financial stability, the review also seeks to help preventing financial tensions.  Central banks have a strong and natural interest in the safeguarding of financial stability. This is in particular because financial institutions, notably banks, are issuers of by far the largest component of the money stock. It is equally because a stable financial system is needed for an effective transmission of monetary policy and for the smooth operation of payment systems. A robust financial system is therefore needed to ensure that the single monetary policy can deliver on the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area. Finally, but not least, the health of the financial system is inextricably intertwined with the performance of the economy and its resilience to shocks. These are the reasons why the ECB and the Eurosystem have an important stake in financial stability in the euro area.  Complex to define, financial stability is not only of the essence in avoiding financial crises but also in paving the way for the best financial environment in normal times. It is a condition where the financial system is capable of performing well in normal times all of its normal tasks and where it is expected to do so for the foreseeable future. From this viewpoint, financial system stability requires that the principal components of the system - ie financial institutions, markets and infrastructures - are jointly capable of absorbing smoothly a full array of adverse disturbances. It requires that the financial system is facilitating an efficient reallocation of financial resources from savers to investors, that financial risk is being assessed and priced accurately and that risks are being efficiently managed. Financial stability also has an important forward-looking dimension. For instance, inefficiencies in the allocation of capital or shortcomings in the pricing of risk can, by laying the foundations for future vulnerabilities, compromise future financial system stability and therefore economic stability.  Three steps are needed to produce a comprehensive picture of the stability of the financial system. The first entails forming an assessment of the individual and collective robustness of the institutions, markets and infrastructures that make up the financial system. The second involves an identification of the main sources of risk and vulnerability that could pose challenges for financial system stability in the future. The third and final step is an appraisal of the ability of the financial system to cope with crisis, should these risks materialise. The overall assessment will determine whether remedial action is needed.  It is important to bear in mind that calling attention to the potential sources of risk and vulnerability to financial stability does not aim at identifying the main - or most likely - future scenario for the euro area economy. It neither aims at identifying the full balance of risks surrounding this main scenario as is the principal focus in the monetary policy assessment and decision-making process. Rather it entails the highlighting of potential and plausible sources of negative events, even if these are remote and very unlikely.    1/2  
The analysis contained in the review was prepared with the close involvement of, and contribution by, the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC). The BSC is a forum for cooperation among the national central banks and supervisory authorities of the EU and the ECB. The collaboration with the BSC has meant that the review draws upon a very broad knowledge-base and the analysis contained within it blends together the macro perspectives of central bankers with the micro perspectives of supervisors. Let me now give the floor to Mr Padoa-Schioppa, who will present to you the main findings of our analysis.   2/2  
Philipp Hildebrand: Developments in the international financial markets and managing the Swiss National Bank’s assets Introductory remarks by Dr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. *      *      * 1. Developments in the international financial markets Looking back at the year gone by, it becomes evident that two opposing price movements have dominated the markets: the strong depreciation of the US dollar on the one hand and the sharp rise in oil prices on the other hand. Developments in the bond and equity markets were, by comparison, rather restrained. In the past few weeks, the dollar has continued its downtrend that commenced three years ago, at which time the greenback was still worth over CHF 1.70. Given the structurally inflated US current account deficit, the sustained downward revision comes as no surprise. However, the fact that the revision to date has been relatively one-sided vis-à-vis the European currencies and the Canadian dollar is problematic. Major Asian currencies have either remained completely pegged to the dollar, such as the Chinese renminbi, or joined the dollar in its slide - at least to some extent - like the Japanese yen. This was only possible, however, at a price, namely huge dollar-buying efforts on the part of the central banks and governments in question. As a result of this asymmetric trend, European exporters are currently bearing the brunt of the additional competitive pressures stemming from the weaker dollar. The Swiss export industry is understandably especially keen to see that the franc is not exposed to any further revaluations against the euro. Sudden and precipitous adjustments to the exchange rates are also undesirable from a monetary policy perspective. The unrelenting rise in oil prices surprised many market analysts. Since the beginning of 2004, the dollar price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil has climbed by more than 50%. In real terms, however, the ascent was not nearly as sharp as in earlier oil price shocks. In Europe, the hike was further cushioned by the erosion of the dollar. The reasons behind the bullish oil prices are manifold. The main trigger, however, is likely to have been the structural increase in demand coming from the emerging economies, particularly from China and India. In addition, supply flexibility is currently quite weak, as investment spending in the drilling, transportation and storage of oil was somewhat neglected in the years when oil prices were low. Potential geopolitical risks also push up the prices. Last but not least, raw materials - such as gold traditionally - are playing an ever greater role in international investors’ asset allocation, which also tends to generate an increase in demand. That notwithstanding, the influence of financial players on the price of oil should not be overestimated. The development of the long-term futures prices of crude oil indicates that the price spike was primarily triggered by a sustained increase in consumer demand. The price of five-year futures contracts for West Texas Intermediate crude has almost doubled in the last three years. Following the sudden rise last spring, US capital market rates have since dropped back to the year-earlier level. The temporary increase in capital market rates in Europe was slightly less pronounced. As a result of the opposing movements of the US and European interest rates of the past few weeks, the long-term dollar interest rates now exceed the corresponding interest rates in the euro area by approximately 50 basis points. On the one hand, the general interest rate development in the capital markets reflects market participants’ misgivings concerning the strength of the economic upswing. On the other hand, the historically low nominal interest rates are testimony to the markets’ confidence in the ability and determination of central banks to further ensure price stability. Moreover, the interest rate structure in the US is characterised by the sizeable dollar investments from Asia. International equity markets trended sideways for much of the year, although some emerging market indices in particular were able to generate significant profits. 2.  Managing the National Bank’s assets The National Bank manages monetary reserves slightly in excess of CHF 60 billion, two-thirds of which are held in foreign currency investments and one-third in gold. In addition to this are approximately 25-30 billion Swiss franc assets in the form of balances from repo transactions in the   1/2  
money market and bond investments in the domestic capital market. The monetary reserves and Swiss franc assets combine to make up the monetary assets, which are required for monetary policy. In addition to these assets, the National Bank also manages the proceeds from the sale of the surplus gold reserves. The portfolio of these so-called free assets amounts to slightly more than CHF 20 billion. In the management of the monetary assets, monetary policy objectives and restrictions have priority. In compliance with the primacy of monetary policy, the investments are optimised according to security, liquidity and return. Important in this regard are the concentration on liquid investments, in other words readily marketable investments, and on the greatest possible risk diversification by holding different currencies and investment categories. The National Bank’s leeway for investment has extended considerably since the entry into force of the new National Bank Act in May 2004. Risk diversification options in particular were also increased as a result. The concrete investment structure of the different portfolios and their yields are published quarterly in an updated appendix to the Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank. The current investment structure and the risk/earnings profile of the National Bank’s assets, in particular the foreign currency reserves and free assets, can be summarised as follows: The portfolio adjustments made under the new Act aim to increase diversification in terms of currency and investment category. Within the context of the 2004 strategy, the dollar share was reduced in favour of the pound sterling and the yen. The weakening of the US currency resulted in a further decrease in the dollar’s share of foreign currency reserves. Recently, in an effort to prevent the dollar’s share from dropping too low and with a view to rebalancing, we bought dollars again on a number of occasions. Furthermore, as part of the 2004 strategy, the proportion of government bonds was also reduced in favour of other borrowers’ bonds. The required minimum rating for bond investments was lowered from A2 to BBB, thus covering the entire “investment grade” range. Corporate bonds have now also been added to the National Bank’s investment universe, albeit only those of foreign companies. Currently, roughly 4% of both foreign currency reserves and free assets are invested in corporate bonds. The credit quality of all our investments is still very high. Borrowers with the top rating AAA account for over 70% of the investments. Close to 20% bear the AA rating. The remaining investments have an A or a BBB. The average residual maturity (duration) of all bonds held by the National Bank was kept at 4-5 years. The first investments in equities issued exclusively by foreign companies will be made at the beginning of 2005. The addition of equities and corporate bonds is likely to improve the degree of diversification of the investments and will contribute to the achievement of slightly higher returns in the medium term. The main difference between the investment structures of foreign currency reserves and free assets is their currency profile. In the case of free assets, foreign currency investments are more diversified and are also partially hedged against exchange rate risks. Around half of the free assets are currently exposed to currency risks. The risks relating to the National Bank’s assets are primarily assessed and monitored using the value-at-risk method. Moreover, a number of different stress analyses are increasingly being carried out. In risk measurement, it is taken into account that the investment horizon, in particular for the monetary reserves, is a long-term one. Where monetary assets are concerned, gold price and exchange rate risks - notably those on the dollar - play a decisive role. Interest rate risks, while significant in their own right, are quite small by comparison. The overall risk with free assets is considerably lower. On the whole, the credit risks are relatively small. The National Bank’s investments are valued daily at market prices, thus making it possible to form an up-to-date impression of the earnings situation. Owing to the high degree of risk exposure to the gold price, the exchange rate and the interest rate level, the earnings situation can change dramatically from quarter to quarter and year to year. In this year alone, the quarterly returns on total assets fluctuated between +2.7% and -3.2%. So far this year, the National Bank’s assets have yielded 1.3% overall. Given its long-term investment horizon, short-term fluctuations generally do not present a problem to the National Bank. The long-run yield is of greater importance. In the past five years, the National Bank has achieved an average yield of 2.9%. This more or less corresponds to the earnings forecasts underlying the agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the National Bank regarding the distribution of profits.   2/2  
Jean-Pierre Roth: The Swiss National Bank’s new inflation forecast Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 16 December 2004. *      *      * Economic growth in Switzerland has lost some of its momentum. For this year, however, we still anticipate economic growth to be close to 2%. In the coming year, we expect the economy to expand by 1.5% to 2%. On the assumption that the three-month Libor rate will remain unchanged at 0.75%, we expect an annual inflation rate of 1.1% in 2005 and 1.3% in 2006. Less dynamic growth, the weaker US dollar and the decline in excess liquidity have dampened the anticipated inflationary pressure somewhat. The target range for the three-month Libor rate will therefore be left unchanged at 0.25-1.25% and the rate will again be kept in the middle of the range. The National Bank’s monetary policy continues to have an expansionary effect. Should unexpected developments push up the Swiss franc sharply, we will take appropriate action. Allow me to explain our decision. It is based on the outlook for price developments in the coming three years as summarised in our new inflation forecast. The graph depicts the current and the previous inflation forecasts. The dash-dotted green curve reflects the September forecast. Like the current forecast, it was based on the assumption of the three-month Libor rate remaining unchanged at 0.75% in the following three years. We can see from the graph (blue line) that inflation in the third quarter of this year was insignificantly higher than we had forecast in September. The dashed red curve represents the new forecast. It begins in the fourth quarter of 2004 and ends in the third quarter of 2007. The new forecast differs from the previous ones in three points. Firstly, the projected inflation is higher until the third quarter of 2005. Secondly, the inflationary uptrend sets in half a year later. And thirdly, inflationary pressure has decreased in the long term, which is evidenced by the lower-lying curve. There are significant economic facts behind these three deviations, which I would like to comment on. 1.  Slightly higher inflation in 2005 The increase in the anticipated inflation until the third quarter of 2005 is predominantly attributable to the rise in oil prices. At the September assessment, the price of Brent in London stood at USD 41. By the end of October, the price had surged to over USD 50 before dropping back to around USD 40. Higher prices of oil products were the main cause for the rise in inflation in the last few months. Annual inflation between May and September hovered around 1%. A fresh spurt in oil product prices in October and November triggered a rise in annual inflation to 1.3% and 1.5% respectively. According to the new inflation forecast, the annual rate of inflation will increase to 1.5% on average in the first quarter of 2005. We presume that oil prices will tend to go down. Consequently, inflationary pressure will subside somewhat, particularly towards the end of 2005. With an unchanged monetary policy, we are likely to see an inflation rate of 0.9% in the first quarter of 2006. 2.  Continued recovery In order to assess inflation in the medium term, economic prospects are paramount. During a phase of economic recovery, as we are currently experiencing, how rapidly the capacity utilisation rate increases is important from a monetary policy perspective. Even though GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2004 is likely to be lower than we projected in the September assessment, we expect the Swiss economy to expand by close to 2% this year. The upswing will continue next year. We anticipate a growth rate of 1.5% to 2% for the whole of 2005. The fact that the economy braved the oil price hike and the stronger franc is testimony to a robust recovery. There is less uncertainty now as to the inflation prospects for next year. Utilisation of economic resources, which is slowly increasing, will not lead to any additional pressure on prices in 2005. As can be gleaned from the new inflation forecast, improved capacity utilisation is likely to have an impact on price development only in the course of 2006.   1/3  
The current inflation forecast for the medium term, ie for the coming two years, is characterised by a similar course to the one charted in September. In the new forecast, the point at which inflation will begin to climb again has been postponed by half a year. If monetary policy remains unchanged, annual inflation will be 1.1% in 2005 and 1.3% in 2006. 3.  Lower inflation in the longer term After having discussed the medium-term inflation prospects, allow me now to move on to the long-term prospects. The assessment of inflation prospects in the longer term depends on a number of factors, such as the development of monetary and credit aggregates and different asset prices. Long-term forecasts are fraught with a high degree of uncertainty. In spite of this, a central bank must make a sound assessment of the effects of its monetary policy in the longer term. The need for a forward-looking stance is due to the fact that monetary policy has its strongest effect on prices only after a lag of two to three years. M1 was 5.4% below the year-earlier level in November; M2 was down by approximately 3%. M3 increased by 1.4%. Although there is still ample provision of liquidity, it has dwindled as a result of the latest developments. Compared with the September assessment, we have therefore made a downward correction of our inflation projection for the years 2006 and 2007. According to our September forecast - based on an unchanged three-month Libor rate of 0.75% - inflation would have climbed to 2.9% in the second quarter of 2007. With an unchanged monetary policy, the current forecast predicts an increase of only 2.3%. At the end of the new forecasting horizon in the third quarter of 2007, inflation would stand at 2.6%. The lower long-term inflation forecast suggests that there is currently more room for manoeuvre in maintaining an expansionary monetary policy course. 4.  Exchange rate The dollar has plummeted since October. It has lost 7.9% vis-à-vis the Swiss franc. Notwithstanding the sharp fluctuations of the dollar, the franc has remained virtually unchanged against the euro. The depreciation of the dollar has a direct impact on the Swiss economy in that it undermines the price competitiveness of the export industries. Moreover, a weak dollar also exerts an indirect influence by clouding growth prospects in Europe, our largest sales market. The appreciation of the franc has tightened monetary conditions. At the same time, the weaker dollar has a dampening effect on import prices and, consequently, on inflation prospects. 5. Continuation of expansionary monetary policy I will now come to my concluding remarks. The inflation forecast shows that the process of normalisation of monetary policy has not yet ended. In light of my comments it should nevertheless not be difficult to understand our decision to leave the three-month Libor rate at 0.75%. Since inflationary pressure is expected to ease in the long term, there is no need to take a further step toward a normalisation of interest rates at this point in time. In addition, the stronger franc has already resulted in more restrictive monetary conditions. With our decision to keep the three-month Libor rate on hold, we are adhering to our current monetary policy course: we are making use of our monetary policy leeway to support growth without jeopardising long-term price stability. Every forecast and every decision is fraught with uncertainty. Should unexpected events delay economic recovery or push up the Swiss franc sharply, we shall take appropriate action. For such cases, the Swiss National Bank keeps all its options open.   2/3  
   Observed inflation December 2004    Inflation forecast on September 2004 with Libor at 0.75%  and of December 2004 with Libor at 0.75%    3/3  
Michael C Bonello: The Maltese lira  Interview with Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, by The Malta Business Weekly, 9 December 2004.  *      *      * I must first of all point out that decisions regarding the external value of the Maltese lira can only be taken by the Minister of Finance on the recommendation of the Central Bank of Malta and with the consent of the Prime Minister. Decisions on such a complex, technical issue can have far-reaching economic and social implications and are understandably not taken lightly. They must, for that same reason, be made on the basis of facts not supposition. Having said that, I must make it equally clear that at this point in time the Bank cannot responsibly make a recommendation in this sense for the simple reason that it has no conclusive evidence that such a change is warranted, still less that it would deliver the expected benefits. Nor is the Bank aware that anybody else has made a credible case for changing the value of the currency. The conclusions of the Bank’s study on the equilibrium exchange rate have been shared with several local and foreign experts, including the IMF mission that was in Malta last May. Subject to the caveat that the equilibrium exchange rate of a currency cannot be estimated very precisely, there is common agreement that the exchange rate of the Maltese lira does not appear to be significantly misaligned and that the reasons for the economy’s slow growth lie elsewhere and should be addressed directly. Indeed, I cannot detect an economic rationale for the sudden attention being given to the exchange rate. The exporting community, the sector most directly concerned, has not to my knowledge made a formal proposal through the FOI. It is also significant that a change in the exchange rate did not feature among the 55 MCESD recommendations for the restoration of competitiveness. Devaluation to improve competitiveness does not work. Unless it is accompanied by a cut in real wages, it serves only to raise inflation. This is borne out by the experience of several countries, including Malta’s after 1992.  As for the concept of a “gradual depreciation”, which has not been clearly defined, the nearest instrument known to economic theory is a crawling peg. Since this involves a change in the exchange rate regime, it requires an announcement that the currency will be depreciated at given intervals dictated by movements in some anchor, such as the retail price index. This method creates uncertainty and offers speculators a one-way bet. Experience has indeed shown that crawling peg regimes have often ended in crisis. The lessons of recent economic history should not be ignored. Changes in the exchange rate should only be resorted to when everything else has failed. They should be a measure of last resort. Besides, they only produce the desired results if they are accompanied by a comprehensive set of complementary policies implemented in a controlled environment. Speculating about the exchange rate without producing conclusive proof that it is the root cause of the economy’s difficulties is, therefore, inappropriate and can have serious repercussions. The national interest requires all of us to concentrate rather on the more immediate, and well documented, reasons for the economy’s slow growth. I have elaborated on this aspect in a recent interview carried by another local newspaper.   1/1  
T T Mboweni: The state of the South African economy Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Annual Dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners to the Republic of South Africa, Pretoria, 7 December 2004.  *      *      * Your Excellency, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and High Commissioners Your Excellency, the Chief of State Protocol Your Excellencies, Heads of International Organisations represented in the Republic of South Africa Deputy Governors of the South African Reserve Bank Senior Management of the South African Reserve Bank and their spouses/partners Media representatives Ladies and Gentlemen Welcome once again to this annual dinner in honour of the Ambassadors and High Commissioners accredited to the Republic of South Africa. My colleagues and I always look forward with bated breath to this evening at the end of every year. This dinner represents for us the highlight of every year as we gather with you to break bread and discuss issues of common interest and relevance to our various countries. 2004 has indeed been a momentous year for the global economy. One of the distinguishing features of this year has been the oil price. When I joined the central bank in 1998, the north sea brent crude oil price was $9 per barrel. Since then, the oil price has shot up quite considerably. The price of north sea brent crude oil is now around $38 per barrel and indications are that it might not come down to the OPEC target levels of $22 - $28 per barrel in the near future. The futures price also indicates that the oil price will stay near the $40 per barrel level. The behaviour of the oil prices has changed the global economic outlook in a real way. Estimates by the International Monetary Fund researchers is that if the oil price averages $37 per barrel in 2004, global growth will slow down by some ½ percentage point, inflation for the advanced countries will increase by about 0.3 percentage point and the trade balance of advanced countries will deteriorate by some 0.3 per cent of gross domestic product. The estimates for South Africa are that economic growth might decline by some 0.6 percentage point, inflation will increase by some 1.6 percentage point and the trade balance will worsen by some 1.4 per cent of gross domestic product. Clearly there is cause for concern all-round. At the core of these oil price developments seems to be concerns about supply constraints. These arise, in part, as a result of supply problems from Iraq, uncertainties about possible tensions between the United States and Iran, production uncertainties in Nigeria, the continuing problems experienced between the Russian government and the Yukos oil company, management and trade union tensions in Norway and the damage to production which was caused by hurricane Ivan in the Gulf of Mexico. Although some of the developments mentioned above are significant, it would, however, seem to us that the oil market players are running ahead of themselves in terms of pricing. Time and again, the largest producer of oil in the world, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, has made it known that there are sufficient reserves and capacity to ensure that global supply meets demand. On many occasions, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has actually increased supply by no less than a million barrels per day. They have indicated that there are sufficient reserves for the next 50 years. And as stability returns in any troubled oil-producing country, supply surely should be guaranteed. It is maybe time for the market to pause and reflect on the perceived supply constraints. Certainly, the global economy expects no less from the oil market. Despite these risks for the global economy now and in the recent past, substantial global economic growth has been recorded in 2003 and prospects for the whole of 2004 look promising. The global economy recorded an impressive 3.9% growth in 2003, with the United States, Japan, India, China and many emerging market economies making the most impressive contribution to global growth.   1/5  
Growth rates in China and India remained the envy of all countries in 2003. Although the Chinese authorities attempted to slow down growth in their country, at growth rates of around 9%, this country continues to amaze. It is forecast that global growth in 2004 is likely to be in the region of 5%, slowing down somewhat in 2005 to 4,3%. Based on these forecasts, we can safely say, without any fear of contradiction, that the world economy is still in a good state of growth. The oil price notwithstanding, the global economy has shown itself to be resilient in the face of so many other constraints. There remain, however, a number of challenges to be tackled if the world economy is to improve further in the medium to long term. At the most recent G20 meeting in Berlin on 20 and 21 November 2004, the challenges to global growth were summarised as follows: “the United States needed to urgently address its fiscal and current account deficits which are resulting in major negative adjustments in other parts of the world; Latin American countries needed to continue with broad based structural reforms and pursue prudent fiscal policy whilst at the same time continuing with policies to encourage investment; Argentina in particular was urged to continue strengthening its banking sector and reviewing its fiscal system; the European Union member countries were urged to continue with structural reforms, in particular reforming their labour markets, consolidating their fiscal positions and reforming their pension systems; the Russian Federation was urged to “create foundations for more broad based and sustainable growth at a high rate”; the Russian Federation was further urged to introduce “reforms of the banking sector and the judiciary systems”; South Africa was urged to focus on infrastructure investment, increased savings and skills development; Saudi Arabia was urged to diversify its economic structure, support private sector development and improve the business environment for foreign investment; South and Southeast Asia were urged to improve the climate for investment, in particular through regulatory reform; India was encouraged to “reduce the budget deficit while raising sufficient resources (ie reforming the tax system) for infrastructure and rural development”; Australia was urged to improve flexibility in workplace relations to expand employment options, improve the tax and income support systems and make progress more generally with microeconomic reforms; Japan was encouraged to continue with its reform agenda, including measures to promote further reform of the financial system, foster privatisation and address more vigorously the problem of fiscal sustainability; China was encouraged to continue deepening the reforms of the state asset management system and the state owned enterprises, to promote the development of the non-state sector of the economy, to consolidate and strengthen the position of agriculture, to carry forward the reforms of the financial system, the fiscal and taxation systems and the investment climate, to push forward the employment and income distribution system, to improve the social security net and strengthen the reforms of the administration management system and the legal system”. The G20 concluded by committing to “strengthening the above-mentioned framework for the global economy”. The G20 encouraged 'trade ministers to work together in good faith to enable the WTO negotiations to succeed as quickly as possible”. Based on the G20 global economic reform agenda, referred to as the G20 Accord, one is encouraged to observe the serious commitment from these leading countries to ensure that the world economy continues to grow and prosper. It is indeed heart-warming that a common global agenda for growth is beginning to emerge amongst the world’s 20 largest economies outside the traditional Washington consensus. Coming back to developments in South Africa, it is also pleasing to note that the hard work which has been put into policy formulation and planning in the past decade is beginning to bear fruit.  I know that you are more than familiar with the economic situation in South Africa and I therefore only wish to highlight some of the key features of the recent economic and financial developments. Statistics SA has recently rebased and revised the economic growth numbers. This is an acceptable international best practice. The South African Reserve Bank endorses this endeavour. As a result of their extensive exercise, the developments mentioned below have been observed. Firstly, the South African economy is larger than was previously thought. Previously, the level of the gross domestic product was estimated at R888 billion (2000), R983 billion (2001), R1 121 trillion (2002) and R1 209 trillion (2003). The revised figures show that the level of GDP was much higher at R922 billion (2000), R1 020 trillion (2001), R1 165 trillion (2002) and R1 251 trillion (2003). These revisions are fairly substantial! The Statistician General commented that “the level of the revised GDP at current prices is between 0.5 and 3.9 percent higher than the previous estimates for the period   2/5  
1998 to 2003. The GDP for the year 2003 is 3.5% higher than previously reported”. In summary, this means that the level of economic activity in South Africa is indeed very significant. Secondly, the GDP per capita at current prices has improved significantly based on these revisions and if one makes use of the latest available 2001 population estimates. Previously, it was thought that the GDP per capita was R20,3 thousand (2000), R22,1 thousand (2001), R24,5 thousand (2002) and R26,2 thousand (2003). The revised figures mean that we are much better-off than was thought, R21,1 thousand (2000), R22,9 thousand (2001), R25,5 thousand (2002) and R27,1 thousand (2003). Thirdly, these revisions confirm the observations which many people had made about the South African economy. It was clear to many that this economy was larger and growing much faster than the official data from Stats SA had previously suggested. The challenge ahead is to maintain the momentum by focusing amongst others on what the G20 has urged South Africa to do. Of particular importance here will be the absolute fully dedicated focus on education and skills development in South Africa for a higher growth path. Although employment creation is still at low levels, it is nonetheless encouraging to see that there has been a pick up in the numbers of people employed. According to the latest official data available in March 2004, total employment in South Africa was 11 984 million, which was a marked improvement from the total of 11 652 million in September 2003. The number of unemployed people remains high in South Africa despite this improvement. According to Stats SA, the total unemployed was 4 611 million in March 2004 as compared to the 4 627 million in September 2003. So a lot of work still lies ahead as far as employment creation is concerned. But it is encouraging that the number of people unemployed is coming down. As we have indicated in the past, South Africa introduced inflation targeting in the year 2000. The inflation target was specified as the Consumer Price Index less mortgage cost, the co-called CPIX. The numeral target was for CPIX to remain on average between 6 and 3 percent. Now, there has been a little change to specify that the target must be met on a twelve-month continuous basis. We are happy here at the central bank to report to you this evening that since September 2003, we have been inside the target range. This achievement has also begun to influence inflation expectations in a positive way. The expectations of business, trade unions and households are now well within the target levels. This is important for inflation outcomes going forward. In an inflation targeting monetary policy framework, it is important that we are committed to the inflation target and not target any other intermediate variable. So whilst variables such as the exchange rate, monetary aggregates, unit labour cost and oil prices play an important part in the inflation process, these should not become intermediate targets but must however be watched carefully and systematically by the central bank.  The exchange rate of the rand is determined by the supply and demand developments in the foreign exchange market. The central bank does not target any level of the exchange rate but takes the rate as given by the forex market. Due to the importance which attaches to the exchange rate in the inflation process, a competitively priced exchange rate is the preferred outcome for the central bank. We neither prefer a weak rand nor an overvalued exchange rate. We prefer a competitively priced exchange rate. From time to time, exchange rates have a tendency to over- or undershoot in the market. This can be the case if, for instance, global imbalances lead to a depreciation or an appreciation in some of the more significant currencies such as the American dollar. Indeed the current level of the dollar is occasioned in the main by the large American current account deficit on their balance of payments. For as long as the rest of the world is willing to finance this deficit by buying American assets, the current account deficit is easily financed but the market seems to have become somewhat doubtful recently. We do not share the view that the American dollar will collapse. Yes, there will be some gradual adjustment as a result of the current account deficit but our hope is that these adjustments should be measured and orderly and not be disruptive to the global currency markets. Extreme volatilities in the forex markets are not helpful to all of us. One should therefore expect that in the current period and in the near term, the rand will show some strength against the dollar. But the rand is not alone in this. Indeed the Euro, Australian dollar, Japanese Yen and many other significant currencies are showing signs of strengthening against the American dollar. This should be expected.   3/5  
But our central bank is not losing focus. And indeed it should never lose focus. We are in the business of targeting inflation and not any other intermediate variable. We have taken advantage of the current conditions in the forex market to purchase significant amounts of foreign currency in the market as part of the process of building up our foreign exchange reserves. You might recall that in 1998 we had a negative net open foreign currency position of some $23 billion. That was a difficult time for us here at the Bank. Through some carefully planned processes, we have eliminated the negative net open foreign currency position and now we have some positive $14,4 billion in our gross gold and foreign exchange reserves account. The building of reserves is seen as fundamental to the stability of the foreign exchange market. We therefore hope to see a much more stable exchange rate going forward. I know that a stable foreign exchange market is also of significant importance to the Diplomatic Corps as it brings about stability and certainty in your budgeting processes. We are glad that by eliminating the negative NOFP we could be of some assistance to you. The competent macro-economic management, including fiscal and monetary discipline, has led to the country’s improved economic outlook as well as to the enhanced sound economic fundamentals. International investors have recognised the progress achieved and have in recent years changed their sentiment towards South Africa. The positive sentiment towards the country and the high level of confidence in its future progress has also been supported by numerous ratings upgrades from major international rating agencies over the last few years. These ratings are supported by a stable and transparent macro-economic policy framework; a record of fiscal prudence resulting in moderate public debt levels; and a much improved external liquidity position after the closure of the forward book.  The credit ratings continue on an upward path. Currently Moody’s is reviewing the country for a further upgrade, which could see South Africa’s foreign currency rating move from the current Baa2 (lower investment grade) to Baa1 (higher investment grade). Towards the end of October 2004 Fitch revised their outlook on South Africa’s BBB rating from stable to positive.  Inflows into South Africa’s bond and equity markets, which were largely elusive in 2002/2003, witnessed a significant turnaround in 2004. Faster economic growth combined with a low inflation environment and interest rates at multi-decade lows has seen non-residents return to the equity market. For 2004 to date, the equity market has enjoyed inflows to the value of R25,9 billion. While on a net basis, the bond market has experienced outflows, these remain small in comparison with the outflows experienced in 2003 (-R1,7bn when compared to -R8,1bn) . In fact, the bond market registered an inflow of R3,9 billion in November alone, as yields on domestic government bonds continued to move to fresh lows during the month. These capital inflows do not only reflect lower risk perceptions justified by improved credit ratings, but clearly indicate a high level of confidence in South Africa’s macro-economic future.  Positive sentiment is also reflected in the spreads of South Africa’s foreign currency denominated bonds in relation to US Treasuries. The spreads on the South African sub-index over US Treasuries narrowed significantly. For the first time since its launch, this sub-index closed below the 100-basis-points level, ie at 94 basis points, on 4 November. The improvement was supported by the country’s positive credit rating outlook, the performance of the rand and other sound economic fundamentals. At these levels, South Africa compares favourably with Poland, Malaysia and Thailand, whose credit ratings are at the upper level of investment grade. On 30 November, the South African sub-index narrowed further to 92 basis points over US Treasuries. The spreads of South Africa’s US-dollar denominated bonds maturing in 2009 and 2012 narrowed to 102 and 72 basis points over US Treasuries respectively between 14 October and 30 November 2004. The 10-year US dollar global bond issued in May this year similarly tightened from 195 basis points over US Treasuries at its launch in May to currently around 103 basis points. A ratings upgrade by Moody’s would put South Africa on the same scale as Thailand whose ten-year US-dollar denominated bond spread is currently trading around 52 basis points over US Treasuries. This suggests that South Africa’s ten-year US dollar denominated bond, which is currently at 85 basis points above US Treasuries, could rally further. Another clear indication of South Africa’s improving creditworthiness can also be seen in increasingly narrower margins paid on our international syndicated loans. Whereas in 2001 we were paying 85 basis points p.a. over LIBOR for a three-year loan, by 2003 the margin had come down to 67.5 basis points p.a., and earlier this year we were able to improve the terms further and negotiate a margin of 47.5 basis points p.a. over LIBOR.    4/5  
The relations between South Africa and so many countries in the rest of the global village, evidenced by the number of embassies and high commissions stationed in South Africa, bears testimony to this confidence. My colleagues and the senior management staff at your tables will hopefully clarify and amplify some of the remarks I have made during this evening. Meanwhile, welcome once again and thank you for accepting our invitation to this Annual Dinner in honour of Ambassadors and High Commissioners posted to the Republic of South Africa. Your friendship is not taken for granted, it is highly valued. Thank you very much.    5/5  
Jean-Pierre Roth: International monetary policy 2005 Summary of a speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 19. Internationales Zins-Forum - Zinsen 2005, Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 2004. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * The major central banks reacted to the lacklustre global economy in 2002 by relaxing the monetary policy. The low money market rates in 2002 and 2003 were appropriate for a recession. They are not, however, indicated for a sustained and global upswing. This is why several central banks began to steer their monetary policy back to a normal course in 2003 and 2004. The tempo of monetary policy normalisation obviously depends on the progress of economic recovery, which leads to different reactions in each country.  In this rather favourable climate, oil prices began to soar in 2003. However, there is no reason to fear a repeat of the dire consequences witnessed during past oil crises. On the one hand, the rise in oil prices comes at a time when the economic environment is much more stable than it was back then. On the other hand, strong global economic growth drives up oil prices.  In order to ensure price stability, a normalisation of economic activity must be accompanied by a normalisation in the interest rate policy. The latest oil price hike has no bearing on this basic premise. The constellation of a weaker growth dynamic and higher oil prices could, however, delay getting monetary policy back on track. Since central banks are committed to the goal of price stability, a lot will depend on the transmission of oil price increases to inflation expectations. In most industrialised countries, inflation expectations give no cause for concern for the time being. Low inflation expectations and flexible monetary policy concepts allow central bankers to carefully adjust their monetary policy for 2005, provided that it seems appropriate for business cycle reasons.   1/1  
Susan Schmidt Bies: It’s not just about the models - recognising the importance of qualitative factors in an effective risk-management process Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the International Center for Business Information’s Risk Management 2004 Conference, Geneva, 7 December 2004.  *      *      * Good afternoon. I am delighted to join you today. I have spent much of my career in the field of risk management, and of course the Federal Reserve has a keen interest in this topic. For those of us who have spent more than a few years in the business, it is easy to see the recent progress in the quantitative or scientific aspects of risk management brought about by improved databases and technological advances. These increased capabilities have opened doors and minds to new ways of measuring and managing risk.  These advances have made possible the development of new markets and products that are widely relied upon by both financial and nonfinancial firms, and that in turn have helped to promote the adoption of the best risk measurement and management practices. They have also made the practice of risk management far more sophisticated and complex. These changes have come about because of better risk-measurement techniques and have the potential, I believe, to substantially improve the efficiency of US and world financial markets.  Although the importance of the quantitative aspects of risk measurement may be quite apparent - at least to practitioners of the art - the importance of the qualitative aspects may be less so. In practice, though, these qualitative aspects are no less important to the successful operation of a business - as events continue to demonstrate. Some qualitative factors - such as experience and judgment - affect what one does with model results. It is important that we not let models make the decisions, that we keep in mind that they are just tools, because in many cases it is management experience - aided by models to be sure - that helps to limit losses. Some qualitative factors affect what the models and risk measures say, including the parameters and modelling assumptions used as well as choices that relate to the characteristics of the underlying data and the historical period from which the data are drawn.  In my comments today, I will address three topics. First, sound risk management is more than technical skill in building internal models. Models of risk need to be integrated into a robust enterprise-wide program that encompasses even line management’s routine business practices. Second, regular testing of “data integrity” in its broadest sense as it relates to these risk measurement and management processes is essential to the effectiveness of these processes. Finally, I want to raise some issues around accounting and disclosure of risk.  If there is a single theme to my remarks today, it is simply this: Keep improving, refining, and innovating in risk management. Although Basel II is a remarkable achievement, and the subject of this conference, don’t let your best practices be limited by what Basel II does or requires. Indeed, one of the more desirable aspects of Basel II is that it anticipates that it can evolve with best industry practices without creating a new framework. The designers have not intended to build a straitjacket, and the policymakers have insisted on this characteristic, which my colleague Vice Chairman Ferguson has referred to as Basel II’s “evergreen” aspect.  Enterprise-wide risk management Within financial institutions, the better and greater focus on risk measurement has helped to bridge the gap between the perspective of the traditional credit risk officer and that of the “quant.” This is no small accomplishment, and a significant advance in credit culture. If you will pardon my use of stereotypes, historically the credit risk officer has been the fellow who always says “no” because it is the conservative thing to do, while the financial modeller has been the proponent of active-trading strategies that fulfil the promise of a data-mined efficient frontier that has been estimated to several decimal places of precision. The logic of risk and return in a competitive marketplace, as measured by return on economic capital that is founded in empirical analysis, has provided both sides with a common language and set of standards. It is not unusual anymore to hear chief credit officers describe their appetite for risk in terms of risk-adjusted return on capital (RAROC) or monitor current spreads on BIS Review 74/2004 1 
credit default swaps to look for market signals on borrower credit quality. With better credit cultures and improved tools, institutions can also measure and evaluate more objectively the results of their business strategies and use that information to enhance future performance. They can decide how much risk to take, rather than letting their risk profile be the consequence of other decisions.  The evolution of interest rate risk management in the United States is a great illustration of how an enterprise-wide approach can help institutions customize products that better serve customers, set prices to reflect risk exposures and attain profit targets, and ensure that corporate earnings contributions are met. Thirty years ago, bankers who were used to taking fixed-rate deposits - capped under the old Regulation Q ceilings - and making fixed-rate term loans, found the cost of their deposits rising with the market after short-term rates rose dramatically late in 1979. Financial institutions found that, to meet market interest rates, they had to pay higher rates of interest on deposits than they were receiving on loans. As a banker, I went through that period in 1980 when the popular new six-month CDs that were booked in March, at annualized interest rates of around 15 percent, were funding loans at a negative carry when the prime rate fell to 11 percent by August. The roller coaster continued as lower CD rates in the second half of 1980 were funding loans at a prime rate of more than 20 percent by January 1981.  One of the first challenges bankers faced in this environment was developing the information and analytical systems needed to manage the institution’s overall interest rate sensitivity. So, in the early 1980s, taking advantage of the newly emerging computer technology and software, they developed asset-liability management models that integrated information on deposit and loan repricing. Further, the management committees responsible for interest rate risk changed. Instead of committees that included only management from the funding-desk and investment-portfolio management, a new group was created - the Asset/Liability Committee, or ALCO. This committee included the old finance committee members and new ALCO staff but also, most important, added business-line managers responsible for major corporate and retail banking activities. For the first time, pricing of loans and deposits was moved from the silos of business-line management, recognizing that the enterprise as a whole had to coordinate balance sheet usage in order to maintain the net interest margin around a targeted level. While this enterprise-wide approach to market risk evolved at varying paces in different depository institutions, by the latter part of the 1980s all of the basic elements were in place and, by the 1990s, the process had matured. The ALCO process is now widely recognized as a critical element in both management and board governance processes.  This discipline emerged not only because of better asset-liability risk measures, but also because these new risk measurement and management techniques and computer technology facilitated rapid innovation in financial instruments. The industry turned to new securitization techniques to pool mortgages and remove the interest rate risk from balance sheets, techniques that eventually expanded to other loan types as well. Interest rate derivatives, structured investment securities, and callable debt have allowed financial institutions to meet customer demands more effectively while managing the liquidity and interest rate risk exposures those relationships entail. Enterprise-wide market-risk management became a value-added activity and has been widely accepted as a critical element of the governance and strategic processes at financial institutions.  The example I presented of how effective asset-liability management committees and processes can support business-line strategies as well as governance, is intended to illustrate that effective enterprise-wide risk-management processes are not built just to comply with regulations, such as banking regulations or Sarbanes-Oxley requirements in the United States. Rather, these processes can add value when they become an integral part of both strategic and tactical business-decision processes.  Corporate strategies often focus on the “most likely” future scenario and the benefits of a strategic initiative. A sound governance, risk-management, and internal-control environment starts by stretching the strategic planning exercise to consider alternative outcomes. That is, while the strategy is being developed, management and the board should consider how risk exposures will change as part of the planning process. Then, appropriate controls can be built into the process design, the costs of errors and rework in the initial rollout can be reduced, and the ongoing initiative can be more successful because monitoring processes can signal when activities and results are missing their intended goals and corrective actions can be initiated more promptly.  According to a global survey of governance at financial institutions conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers (and reported in April), one of the reasons financial institutions are not making the grade is that they equate effective governance with meeting the demands of regulators 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
and legislators, without recognizing that sound governance is also good for business.1 In other words, they tend to look at this as another compliance exercise. The study goes on to state that this compliance mentality is limiting these institutions’ ability to achieve strategic advantages through governance.  I agree that any institution that views corporate governance as merely a compliance exercise is missing the mark. Over the years, corporate managers have learned that focusing on better process management and quality can enhance financial returns and customer satisfaction. They have learned that correcting errors, downtime in critical systems, and undertraining of staff all result in higher costs and lost revenue opportunities. I challenge you to consider the corporate governance structure appropriate to your bank’s unique business strategy and scale as an important investment, and to consider returns on that investment in terms of the avoidance of the costs of poor internal controls and of customer dissatisfaction.  As you know, once an organization gets lax in its approach to corporate governance, problems tend to follow. We have some experience in that regard. Some of you may recall the time and attention that management of US banks devoted to section 112 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, which first required bank management reports on internal controls and auditor attestations in the early 1990s. Then the process became routine, delegated to lower levels of management and unresponsive to changes in the way the business was being run. Unfortunately, for organizations with weak governance, trying to change the culture again to meet Sarbanes-Oxley requirements is taking an exceptional amount of senior management and directors’ time - time taken away from building the business. The challenge, therefore, is not only to achieve the proper control environment at one point in time, but also to maintain that discipline and, indeed, ensure that corporate governance keeps pace with the changing risks that you will face in the coming years.  One weakness we have seen is the delegation by management of both the development and the assessment of the internal-control structure to the same risk-management, internal-control, or compliance group. It is important to emphasize that line management has the responsibility for identifying risks and ensuring that the mitigating controls are effective - and to leave the assessments to a group that is independent of that line organization. Managers should be expected to evaluate the risks and controls within their scope of authority at least annually and to report the results of this process to the chief risk officer and the audit committee of the board of directors. An independent group, such as internal audit, should perform a separate assessment to confirm management’s assessment.  Credit risk management The evolution of a portfolio approach to credit risk management has followed a path similar to that of asset-liability management. It began in the late 1980s, in the aftermath of serious credit-quality deterioration. Models and databases on defaults and credit spreads have since become more sophisticated, and loan review committees have evolved into committees that consider more broadly the various aspects of portfolio risk management. As a result, loans are priced better to reflect their varying levels of risk, they are syndicated and securitized to mitigate lenders’ risk, and credit derivatives have been created to limit credit-risk exposures that are retained.  On that last topic, I would be remiss not to draw your attention to a recent consultative paper on credit-risk transfer issued by the Joint Forum in October. This consultative paper focuses on credit derivatives and related transactions - themselves an outgrowth of better risk measurement - and is open to public comment through January 2005. It documents the remarkable growth and innovation in these credit products, with aggregate notional value of $2.3 trillion and with about 1,200 regularly traded reference entities or “names.” The paper emphasizes that much more growth is likely, because these products are still in the early phases of their life cycle, and that the most important issue now facing market participants is the continuing development of their risk measurement and management capabilities.                                                        1  PricewaterhouseCoopers and the Economist Intelligence Unit, “Governance: From Compliance to Strategic Advantage,” (436 KB PDF) (April 2004). BIS Review 74/2004 3 
In that context, the consultative paper responds to three questions: whether the transactions accomplish a clean transfer of risk, whether participants understand the risks involved, and whether undue concentrations of risk are developing. Overall, the paper offers seventeen specific recommendations for improving the practice and supervisory oversight of credit risk transfer activity, drawing heavily on discussions with sophisticated market participants. I encourage you to review this paper and consider its recommendations seriously. Let me discuss two of them briefly.  One recommendation is that firms understand fully and apply discipline to their credit models in order to ensure quality and manage the usage of these models appropriately. Correlation assumptions receive special attention here, including the growing presence of “correlation trading desks” and the observation from several market participants that there may be too much commonality in these assumptions across market participants. Insufficient diversity in views could lead to the kind of turmoil that occurred in markets for longer-term Treasury instruments in mid-2003. In that case, unexpected increases in rates led a large number of similarly positioned financial institutions to seek to take the same side of transactions simultaneously.  Another recommendation is that participants properly understand the economic meaning of external ratings that are applied to credit risk transfer instruments, especially collateralized debt obligations or CDOs - as compared with ratings given to more traditional obligations. Identical ratings across different types of instruments do not guarantee identical risk characteristics, and in particular may imply equal probability of a loss event but unequal severity of loss. It is important to understand both the specific methodology used by the rating agency - which the agencies make available in extensive detail, including how default correlation is addressed - and the structure of a specific transaction in order to properly assess its contribution to a portfolio’s risk profile.  Data integrity, broadly defined Even the best of processes suffers if the data used to measure risk and performance are flawed. In understanding the drivers of good risk management, qualitative factors are a critical influence on the reliability and characteristics of the “data” used to evaluate risk and performance. In this broader sense, “data integrity” can refer not only to the consistency, accuracy and appropriateness of the information in the data base and model, but also to the processes that produce and utilize these measures. Used this way, “data integrity” includes the quality of credit files, tracking of key customer characteristics, internal processes and controls, and even the training that supports them all.  When one says “data integrity” in risk-management circles these days, most people think of the qualifying standards for the internal-ratings-based approaches to credit risk capital under Basel II. I think it is a broader concept, so let me spend a moment on that subject. The proposed timetable for US implementation of Basel II reflects the requirements of our rulemaking processes and the need for banks and supervisors to prepare for the introduction of the new standards. As you probably know, the US banking agencies envision formal release of the proposed regulations in mid-2005, with parallel running of Basel I and Basel II in 2007 and full implementation in 2008. Even on that timetable, the regulatory community recognizes that substantial data limitations may prevent banks from developing viable and robust parameter estimates in the near term - even for probability of default in some cases. For this reason, both banks and their supervisors will have to wait while data accumulate before banks can estimate and validate parameter inputs in a reliable, robust manner.  In the interim, banks and supervisors will have to rely heavily on qualitative validation approaches - although not entirely. Supervisors across countries are working together to address validation issues, and, I believe, will develop useful guidelines for banks and supervisors alike. In the early years, more weight may need to be placed on qualitative reviews of a bank’s internal policies and procedures, including its internal validation and documentation. But we expect that, soon after implementation, banks should have the ability to generate the needed parameters from actual data, and supervisors will want to see positive steps being taken by banking organizations to develop good databases to provide the sort of data integrity I am discussing. Qualitative and quantitative benchmarking studies, which compare methodologies and parameter estimates across banks, will be important tools for validation and for encouraging the diffusion of best practices throughout the industry during both the initial, more qualitative and the later more quantitative, intervals.  But, as I noted, high-quality data are important for strong risk management, and not just for Basel II. Data are needed for other models and risk measures used in financial services, including credit scoring models, market-based measures such as KMV, and value-at-risk and other economic capital 4 BIS Review 74/2004 
models. As you know, these economic capital models are a key element of Pillar 2. The broader concept of data integrity also applies to the development and maintenance of well-controlled processes including those that measure risk and performance. If the environment in which the models operate is not appropriate - if an institution considers internal controls just to be a checklist - its risk measures will not provide the performance it hopes to achieve.  Accounting, disclosure, and market discipline Strong risk measurement and disciplined maintenance of data also improve the communication between the institution and its investors and counterparties. This sense of data integrity relates just as well to the information provided to these parties. I would like, now, to turn to some of the recent accounting issues surrounding complex instruments and the role of financial disclosure in promoting risk management.  Some of you may have experienced earnings volatility resulting from the use of credit derivatives. Under US generally accepted accounting principles, credit derivatives are generally required to be recognized as an asset or liability and measured at fair value, and the gain or loss resulting from the change in fair value must be recorded in earnings. Most credit derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, implying greater earnings volatility if the hedged portfolio or securities are carried at historic cost in their banking book. As a bank supervisor, I am concerned if the accounting treatment discourages the use of new risk-management financial instruments.  You may be wondering if the answer to this volatility issue is fair value accounting. If the hedged asset were measured at fair value, the changes in values of the hedged item and the credit derivative would offset each other, reducing the volatility that arises when only the derivative is marked to market, depending of course on the effectiveness of the hedge. But some volatility is likely to remain, since it is the lack of close correlation that prevents hedge accounting treatment.  The IASB developed the new “fair value option” under International Accounting Standard (IAS) 39, under which firms could mark to market both the credit derivative and the hedged position and report changes in their fair values in current earnings. While at first glance the fair value option might be viewed as the solution to addressing the problems of the current accounting model, it also raises a number of concerns. Without observable market prices and sound valuation approaches, fair value measurements are difficult to determine, verify, and audit. Reporting would become less comparable across institutions. Moreover, if an entity’s creditworthiness deteriorates significantly, there is potentially a peculiar result. In this circumstance, financial liabilities would be marked down to fair value and a gain would be recorded in the entity’s profit and loss statement. In the most dramatic case, an insolvent entity might appear solvent as a result of marking to market its own deteriorated credit risk. Many of these concerns, as well as recommendations to address them, were included in a July comment letter to the IASB from the Basel Committee.2 As heavy users of customer and investor corporate financial statements, bankers should also consider how a fair value measure may mask underlying reasons for the change in fair value.  As institutions using IASB standards consider how to use the fair value option for their own financial reporting purposes, they should be aware of certain related complexities. For example, if loans are reported using the fair value option, changes in fair value would presumably affect loan loss allowances and thus regulatory capital, important asset-quality measures like nonperforming assets, and even net interest margins.  One area in which improved disclosures by banking organizations are needed involves credit risk and the allowance for loan losses. As you know, a high degree of management judgment is involved in estimating the loan-loss allowance, and that estimate can have a significant impact on an institution’s balance sheet and earnings. Expanded disclosures in this area would improve market participants’ understanding of an institution’s risk profile and whether the firm has adequately provided for its estimated credit losses in a consistent, well-disciplined manner. Accordingly, I strongly encourage institutions to provide additional disclosures in this area. Examples include a breakdown of credit exposures by internal credit grade, allowance estimates broken down by key components, more-thorough discussions of why allowance components have changed from period to period, and                                                       2  A copy of the letter, dated July 30, 2004, can be found at www.bis.org/bcbs/commentletters/iasb14.pdf (59 KB PDF). BIS Review 74/2004 5 
enhanced discussions of the rationale behind changes in the more-subjective allowance estimates, including unallocated amounts.  Thus, as both users and preparers of financial statements, bankers should encourage transparency in accounting and disclosure of risk positions.  Conclusion In my remarks today, I have sought to encourage you to continue your efforts to support the evolution of risk measurement and risk management practices and to heighten the degree of professionalism that every effective risk manager should demonstrate. I want to leave by reminding all of you not to become so caught up in the latest technical development that you lose sight of the qualitative aspects of your responsibilities. Models alone do not guarantee an effective risk-management process. You should encourage continuous improvement in all aspects, including data integrity, legal clarity, transparent disclosures, and internal controls.  For the risk managers at this conference, I hope the message you have heard is that you should be actively engaged with managers throughout the organization, talking about the merits of a consistent, sound enterprise-wide risk management culture. In doing so, you can help managers see that the risk-management process will allow them to better understand the inherent risks of their activities so that they in turn can more effectively mitigate these risks and achieve their profit goals.  6 BIS Review 74/2004 
Caleb M Fundanga: The role and operations of the Bank of Zambia  Closing remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the end of the Bank of Zambia lecture series to members of the University of Zambia Business and Economics Association (UNZABECA), Lusaka, 24 November 2004. *      *      * Chairperson Bank of Zambia Directors  Members of UNZABECA  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen  As we come to the end of the series of lectures presented by the Bank of Zambia, it is my sincere hope that UNZABECA members have now gained a better understanding and appreciation of central banking, in general, and the role and operations of the Bank of Zambia, in particular.  Ladies and Gentlemen, as it has been amply explained during the course of the Lecture Series, I would also like to reiterate that a central bank plays a critical role in the monetary and financial operations of any country. Through these Lectures, you have learned that the primary responsibility of a central bank includes, among others:  • issuance of currency;  • acts as banker to the Government;  • banker to commercial banks; • management of a country’s foreign exchange reserves;  • lender of last resort;  • management of public debt. Although some central banks do not carry such responsibilities;  • collection and interpretation of statistics, in particular, financial and monetary statistics; and  • implementation of monetary and financial systems policies.  Through these Lecture Series, which have successfully ended today, it has been highlighted that the central bank, like the rest of the economy, adapts to changes in the market environment. In the case of the Bank of Zambia, prior to 1991, the Bank had numerous roles, including the promotion of economic growth through the provision of credit to critical sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing, mining, etc, as well as issuance of export guarantees to exporters. As expected, the multiplicity of functions led to conflict of interest. For instance, on one hand, the Bank was expected to control the growth of money supply while, on the other hand, it was required to inject money into the system through the provision of credit to the selected sectors.  The introduction of economic reforms by the Government beginning the end of 1991 therefore brought about enormous challenges for the Bank of Zambia. To meet the new challenges, the Bank’s operations needed to be more focused. In this respect, the Bank of Zambia Act was amended in 1996 to reflect the changed nature of the operating environment. By amending the Act, the Bank’s primary role was solely “to formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure the maintenance of price and financial system stability”.  This was deliberate, as experience world-over has shown that you can only achieve sustained and high economic growth in an economic environment characterised by low and stable inflation. Thus, by working to ensure price stability as well as maintenance of a safe, sound and efficient financial sector, the Bank is contributing to the achievement of sustainable economic growth and, ultimately, poverty reduction.  In a nutshell, following the amendment of the Bank of Zambia Act in 1996, the Bank’s main responsibilities comprise price and financial system stability. The Bank ensures financial system stability by licensing, supervising and regulating the activities of banks and non-bank financial institutions so as to promote the safe, sound and efficient operations and development of the financial system.  BIS Review 74/2004 1 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I trust that, as members of UNZABECA, you have actively participated in these series of lectures and expanded your knowledge of the functions of the Bank of Zambia. On our part as Bank of Zambia, we strongly encourage investment in education, which has been demonstrated by the sponsorship of these Lectures. In this regard, I wish to take this opportunity to call upon other institutions to support our university by either sponsoring a series of lectures, like the Bank of Zambia has done, or rendering any financial assistance. As many of you may be aware, most of the companies in Zambia have benefited, in one way or the other, from the services offered by our universities. As for the Bank of Zambia, most of its management members of staff, including myself, are graduates of this university and were members of UNZABECA.  Therefore, as a token of their appreciation to UNZABECA, they have made a generous donation in the sum of K9.5 million. This donation, I hope, will go a long way in supporting UNZABECA programmes. However, may I caution you to manage these funds prudently and ensure that they are applied towards the attainment of the intended UNZABECA objectives. Please, do not be wasteful now that UNZABECA coffers are liquid!  In conclusion, as Patron of UNZABECA, I look forward to being involved in UNZABECA activities. In this regard, I undertake to promote your activities, at any slightest opportunity, to other institutions, which would benefit from your services. With these few remarks, it is now my honour and privilege to declare the Bank of Zambia UNZABECA Lecture Series officially closed.  I thank you. 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
R Basant Roi: Monetary policy objectives in Mauritius and its operational framework since 1994 Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, GCSK, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Bank of Mauritius’ Annual Dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 3 December 2004. *      *      * Honourable Chief Justice Distinguished Guests Ladies and Gentlemen Good Evening I am pleased to welcome you all to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner. In my last six addresses I dealt mostly with regulatory and supervisory issues that the business community and the public at large need to be aware of. The addresses are purported to enhance transparency in the Bank’s policy decision-making. The theme for my address this evening is: A perspective of our monetary policy objective and the evolution of its operational framework since 1994 when our Exchange Control Act was suspended. Let me start with a remark - a remark that is generally valid. Often, commentators make observations that are so framed, either unwittingly or intentionally, as to lend the impression that monetary policy, on its own, should be capable of achieving all economic objectives at the same time and all the time. This is indeed an unrealistic demand on monetary policy. Monetary policy, though a very important arm of macro-economic policy, is only one of several elements in the economic panorama. We need to have a realistic appreciation of what monetary policy or any other policy in any other field can be reasonably expected to deliver. It’s a fact of life that we cannot have all that we want at the same time, all the time and under all circumstances. Whether it’s monetary policy, fiscal policy or social policy, choices are made between conflicting or potentially conflicting objectives in the short term. Between the choices made in the short term and the choices available in the long run there is what economists call the long run opportunity cost. Policy choices made today do often constrain the range of choices available in the longer run. Those of us outside the economics profession and even those in the economics profession frequently tend to overlook the long run opportunity cost when it suits them. Whenever expectations of a particular sector are not met, there emerges pressing demand to intervene and set right sectoral problems while dismissing the long run adverse implications of the intervention for the economy as a whole. In any dynamic society with ever changing priorities, the relative importance of any single objective varies over time. A switch from one policy to another as demanded by particular economic sectors out of unrealistic expectations to best serve their exclusive interests is likely to cause unintended damage to other longer term objectives. High level of employment is a desired policy objective. But we simultaneously want low and stable inflation rate. Consumer protection is warranted in the same way as investor protection is warranted. But we also want free-market competition. The rupee depreciates. Exporters are silently happy. Consumers are not. The rupee appreciates. Exporters are angry. Consumers are silent. And so goes the story on interest rate changes. We will have “expectations gaps” all the time. There are “trade offs”. However, policy makers constantly strive to strike the right balance between competing ends. Sound minded people cannot reasonably expect conflicting objectives to be met at the same time. If the Bank of Mauritius were to meet everybody’s expectations, its policy would swing, quite often violently, from one extreme to the other. The end result would be much less success in the achievement of its longer-term objective.  Prior to the 1980s, monetary policy did not have a precisely defined role in an overwhelming majority of countries across the world. Monetary policy was expected to achieve a number of objectives: price stability, balance of payments equilibrium, promotion of economic growth and full employment. These objectives are conflicting in the short term. With one major policy instrument, central banks were expected to achieve the conflicting objectives simultaneously. As priorities changed following pressures from politicians, industry and commerce, monetary policy shifted legs from one to the other, frequently at short intervals. The monetary policy stance of central banks swung from one extreme to BIS Review 74/2004 1 
the other giving rise to business cycles and higher and higher inflation rates as also higher and higher unemployment levels - an excellent way of sharing misery but not of creating solid wealth. Central bankers became increasingly disappointed. What should central banks systematically aim at to finally achieve the ultimate goals of growth and high employment levels? Academics and central bankers debated the question. Researchers emphasized the monetary nature of inflation. Lasting price stability came to be accepted as a necessary condition for sustained growth and high employment levels. Country experiences supported this perception. Those countries with a history of low and stable inflation had also performed well in terms of growth and employment. Over the years, lasting price stability as a policy goal for central banks won broad-based support. Monetary policy came to be assigned the specific objective of achieving and sustaining price stability. Rather than pursuing different policy stances depending on the exigencies of the day to meet the expectations of different pressure groups, it is best to consistently pursue policies with a precisely defined objective that best serve society as a whole in the medium and long-term. There is a general tendency to believe that the Bank of Mauritius is not concerned with growth and employment. This is a mis-perception. The Bank is not insensitive to the unemployed. Indeed, the Bank does take into account these considerations in policy-making, not with a short term but with a medium and long-term view. Monetary policy does not directly promote growth and help create employment; it does it indirectly through the achievement of sustained price stability. Durable growth can only be achieved, inter alia, within a framework of monetary stability. This is what central banks can be reasonably expected to deliver. In the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 this is what is expected of the Bank.  There are however several underlying and fundamentally important assumptions for monetary policy to succeed. Rather than enumerating the assumptions, let me set a few questions and leave them to you for reflections. Are there serious imperfections in the determination of prices of goods and services in the domestic market? Why prices of goods and services do not positively respond in both directions to movements in the exchange rates of the rupee? How rational are consumers in making decisions? Is the labour market flexible? How many traders, producers, exporters and importers have reliable annual balance sheets on the basis of which banks make decisions to lend? Have our financial markets attained a level of development that facilitates transmission of monetary policy impulses readily? Years ago we had less national savings and more investment. Today we have are flushed with funds but investment is sluggish despite a panoply of investment incentives. Indeed, national savings exceed investment by far. Haven’t we overstretched the “welfare state” for too long a time to a point that has suppressed entrepreneurial instinct, blunted creativity, inventiveness, and undermined work effort? Hasn’t the “welfare state” been overstretched to a point that has given rise to a society of free riders? The more free riders there are in a “welfare state” the heavier is the burden on Government finance and the more difficult is the task of monetary policy in achieving the desired objective.  The point I want to make here is that monetary policy does not operate in a vacuum, independent of a host of other critical factors, and it alone cannot perform miracles. Deprived of a number of allied factors, the achievement of monetary policy objective and ultimately durable growth could be rendered difficult. Lasting price stability is, as I stated earlier, a necessary condition but not a sufficient condition for growth and employment. A number of catalytic factors should imperatively accompany monetary policy for it to succeed.  Along with the change in the aims of monetary policy in the last fifteen years, the operational framework for the conduct of monetary policy underwent several stages of evolution across the world. Here, in Mauritius, since 1994 the operational framework for the conduct of our monetary policy was based on monetary programming, with broad money as an intermediate target and inflation as the final target with a time horizon of 18 months on a running basis. The first Monetary Policy Committee under the Chairmanship of the then Minister of Finance was established in 1994. The monetary programming exercise ought to have produced the desired results. The only snag - a critical one indeed - was the issue of independence of the Bank with regard to interest rate policy decisions. Notwithstanding this snag, the first operational framework for indirect monetary control was at least set. In 1996 the monetary programming was given a different twist. In essence, both exercises had the same objective. The framework changed in its form but not in substance. The first was the top-down and the second is the bottom - up approach of operating in the balance sheet of the Bank of Mauritius. In the following two and a half years, the Bank was at the helm of the ship but could not control the storm for reasons that I suspect you may already be aware of.  2 BIS Review 74/2004 
The Bank had the powers to pursue a realistic interest rate policy but it did not. Even if the Bank had decided to change its interest rate policy, it would have taken several weeks to do so with no meaningful impact on the interest rate structure of the system. The Bank Rate, which is the predecessor of the Lombard rate, used to be determined by the market at the weekly auctions of Treasury bills since 1994. The Bank Rate moved weekly like flotsam and jetsam without signalling any definite direction to the market. This system of determining the Bank Rate was anathema to the financial system of a small highly open economy that had passed the post of financial liberalization. Despite the liberalization of exchange control, which by definition allowed for the free movements of capital, the “flotsam-jetsam” Bank Rate was retained. Towards the end of 1998, the systematic pursuit of a realistic interest rate policy along with an imaginative and well-crafted strategy, that is, the sale of Treasury bills over-the-counter to individuals re-established a number of equations in our system. This strategy remedied to some extent the inadequacies of our money market. In 1999, our operational framework was again reviewed. This framework encapsulated repurchase operations between the Bank of Mauritius and commercial banks along with the concept of a key interest rate, the Lombard rate for signalling the interest rate policy decisions. Admittedly, the connection between the Lombard rate and the money market is not sufficiently strong. This is not because the concept of the key rate itself is wrong but because our money market has not attained the desired level of development and sophistication. The link between the Lombard rate and the money market has to be robust for any shift in the interest rate policy stance to be instantly transmitted. However, as you may have observed, changes in the Lombard rate have been having the intended impact on our interest rate structure. In time to come our operational framework for the conduct of monetary policy will be refined with the progress in the development of our money market. Depending on the pace of development of our money market in 2005, the Lombard rate will be replaced by a Repurchase rate, commonly referred to as the Repo rate. As an aside, let me say that monetary policy making has never been and can never be a purely mechanical process; it is basically an interpretative and therefore a judgemental process requiring a battery of information collected from every available source, including the on-site inspection of banks carried out by our Banking Supervision Department. The judgemental process is what makes monetary policy decision-making difficult. I need not overstate that what is judgemental is susceptible to mis-judgements. The Bank, however, does its best to avoid erring on the wrong side. It sounds simple. But it isn’t. Central bankers endeavour to have a clear view of its monetary policy transmission mechanism. Our policy decisions involve a good understanding of the roles of short-term interest rates, exchange rate, and money and credit in the economy. The Bank heavily counts on dependable inflation forecasts. A fan chart for probabilistic outcomes on the inflation front, duly supported by a highly reliable inflation forecasting model plays a decisive role in our policy-making process. This is a key element since our monetary policy framework is necessarily forward-looking. Academics and central bankers agree that there is no such thing like an “ideal” rate of inflation. The specificities of our economy coupled with the weak predictable relationships between certain key monetary and other economic variables have not made targeting a specific inflation rate that easy at this stage. I suspect you must be aware of the saying: “To be sure of hitting the target, shoot first and call whatever you hit the target.” Price stability will continue to be given central importance and will be kept clearly in sight as the anchor for monetary policy. Precisely, this is what the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 expects us to deliver.  Much progress has been made in the recent past in the achievement of price stability. Wide fluctuations in the rate of inflation have been drastically reduced over time. Inflation rate in the 1980s reached a peak of 44 per cent and a low of less than 1 per cent. In the 1990s, it attained a high of 14 per cent and a low of 3 per cent. In the last 5 years the highest rate was 7 per cent because of the introduction of VAT coupled with an increase in the VAT rate and the lowest was 4 per cent. These figures are the headline inflation rate as published by the Central Statistical Office(CSO). It captures changes in the cost of living based on a typical household consumption basket.  Central banks have gone deeper into statistical analyses of inflation. For quite some years they have come up with the concept of core inflation - an indicator of the underlying movements in consumer prices. Core inflation irons out the effect of temporary disturbances and shocks to prices that are not attributable to economic and monetary policy. For instance, the impact of the current increase in world price of oil on our inflation rate is a disturbance for which monetary policy is not responsible. That part of inflation due to such disturbances and shocks are statistically isolated from the headline inflation rate. The resultant rate of inflation provides a measure of and an indicator of underlying long-term inflation. We have carried out this exercise for Mauritius. We have had some difficulties in arriving at a BIS Review 74/2004 3 
specific core inflation rate for Mauritius because the prices of around one-third of the items in our consumption basket are set by Government. Having used two different methods, we obtained a range for our core inflation. For the 12-month period ended September 2004, the core inflation ranged between 2.9 per cent and 3.3 per cent lower than the headline inflation rate of 4.1 per cent as published by the CSO. On average, our core inflation is likely to be between 1 and 1.5 percentage points below the headline inflation rate. We expect the core inflation for the current fiscal year to be in the region of 4 per cent. I may say that we have made considerable headway in achieving price stability in recent years.        The operational framework for the conduct of monetary policy combined with an increasing degree of transparency has led to a higher level of appreciation by the market of policy decisions of the Bank. This has clearly aided expectations building. In the past central bankers believed that unanticipated changes in their policies were more effective. Contrary to this perception, experience demonstrated that policy induced shocks rather harmed economic agents than helped sharpen the effectiveness of the policy. Central bankers have thus adopted a stand – not that much palpable - that allows market players to formulate a view and anticipate their likely policy moves. We have growing evidence of this phenomenon in Mauritius in the last few years. Let me use an anecdote to express what I mean. In the 19th century a leading newspaper in France announced the death of a famous ailing French author. The author, upon hearing the news about his own death, said, “Eh! I have started living again.” A week later the author actually died. The day after, the same newspaper came with a headline: “We were the first to announce the death of the author.” We have observed such capabilities emerging among our market players and commentators. And that augurs well for the stability of our financial industry.  Ladies and gentlemen, so strong is the weakness of mankind to fall into mutual animosities, that the most fanciful artefacts have been sufficient to excite unfriendly passions. Let me conclude with two observations: the first is about profits of the banking industry. In our type of an economic system profit making is not regarded as a sin. Banks make fat profits. But banks also take high risk. Banks also make fat provisions for debts that have gone bad. Banks also need to build reserves and strengthen their balance sheets. Strong and sound balance sheets make strong banks. The rate of growth of pre-tax profit of commercial banks is observed to be lower than the growth rate of their total assets. Moreover, in the last ten years profits of the banking industry have grown at about the same rate as the nominal growth rate of the economy.  My second observation relates to the idiosyncratic view that commercial banks in Mauritius operate as a cartel. No; that is not simply barking up at the wrong tree, but being in a different forest altogether. It’s a view that is distilled badly, blended poorly, and bottled upside-down. Deposit and lending rates do vary from bank to bank. Fees, charges and commissions also vary from bank to bank. This is what we have seen during our on-site inspections of banks. Now, let me assume for a moment that, for instance, the same rates of interest were offered on deposits by some banks. Should it be necessarily seen as an evidence of collusion among banks? Even elementary economics textbooks on the theory of competition teach us that the inter-play of forces in a competitive market drives down prices of goods and services to the same level. Over time one price for the same product prevails throughout the market not because of necessarily a monopolistic situation but because of competition within the industry. The contention that commercial banks operate as a cartel simply because some of the rates applied by them are the same does not make commonsense. And Mr. Sneer-well said: “I went to the pictures next Tuesday And took a front seat at the back I said to the lady behind me I cannot see over your hat.” Seated in an armchair, I cannot feel the fire of competition underneath.     Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Board of Directors and staff of the Bank of Mauritius and on my own behalf I wish you and your family a Merry Xmas and a Happy New Year. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 74/2004 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The integration of the single market for financial services - the Eurosystem perspective Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the CESR Conference “Europe’s single market in financial services: under construction or fully integrated”, Paris, 6 December 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be here at the first Committee of European Securities Regulators’ (CESR) conference with such a distinguished audience. This is certainly the right place to address our common objective of fully developing a “European single market”.  The process of financial integration is a very challenging and complex endeavour which results from the effective interplay between public and private action. Public authorities, both national and European, do play an important role in ensuring that basic conditions are in place for market participants to expand their cross-border activities. These conditions include an adequate framework of regulation, supervision and financial stability. Whereas public action is necessary, the concrete realisation of financial integration rests eventually on the initiatives of market participants to exploit the opportunities offered by the institutional framework. In this context, we can assert that significant progress has been achieved in the pursuit of financial integration in Europe so far but the final goal of a single financial market has not been fully achieved yet: On the side of market participants a fully fledged pan-European dimension of market activities remains to be achieved. On the side of public authorities the basic components of the institutional framework are already in place, but they need time before fully producing the desirable results.  I would like to focus my contribution on the integration of the European securities markets, emphasising the priorities for further public action from a Eurosystem perspective. The interest of the Eurosystem in the integration of securities markets The Eurosystem has a clear interest in the integration of securities markets. First of all, an efficient and well-integrated financial system is crucial for the smooth transmission of monetary policy in the euro area. Securities market is a particularly relevant area, since the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations need to be fully collateralised. The harmonisation of national laws and practices in the field of securities - which is one important element to further integration in the securities markets - enhances the effectiveness of the Eurosystem’s collateral policy.  Second, the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations also rely heavily on the smooth delivery of securities. Securities settlement systems should ensure that such a smooth delivery both at a national level and on a cross-border basis. At the same time, safety and soundness of securities clearing and settlement systems is equally important from a central banking perspective. In this regard, I want to mention the recently published standards on securities clearing and settlement systems, which have been jointly developed by the ESCB and the CESR. These standards provide a benchmark for regulators, supervisors and overseers to adapt their practices to a commonly accepted approach in the field of securities settlement. I would recall that such standards are based on the current market situation and legal framework, which is not harmonised at the EU level. Should a Directive on clearing and settlement be finally adopted at the EU level, it is clear that the standards would have to be assessed for their conformity with the provisions of the Directive and, if necessary, amended accordingly. Third, the Eurosystem’s interest also stems from the relationship between integration of securities markets with financial stability. Central banks have a natural role in this area, confirmed by the Treaty, which states that the Eurosystem should contribute to the smooth conduct of policies relating to the stability of the financial system. An important task of the Eurosystem in this respect is the systematic monitoring of sources of vulnerabilities for the euro area financial system and the assessment of its degree of resilience to potential shocks. In this context, I would like to announce that the ECB will start publishing the output of this activity in the form of a financial stability review, with the first issue already scheduled to be published on 15 December. Another task of the ECB in this area is the provision of BIS Review 74/2004 1 
advice on draft Community and national legislation in the financial field either through formal opinions or through its participation in the relevant regulatory (level 2) and supervisory (level 3) committees. In particular, the ECB follows closely the work of the European Securities Committee (ESC) and the CESR which play an important role in assisting the Commission in shaping the regulatory framework in the securities field.  Priorities in the areas of financial regulation and supervision  The level of integration of securities markets, including market infrastructures in both the trading and post-trading areas, has increased significantly since the introduction of the euro. Given this substantive progress, it is important that integrated markets develop on the basis of a sound framework for financial regulation and supervision. The CESR has a crucial role to play in this regard.  First, the completion of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) will provide the “Single European Securities Market” with a strong impetus. It is however important to note that most of the FSAP directives in the securities field are designed in line with the Lamfalussy framework. Let me mention in that context the Market Abuse Directive, the Prospectuses Directive, the Transparency Directive and the Directive on Markets for Financial Instruments. These directives warrant the adoption of a number of Level 2 implementing measures by the Commission for their full implementation. The preparation of technical advice of good quality on the content of Level 2 rules is one of the CESR’s main achievements to date, also under tight deadlines.  In this respect, the message I would like to convey to the CESR is to strive to continue the good practice of providing timely and good quality technical advice with extensive consultation practices. The recommendations of the Inter-Institutional Monitoring Group in this context are to be supported. For instance, as recently requested by the Commission, instead of a more general contribution, CESR could formulate its advice as close as possible to the content of a Level 2 measure. This will both facilitate and increase the transparency of the Lamfalussy regulatory process. As regards the Level 2, I would consider further efforts for optimising the content of this component of the Lamfalussy framework as of critical importance. In particular, the distinction between Level 1 and Level 2 legislation, with due consideration of the applicable legislative procedures, could be better refined. The aim would be to achieve a flexible and consistent set of securities regulations among Member States, which can further enhance cross-border transactions. The good experience gained so far with the implementation of the Lamfalussy approach should allow a wider scope for Level 2 than it has been the case.  Second, the fact that integration has progressed more in the securities field than in other segments of the financial sector, makes the issue of effectiveness of supervisory convergence particularly relevant. This implies that Level 3 needs to be further developed with regard to the supervision of securities markets.  The CESR is providing a contribution in this field by promoting strategic reflections on the key challenges surrounding supervisory convergence. I am referring to the recently published report by CESR, commonly called the “Himalaya Report”. I understand that these reflections mirror the fact that, in comparison with other level 3 committees, the CESR has already gained some experience and is a position to start developing strategic considerations about its future role.  On this issue, I would like to emphasise my conviction of the soundness and potential of the Lamfalussy framework. This framework provides an appropriate institutional set-up to achieve both a more flexible regulatory process and consistent supervision for integrated financial markets. This conviction has been substantially reinforced by the good experience gained so far in the securities field. Therefore, I have confidence that the extension of the Lamfalussy framework to the banking and insurance sectors will reveal the same positive experience.  Looking ahead, I believe that one of the main objectives in the context of what is commonly referred to as “the post-FSAP strategy” is to attempt to exploit to the maximum possible extent the potential which is inherent in the Lamfalussy framework to improve the regulatory and supervisory process. This is one of the main challenges for the Level 3 committees but it is also one of the main factors on which the success of these committees will be measured. I am aware that all the Level 3 committees are already working hard to meet the challenges posed by the Lamfalussy process.  Therefore, I am in full agreement with the conclusion of CESR in the Himalaya report that the experience so far is a success and is in the right path. The priority is indeed to implement the existing 2 BIS Review 74/2004 
and potential supervisory tools within the FSAP and Lamfalussy frameworks. And the objective is and should be to achieve a good co-ordination among authorities in the implementation and enforcement of securities regulation across the EU.  In this respect, while acknowledging the limitations of the voluntary nature of Level 3, I would tend to think that certain “soft” tools, some of those already used by the CESR, may enhance the prospects for such co-ordination among authorities. First of all, increased transparency of CESR’s activities, including consultation and reporting practices, may also enhance in my view CESR’s accountability. Second, tools such as peer pressure and supervisory disclosure may provide appropriate incentives to co-ordinated efforts among authorities without changing the nature of the Level 3 Committees. In this respect, I would be happy to hear more concrete details of the CESR’s proposal for a mediation mechanism of an advisory nature among national regulators. This has the potential to enhance the dialogue among CESR members on specific supervisory issues, therefore also enhancing their co-ordination and mutual understanding. This is a good example of instruments to exploit to the maximum extent the opportunities offered by the Lamfalussy framework. Priorities in the area of financial stability After addressing regulation and supervision, let me now turn to the third component of the public policy framework for financial markets: financial stability.  Indeed, the process of pursuing further financial integration also needs to be accompanied by the strengthening of the framework for maintaining financial stability. The emergence of pan-European banking groups and the growing integration of financial markets and market infrastructures increase the potential scope for systemic risk in the EU. Systemic disturbances are likely not to be confined to one Member State, thus cross-border contagion may spread more easily.  Many initiatives have been or are being taken at the EU and national level to reinforce the set-up for maintaining financial stability and managing financial crisis. First, the monitoring of the stability of the financial system is being further developed. More and more central banks are developing a more systematic monitoring of the stability of their domestic financial systems. This is reflected also in the tasks of the Eurosystem which, as I already mentioned, has established a systematic monitoring of the stability of the euro area financial system. This analysis includes all the relevant components of the financial system, notably banks, non-bank financial institutions, financial markets and financial infrastructure and reviews all possible sources of vulnerability for the system. This activity of the Eurosystem benefits from the monitoring of banking stability in the EU conducted since long by the Banking Supervision Committee, one of the ESCB committees where central banks and supervisory agencies are represented. In this connection, I acknowledge that the Level 3 committee in the insurance field, the CEIOPS, has recently activated a systematic monitoring of the stability of the insurance sector in the EU very much along the lines of the BSC work. I would thus see merit in the involvement of CESR in this area by developing a systematic monitoring of developments in financial markets from a financial stability angle.  Second, additional measures are being considered to strengthen the effectiveness of supervisory action in a more integrated financial market. For the banking sector let me mention the revised EU capital requirements framework for banks and investment firms where enhanced responsibilities are attributed to the consolidating supervisor. Indeed, along with the responsibility of being held accountable for the approval of sophisticated approaches to calculate capital requirements for the group as a whole, the consolidated supervisor is also responsible for coordinating activities and exchanging relevant information in crisis situations. Hence, in my view, the role of the consolidating supervisor does not undermine but rather underpins the crucial need to reinforce supervisory cooperation and strengthen the interplay between the home and the host supervisor for the supervision of groups operating on a cross-border basis. Strengthening of co-operation is critical for effective prudential supervision of all financial institutions. As to securities supervision - which is the main domain of CESR - I recognise that the main challenges are related to the fact that the principle of home country control finds a narrower application and that securities commissions have very different powers across countries.  Third, in the area of financial crisis management, the main initiatives are in the form of promoting multilateral or bilateral agreements among the relevant authorities so that they are prepared in case of a financial crisis with cross-border dimension. The main idea behind these agreements rely on the assumption that the management of a financial crisis having a cross-border dimension is a complex BIS Review 74/2004 3 
endeavour which requires a clear ex-ante understanding of the role and procedural steps for all authorities involved. Such agreements are expected to be a useful tool helping to a certain extent the management of a crisis, if it were to happen, though it should be recognised that each crisis has its own unique features and therefore it is impossible to foresee its dynamics. In this context, I should mention the MoU agreed in 2003 by the EU central banks and banking supervisors for the co-operation and exchange of information between them in crisis situations. The MoU - prepared by the BSC - defines general principles for co-operation and can be used as a basis for more specific agreements amongst the authorities. More recently, the ECOFIN has agreed that another agreement should be reached at the EU level between central banks, banking supervisors and Finance Ministries for the interplay among the three authorities in crisis situations. At a certain stage, I think, the issue that will have to be addressed would be to also involve other categories of supervisors, in particular securities and insurance supervisors, given that a crisis of a cross-border dimension may well cover also financial institutions falling within their competence.  Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen,  Let me finish by reiterating that the “European single market” is still under construction. Notwithstanding the significant progress achieved so far, the attainment of an optimal level of integration requires an effective interplay between market forces, and both collective actions and public action. Nevertheless, an exclusive and essential responsibility of public authorities remains the establishment of an appropriate legislative and regulatory framework. Regulatory and supervisory convergence represent the main elements in this process. Indeed, convergence will only be effective and produce its intended benefits if both CESR members and market participants can fully rely on a consistent set of practices across the EU. This constitutes the pre-condition – which has not been present so far - for workable mutual recognition among authorities and expansion of cross-border activities by market players. Thank you very much for your attention.  4 BIS Review 74/2004 
Ben S Bernanke: The logic of monetary policy Remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the National Economists Club, Washington, DC, 2 December 2004. The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. *      *      * When I speak about monetary policy at occasions like this one, more often than not the focus of my remarks is on recent policy actions or the near-term outlook. However, just as good tactics are useful only insofar as they serve a larger strategic purpose, so individual policy decisions are best understood in the context of an encompassing policy framework. Today I would like to step back a bit from current policy concerns to address the broader topic of the logical framework within which monetary policy is made. Specifically, I will introduce and briefly discuss two competing frameworks for making monetary-policy decisions, each of which has vigorous proponents among leading monetary economists, and I will relate these frameworks to policy practice at the Federal Reserve. In the latter portion of my remarks I will argue that the choice of policy framework has important practical implications, most notably for the communication policy of the central bank. Before proceeding further, I should say that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1Car and driver: a misleading analogy Eight times each year the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meets to set U.S. monetary policy - which, under current operating procedures, amounts to choosing a target for the federal funds rate, a short-term interest rate that the Federal Reserve influences by controlling the supply of bank reserves. What logical framework guides these decisions? Superficially, the FOMC decision process may appear straightforward. A commonly used analogy takes the U.S. economy to be an automobile, the FOMC to be the driver, and monetary policy actions to be taps on the accelerator or brake. According to this analogy, when the economy is running too slowly (say, unemployment is high and growth is below its potential rate), the FOMC increases pressure on the accelerator by lowering its target for the federal funds rate, thereby stimulating aggregate spending and economic activity. When the economy is running too quickly (say, inflation appears likely to rise), the FOMC switches to the brake by raising its funds rate target, thereby depressing spending and cooling the economy. What could be simpler than that?2I wish it were that easy. Unfortunately, the simplistic view of monetary policymaking derived from the automobile analogy can be seriously misleading, for at least two reasons. First, policymakers working to keep the economy from going off the road must deal with informational constraints that are far more severe than those faced by real-world drivers. Despite the best efforts of the statistical agencies and other data collectors, economic data provide incomplete coverage of economic activity, are subject to substantial sampling error, and become available only with a lag. Determining even the economy’s current “speed,” consequently, is not easy, as can be seen by the fact that economists’ estimates of the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP) for the current quarter may vary widely. Forecasting the economy’s performance a few quarters ahead is even more difficult, reflecting not only problems of economic measurement and the effects of unanticipated shocks but also the complex and constantly changing nature of the economy itself. Policymakers are unable to predict with great confidence even how (or how quickly) their own actions are likely to affect the economy. In short, if making monetary policy is like driving a car, then the car is one that has an                                                       1 I thank a number of colleagues who provided constructive comments on an earlier draft. 2 One complication that is not easily captured by the automobile analogy arises when the Fed’s objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment come into potential conflict, as sometimes occurs over short periods (for example, following an aggregate supply shock). In that case the choice of whether to slow down or speed up the economy is not straightforward and depends on a variety of considerations, such as the stability of inflation expectations and the credibility of the central bank. This issue is not central to the points I wish to make today and so I will not discuss it further. BIS Review 73/2004 1 
unreliable speedometer, a foggy windshield, and a tendency to respond unpredictably and with a delay to the accelerator or the brake. The second problem with the automobile analogy arises from the central role of private-sector expectations in determining the impact of monetary policy actions. If the automobile analogy were valid, then the current setting of the federal funds rate would summarize the degree of monetary stimulus being applied to the economy, just as the pressure a driver exerts on the accelerator at any particular moment determines whether the automobile speeds up or slows down. However, in fact, the current level of the federal funds rate is at best a partial indicator of the degree of monetary ease or restraint. The current funds rate imperfectly measures policy stimulus because the most important economic decisions, such as a family’s decision to buy a new home or a firm’s decision to acquire new capital goods, depend much more on longer-term interest rates, such as mortgage rates and corporate bond rates, than on the federal funds rate. Long-term rates, in turn, depend primarily not on the current funds rate but on how financial market participants expect the funds rate and other short-term rates to evolve over time. For example, if financial market participants anticipate that future short-term rates will be relatively high, they will usually bid up long-term yields as well; if long-term yields did not rise, then investors would expect to earn a higher return by rolling over short-term investments and consequently would decline to hold the existing supply of long-term bonds. Likewise, if market participants expect future short-term rates to be low, then long-term yields will also tend to be low, all else being equal. Monetary policy makers can affect private-sector expectations through their actions and statements, but the need to think about such things significantly complicates the policymakers’ task (Bernanke, 2004). In short, if the economy is like a car, then it is a car whose speed at a particular moment depends not on the pressure on the accelerator at that moment but rather on the expected average pressure on the accelerator over the rest of the trip - not a vehicle for inexperienced drivers, I should think. I hope that this short discussion convinces you that making effective monetary policy is no Sunday drive in the park. With both the informational limitations facing policymakers and the role of private-sector expectations in mind, I turn next to a discussion of two alternative frameworks for thinking about monetary policy. Making monetary policy: two candidate frameworks The two frameworks for monetary policymaking I will compare today are generally referred to in the recent economics literature as instrument rules and targeting rules (Svensson, 2003; McCallum and Nelson, 2004; Svensson, 2004b). Unfortunately, for my purposes at least, this terminology is somewhat misleading. First, the term “rule” suggests a rigid and mechanistic policy prescription that leaves no room for discretion or judgment. However, the argument that monetary policy should adhere mechanically to a strict rule, made by some economists in the past, has fallen out of favor in recent years. Today most monetary economists use the term “rule” more loosely to describe a general policy strategy, one that may include substantial scope for policymaker discretion and judgment. Here I will use the term “policy” instead of “rule” to avoid the connotations of the latter. Second, the terms “instrument” and “targeting” are products of the intellectual history of the debate and, to my mind, are not particularly descriptive. I will refer to the approaches known in the literature as instrument rules and targeting rules instead as simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies, respectively. I hope that the benefits of greater descriptive accuracy will outweigh the costs arising from any terminological confusion. How do these two policy approaches differ, and what are their underlying rationales? Under a simple feedback policy, the central bank’s policy instrument - the federal funds rate in the United States - is closely linked to the behavior of a relatively small number of macroeconomic variables, variables that either are directly observable (such as employment or inflation) or can be estimated from current information (such as the economy’s full-employment level of output). I exclude from my definition of simple feedback policies any policy that links the policy instrument to forecasts of macroeconomic variables, such as output and inflation; hybrid policies of this type raise difficult issues that would take me too far afield today.3 Generally, the macroeconomic variables that drive simple feedback policies                                                       3  Svensson (2001) presents some arguments against the use of feedback policies based on forecasts. McCallum and Nelson (2004) and Svensson (2004b) debate this issue. 2 BIS Review 73/2004 
are chosen to reflect the central bank’s objectives, and policymakers are directed to adjust the short-term interest rate (or other policy instrument) as needed to offset deviations of these variables from their desired levels. That is, current macroeconomic conditions “feed back” into the setting of the short-term rate. The adjective “simple” refers to the presumption that, in this regime, policymakers will respond to only a relatively short list of economic variables. However, as I have already mentioned, contemporary advocates of simple feedback policies generally recommend applying these policies flexibly, subject to modification in special circumstances and as judgment dictates. A classic example of a simple feedback policy is the famous Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993). In its most basic version the Taylor rule is an equation that relates the current setting of the federal funds rate to two variables: the level of the output gap (the deviation of output from its full-employment level) and the difference between the inflation rate and the policy committee’s preferred inflation rate. Like most feedback policies, the Taylor rule instructs policymakers to “lean against the wind”; for example, when output is above its potential or inflation is above the target, the Taylor rule implies that the federal funds rate should be set above its average level, which (all else being equal) should slow the economy and bring output or inflation back toward the desired range.4 Numerous simple feedback policies other than those based on the Taylor rule have been proposed and analyzed.5How does the use of simple feedback policies address the issues I raised earlier - namely, the problem of limited information and the need to account for private-sector expectations when making policy? With respect to the informational constraints, advocates argue that policies of this type, if judiciously chosen, are likely to give reasonably good results even when policymakers’ knowledge about the economy and its underlying structure is severely limited. The principal evidence for this claim comes from computer simulations of mathematical models of the economy. Specifically, researchers have attempted to identify particular simple feedback policies that lead to good economic outcomes when applied to a range of alternative economic models (McCallum, 1988; Taylor, 1999; Orphanides and Williams, 2002; Levin and Williams, 2003). As it turns out, simple feedback policies that produce good results in a variety of simulated economic environments - so-called robust policies - can often be found. Proponents of simple feedback policies argue that, as we are far from certain about which of many possible economic models provides the best description of the U.S. economy, the safest course is to adopt one of these robust feedback policies, modified as necessary by policymakers’ insight and judgment, and to stick with it.6The use of simple feedback policies also addresses to some degree the complications raised by the role of private-sector expectations. Because simple feedback policies link the central bank’s policy instrument to a short list of macroeconomic variables, these policies should be relatively easy for the public to understand and to use in forming expectations of the way monetary policy will evolve in the future. Say, for example, that the feedback policy employed by the central bank stipulates that, when inflation rises 10 basis points, policymakers will raise the short-term interest rate 15 basis points on average, subject to possible judgmental adjustments. Armed with this information and their own                                                       4 Actually, the Taylor rule has the stronger implication that the nominal funds rate should rise more than one-for-one when inflation rises, implying an increase in the real funds rate as well (this prescription is the so-called Taylor principle). The Taylor principle seems likely to be a feature of any good monetary policy and thus provides an important guidepost for policymakers. 5 For example, one proposal would have the Federal Reserve adjust the growth of the monetary base in response to current macroeconomic conditions (McCallum, 1988). Another would replace the output gap in the Taylor rule with output growth, a variable that (unlike the output gap) can be measured directly without reference to unobserved variables like “full-employment output” (Orphanides and Williams, 2002). 6 Robust feedback policies may also be useful when members of the policy committee disagree among themselves about how the economy works, if such a policy seems likely to produce acceptable results in each of the competing models or frameworks. Although the simulation-based literature described in the text has produced many valuable insights, it also has a number of shortcomings: First, in conducting simulation exercises, researchers of necessity can consider only a relatively small number of simple and highly stylized economic models out of the large universe of possible alternatives. Thus, simulations cannot demonstrate conclusively that any particular simple feedback policy would be robust to the types of uncertainty actually faced by policymakers. Second, although these analyses are predicated on the assumption that policymakers do not know the structure of the economy, they usually assume (somewhat inconsistently) that private agents not only know the true model but also know the central bank’s feedback policy, which allows them to form accurate policy expectations. Allowing for symmetrical uncertainty on the part of policymakers and private agents is difficult analytically but might produce different results. Third, in assessing competing policies, these analyses (with some exceptions) often ignore the possibilities that policymakers will learn from their mistakes, modify or abandon policies that are producing bad results, or take into account their uncertainty about the underlying economic structure when they form their policies. BIS Review 73/2004 3 
estimates of how strong inflation pressures are likely to be over the next few quarters, financial market participants should be able to forecast future values of the short-term interest rate, allowing them to price bonds and other financial assets more efficiently. Because, under a simple feedback policy, private-sector expectations are likely to be broadly consistent with the central bank’s plans, the effectiveness of monetary policy would be enhanced as well. The second general approach to making monetary policy is what I am today calling a forecast-based policy (Svensson, 2004c). As the name suggests, under a forecast-based policy regime, policymakers must predict how the economy is likely to respond in the medium term - say, over the next six to eight quarters - to alternative plans for monetary policy. For example, monetary policy makers might be interested in evaluating a strategy of keeping the federal funds rate low for a period against an alternative plan that implies a gradual rise in rates.7 Under a forecast-based approach, for each policy plan under consideration, the policymakers and their staffs must make their best guess of how the economy is likely to evolve should that plan be implemented. They may also try to assess the likelihood of outcomes other than their principal scenario. For example, they might conclude that a certain policy plan is likely to produce good results under most circumstances but that less-probable scenarios also exist under which the policy plan under consideration would lead to very bad results. Taking both their baseline forecast and the various risks to that forecast into account, policymakers then choose the plan that seems most likely to produce the best results overall. Their current choice of interest rate corresponds to the first step in implementing the preferred plan. This process is to be repeated at each meeting, with the policy plan being modified as necessary in response to new information or new knowledge about the economy. How do forecast-based policies deal with informational constraints and the role of expectations, the two issues I raised at the beginning of my remarks? Clearly, forecast-based policies require more information to implement than simple feedback policies, a fact that is often stressed by opponents of this approach. Indeed, opponents of this approach argue, a major risk of using forecast-based policies is that monetary policy makers, like other human beings, may be prone to thinking that they know more than they really do. Excessive optimism about what monetary policy can realistically accomplish, some claim, might conceivably lead to worse economic outcomes than would a more intellectually modest stance. In response to this critique, proponents of forecast-based policies suggest that our ability to forecast the economy, though modest, is not nil, and that we should make use of the knowledge we do have. In particular, they note, the use of forecast-based policies does not require that the policy committee members adhere strictly to a particular econometric model or economic theory. Economic forecasts, in central banks as in the private sector, typically reflect the output of a suite of models and statistical methods, plus a heavy dose of the judgment and insights of experienced economists. Forecasts can also be structured to take into account model and data uncertainty - for example by down-weighting changes in variables, such as the output gap, that are known to be poorly measured (Williams, 2004). So long as policymakers and their staffs remain appropriately humble about their forecasting ability and their knowledge of the economy, proponents argue, forecast-based policies are likely to provide better results than simple feedback policies. Supporters also point out that, in comparison with simple feedback policies, the forecast-based approach provides more guidance about how to incorporate judgment and special information into policymaking. As I have noted, advocates of both approaches agree that, in principle, good policy practice leaves scope for discretion and the use of expert judgment. But how, specifically, is this to be done? Simple feedback policies, which presume a good deal of agnosticism about the economy’s underlying structure, do not provide a clear framework for answering this question, except in very qualitative terms. Under a forecast-based approach, in contrast, the answer is straightforward: Judgment or special information should affect policy choice to the extent that it affects the forecast or the risks to the forecast. For example, simulations of an econometric model may imply that policy A is likely to produce better outcomes than policy B; but if expert judgment suggests that the model’s                                                       7 More realistically, the plan might include contingent elements; for example, it might involve keeping the funds rate low unless inflation begins to rise, in which case rates would be allowed to rise as well. Stipulating a policy plan, at least in general terms, is essential in the context of forecast-based policies, as specifying only the current value of the policy rate does not provide enough information to construct a forecast. 4 BIS Review 73/2004 
forecasts do not take special information or circumstances fully into account, or that policy A entails some economic risks not captured by the model, then policy B may be preferred instead. What about the role of private-sector expectations in determining the effect of policy? Again the information requirements of forecast-based policies are relatively more demanding. In contrast to the case of simple feedback policies, under a forecast-based policy financial market participants have no simple formula to guide them in forming expectations about future short-term rates; instead, they must infer the likely course of policy based on their own economic forecasts and their knowledge of policymakers’ outlook and objectives. Given the complexity of the central bank’s forecasting and policy evaluation processes, making these inferences is a daunting challenge. Clearly, under a forecast-based policy, central bankers have scope to provide considerable help to the private sector in its attempts to anticipate policy changes. To the extent that policymakers can accurately communicate their outlook, objectives, and tactics to the public, financial markets will be more efficient and monetary policy more effective (Bernanke, 2004). I will return to the issue of communication shortly. The policy framework of the Federal Reserve It would be nice, at this point, if I could tell you definitively whether simple feedback policies or forecast-based policies represent the superior approach to making monetary policy. But drawing strong conclusions at this juncture would be premature, to say the least. The debate in the monetary economics literature remains lively. Moreover, to some degree, central bank practice remains eclectic. At the Federal Reserve, both simple feedback and forecast-based approaches are used to provide information to policymakers. For example, FOMC members routinely compare their policy choices with both the prescriptions of various forms of the Taylor rule (as noted, a type of simple feedback policy) and the results of model simulations and forecasting exercises undertaken by staff at the Board and at the twelve Reserve Banks (as required by the forecast-based approach).8Although I will not try here to resolve the deeper debate about frameworks, I can say something about the degree to which central banks rely on these approaches in practice. Both simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies influence how policymakers think about their decisions, as I have just noted. However, in my judgment, reliance on these two approaches is not symmetric; instead, the forecast-based approach has become increasingly dominant in the monetary policymaking of leading central banks. This dominance is reflected in the resources that central banks devote to data collection and modeling and in the increasing sophistication and detail of central bank forecasts.9 Indeed, a number of central banks with explicit inflation objectives publish regular forecasts and closely link monetary policy decisions to those forecasts.10The Federal Reserve does not explicitly link policy actions to forecasts, but projections of how the economy is likely to perform under different policy plans are nevertheless central to the monetary policy process in the United States; that is, the Federal Reserve relies primarily on the forecast-based approach for making policy. To provide some evidence for this assertion, as well as some reasons for it, I draw your attention to a speech that Chairman Greenspan made earlier this year, entitled “Risk and Uncertainty in Monetary Policy” (Greenspan, 2004). To be sure, the Chairman’s remarks make clear that he is profoundly aware of the uncertainties that policymakers must face in making their decisions, and he is appropriately cautious about relying too heavily on any particular model, theory, or                                                       8 Reifschneider, Stockton, and Wilcox (1997) describe the forecasting process and its role in the policymaking process at the Federal Reserve. 9 Sims (2002) analyzes the policy process in four major central banks, including the Federal Reserve. He describes the central role played by forecasts of inflation and output, developed by a combination of models and expert judgment. Forecasts may be contingent on different assumptions about the policy path or about the shocks hitting the economy. To an increasing degree, forecasts are accompanied with measures of uncertainty, such as the “fan charts” published by the Bank of England to describe the range of statistically probable outcomes. To obtain a more accurate assessment of the current state of the economy and to improve forecasts, central bank staffs collect and analyze large amounts of data; the hunger for data seems inconsistent with a simple feedback policy, which uses limited data inputs. Sims criticizes certain aspects of the forecasting methodologies that are used and suggests improvements, but he does not question that these central banks put forecasting at the center of their policymaking. 10 In a comprehensive study of twenty inflation-targeting central banks, Fracasso, Genberg, and Wyplosz (2001) find that nineteen of the twenty routinely report their forecasts to the public. Forecast horizons typically range from one to two years, with two countries (New Zealand and Switzerland) extending their forecasts to three years. About half the central banks studied use fan charts to communicate the uncertainty of the forecasts. BIS Review 73/2004 5 
data series. Nevertheless, his speech presents several reasons for concluding that good policies must be primarily forecast-based. These reasons include the need for preemptive policymaking, the importance of taking account of the changing structure of the economy, and the value of what he terms a risk-management approach to policy. I will discuss each of these briefly. Preemption refers to the idea that policymakers achieve better results when they act in advance to forestall developing problems. Early action works best both because monetary policy works with a lag and because developing problems (such as rising inflation) may often be defused at lower cost in their early stages. In principle, simple feedback policies are not inconsistent with a preemptive approach; however, to the extent that each episode has unique features, more information than can be captured in a simple feedback policy may be needed to deal effectively with emerging issues. Referring to monetary policy developments in the 1980s, Greenspan writes: In recognition of the lag in monetary policy’s impact on economic activity, a preemptive response to the potential for building inflationary pressures was made an even more important feature of policy. As a consequence, this approach elevated forecasting to an even more prominent place in policy deliberations. Structural changes in the economy are notoriously difficult to assess as they happen, but to the extent that such changes can be identified and incorporated into the central bank’s forecast, forecast-based policies are again likely to perform better than simple feedback policies. In the mid-1990s, Chairman Greenspan and his FOMC colleagues famously recognized an important structural change, an apparent increase in trend productivity growth. To quote the Chairman’s speech: As a consequence of the improving trend in structural productivity growth that was apparent from 1995 forward, we at the Fed were able to be much more accommodative to the rise in economic growth than our past experiences would have deemed prudent. In short, upon determining that an important structural change was occurring, the FOMC did not feel constrained to respond to current developments in output and inflation as it had in the past - an indication that the Committee’s policymaking was based on a forecast-based analysis, not a simple feedback approach. Perhaps the most interesting confirmation of the role of forecasts in Federal Reserve policymaking, however, is Chairman Greenspan’s description of what he calls the risk-management approach to monetary policy. The risk-management approach is clearly a forecast-based policy. In describing the implementation of this approach, Greenspan describes how models and expert judgment are combined to project not only the most likely scenarios for the economy but also what amounts to a probability distribution of possible economic outcomes. Under the risk-management approach, policymakers choose the policy strategy that implies the most desirable of these probability distributions. To quote Greenspan one more time: Given our inevitably incomplete knowledge. . . . a central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes about that path. The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy. Moreover, under the risk-management approach, models, judgments, forecasts, and policies are continually updated in light of new information, as theory would suggest. Operationally, the risk-management approach differs from the forecast-based policies described in much of the monetary economics literature in only one important respect. For simplicity, researchers have generally analyzed forecast-based policies under the assumption that policymakers care only about average economic outcomes. However, in practice, policymakers are often concerned not only with the average or most likely outcomes but also with the risks to their objectives posed by relatively low-probability events. For example, although the probability last year of a pernicious deflation in the United States was small, the potential consequences of that event were sufficiently worrisome that the possibility of its occurring could not be ignored. In that spirit, Greenspan’s risk-management approach sensibly reflects the fact that the entire distribution of possible outcomes, not just the average or most likely expected outcome, matters for policy choice. This view is certainly realistic, and the analysis of forecast-based policies when the central bank cares about the whole probability distribution of potential outcomes is beginning to receive more attention in the literature (see, for example, Svensson, 2004a). To reiterate, however, the policy framework espoused by Chairman Greenspan is very much a forecast-based approach; indeed, because it requires making judgments about unlikely 6 BIS Review 73/2004 
as well as likely economic outcomes, it places greater demands on our ability to forecast and to assess risks than do simpler forecast-based approaches that focus on average outcomes only. As I mentioned earlier, I will not try to draw definite conclusions today about the relative merits of simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies. I note, however, that not only have most central banks chosen to rely most heavily on forecast-based policies but also that the results, at least in recent years, have generally been quite good, as most economies have enjoyed low inflation and overall economic stability.11 So long as this good performance persists, at least, the simple feedback approach will face a sort of Catch-22 problem: Without a demonstrated record of success, central banks will be reluctant to adopt this approach; but unless some central banks begin to rely on simple feedback policies, real-world evidence in support of this approach will be lacking.12Flexibility and communication In previous talks I have argued that clear communication by the central bank is an important element of effective monetary policy (Bernanke, 2004). I will conclude with a few brief remarks about how the distinction between simple feedback policies and forecast-based policies bears on the value of central bank communication and on the relationship between central bank communication and policy flexibility. Central bank communication and transparency are important precisely because of the role of private-sector expectations in determining the effectiveness of monetary policy, a theme I have highlighted today. The economic stimulus provided by monetary policy depends mostly on longer-term interest rates, which in turn are largely determined by the expectations of financial market participants about the future course of monetary policy. As a general matter, the more guidance the central bank can provide the public about how policy is likely to evolve (or about the principles on which policy decisions will be based), the greater the chance that market participants will make appropriate inferences - and thus the greater the probability that long-term interest rates will move in a manner consistent with the outlook and objectives of the monetary policy committee. My discussion today suggests, however, that the benefit of central bank communication depends crucially on the policy approach that is used. As I have noted, if the central bank follows a simple feedback policy (with relatively few judgmental deviations), the private sector’s problem of inferring future policy actions is greatly simplified. The principal task of market participants in this case would be to forecast the macroeconomic variables featured in the simple feedback policy, from which the course of policy could be inferred with reasonable accuracy. Extensive communication by the central bank may not be essential when a simple feedback policy is employed, except in those cases when policymakers decide to deviate substantially from the prescriptions of the simple feedback relationship. Under the forecast-based approach, in contrast, the public will generally find inferring the likely course of policy to be a great deal more difficult. In that regime, policy plans depend in a complex way on policymakers’ outlooks, risk assessments, and objectives, which the public is unlikely to deduce accurately without guidance. Clear communication thus appears to be especially important for central banks that employ a forecast-based approach to policy - a category that includes most contemporary central banks, including the Federal Reserve. This conclusion bears in turn on the relationship between communication and policy flexibility in modern central banking. One sometimes hears the view that providing information to the public about the central bank’s forecasts, plans, and objectives inhibits the flexibility of policy by effectively restricting policymakers’ future choices. This claim might be correct if the current setting of the federal funds rate fully described the overall degree of monetary stimulus or restraint, in the same way that the                                                       11 I attribute this improved performance not only to technical improvements in modeling and forecasting but, perhaps more importantly, to increased attention by policymakers to the objective of keeping inflation low and stable. The framework of what has been called constrained discretion - the idea that short-run stabilization policy must be constrained by the requirement that inflation remain low and stable - has enhanced overall stability by anchoring inflation expectations while giving policymakers some leeway to respond to short-run disturbances (Bernanke, 2003). 12 An alternative approach to evaluating feedback policies is to compare their predictions to actual policy decisions during periods in which monetary policy was judged to be “successful.” Kozicki (1999) performs this exercise for Taylor rules and concludes that they do not provide robust guides to policy. In any case, this evaluation method has the shortcoming that it does not allow for the possibility that the use of an alternative policy approach would change how the private sector forms its expectations, which in turn would affect the optimal policy path. BIS Review 73/2004 7 
position of the gas pedal at a particular moment fully describes the impetus that a driver is providing to his or her vehicle. In that case, central bank talk could only limit future policy options, much as providing an advance itinerary for an automobile trip may reduce the flexibility to take unplanned detours if required. However, as we have seen, the automotive analogy is a poor one. Monetary policy works largely through indirect channels - in particular, by influencing private-sector expectations and thus long-term interest rates. Consequently, failing to communicate with the public does not create genuine policy flexibility but only reduces the potency and predictability of the effects of given policy actions. To keep monetary policy both flexible and effective, particularly under a forecast-based approach to policy like that employed by the Federal Reserve, clear communication on the part of the central bank is essential. 8 BIS Review 73/2004 
European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 2 December 2004. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. All in all, the short-term outlook for inflation remains worrisome, but our assessment of price developments over the medium term is unchanged. At the current juncture oil price developments are having a sizeable impact on consumer prices in the euro area, while there is no significant evidence that stronger underlying domestic inflationary pressures are building up. Accordingly, we have left the key ECB interest rates unchanged at their historically low levels. At the same time, we recognise the existence of upside risks to price stability over the medium term. Continued vigilance is of the essence with regard to those risks. I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. After the positive developments in the first half of 2004, economic growth has moderated in the second half. In the third quarter of the year, real GDP growth is estimated to have been only 0.3% quarter on quarter, after 0.7% and 0.5% in the previous two quarters. According to Eurostat, the contribution of net exports turned negative, reflecting in particular high import growth, and private consumption was subdued, probably dampened by higher oil prices. At the same time, investment growth increased and inventories were built up. The available survey information for October and November points to ongoing growth in the fourth quarter, albeit at a more moderate pace than in the first half of this year. The conditions remain in place for economic growth to proceed. On the external side, while global growth is showing some signs of moderation, it nonetheless is expected to remain robust. Euro area exports should continue to benefit from global demand conditions. On the domestic side, investment should be supported further by the very favourable financing conditions in the euro area, improved earnings and greater corporate efficiency gained through business restructuring. Finally, scope exists for private consumption to strengthen, particularly if uncertainties surrounding the extent and pace of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms are reduced. Accordingly, we expect a gradual recovery in euro area activity over the next two years, with somewhat more moderate growth rates due to the impact of oil prices. This is also reflected in the Eurosystem staff projections. Euro area real GDP growth is projected to be between 1.6% and 2.0% on average in 2004, between 1.4% and 2.4% in 2005 and between 1.7% and 2.7% in 2006. Available forecasts from international and private sector organisations convey a broadly similar picture. Downside risks to these projections stem in particular from potentially unfavourable developments in the oil market. In order to limit such risks, second-round effects in wage and price-setting must be avoided and fiscal authorities should refrain from taking measures which would prolong or distort the necessary adjustment process. Moreover, the degree of competition in the euro area energy sector is an important factor in allowing higher oil prices to be absorbed without significant distortions. Further progress in increasing competition in this sector would be highly beneficial. Turning to consumer prices, annual HICP inflation was 2.2% in November, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, down from 2.4% in October. Over the coming months, inflation rates of above 2% are likely to persist, and some temporary further increase from current levels cannot be excluded. Looking further ahead, however, the information available so far indicates that HICP inflation would fall below 2% in the course of 2005 if no further adverse shocks occurred and it does not suggest that stronger underlying inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area. Wage increases have remained contained over recent quarters and, in the context of ongoing moderate growth and weak labour markets, this trend should continue in the future. Producer prices are rising, but this remains concentrated on energy and intermediate goods, which should limit the pass-through. These views are also embodied in the Eurosystem staff projections. Average annual HICP inflation is projected to lie between 2.1% and 2.3% in 2004. As the impact of recent oil price increases and the effects of previous indirect tax and administered price rises gradually dissipate, annual HICP inflation is projected to be between 1.5% and 2.5% in 2005 and 1.0% and 2.2% in 2006. These projections are broadly consistent with forecasts recently released by international and private sector organisations. BIS Review 73/2004 1 
Several upside risks need to be taken into account. Concerns relate in particular to future oil price developments and, more generally, to the potential risk of second-round effects in wage and price-setting throughout the economy. Further developments in indirect taxes and administered prices also need to be monitored closely. Further insight into the outlook for price developments, at medium to longer-term horizons, is provided by the monetary analysis. The latest monetary data confirm that the downward trend in annual M3 growth observed from the middle of 2003 has not continued in recent months and has even reversed. Over the course of 2004, monetary dynamics have been driven by two opposing forces. On the one hand, the historically very low level of interest rates in the euro area has stimulated M3 dynamics, in particular demand for the most liquid components of M3 contained in the narrow aggregate M1. On the other hand, portfolio allocation behaviour has tended to normalise over the past year following the exceptionally strong preference for liquidity observed during the period of heightened economic and financial uncertainty between 2001 and mid-2003. However, investors’ preference for liquid assets seems to have remained greater than would typically be expected at the current stage of the economic cycle, possibly due to the fact that the economic and financial uncertainties in recent years have been relatively strong and protracted. The very low level of interest rates is also fuelling private sector demand for credit. In particular, the demand for loans for house purchase has continued to be robust, supported also by strong house price dynamics in several euro area countries. Growth in loans to non-financial corporations has picked up further in recent months. As a result of the persistently high growth in M3 over the past few years, there remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary economic growth. This could pose risks to price stability over the medium term. To sum up, the economic analysis suggests that underlying domestic inflationary pressures are contained, but a number of medium-term upside risks to price stability need to be monitored closely. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability over the medium term. It is of the essence to avoid any spillover from short-term consumer price developments to long-term inflation expectations. As regards fiscal policies, forthcoming budgets and stability programmes should send strong and confidence-building signals, namely that sound public finances and growth-friendly structural adjustments in public finances are being pursued. Concerning the European institutional framework, the Stability and Growth Pact and the excessive deficit procedure are the key fiscal cornerstones of EMU. These must remain firm. The Pact and the excessive deficit procedure should be fully respected in their current form, while their implementation could be improved, in particular as regards the preventive arm of the Pact. Finally, let me support the calls expressed in the report of the High Level Group chaired by Wim Kok to renew the impetus in the Lisbon process and to sharpen its focus. In this context, we restate our strong support for all efforts on the part of governments, parliaments and social partners implementing the reform agenda and focusing on those reforms that will support employment growth, foster investment and stimulate innovation and productivity. Progress in this direction will not only enhance the underlying growth potential of the euro area economy over the medium term but will also help to bolster consumer and business confidence over a shorter horizon. We are now at your disposal for questions. 2 BIS Review 73/2004 
Mervyn King: What fates impose - facing up to uncertainty Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Eighth British Academy Annual Lecture 2004, London, 1 December 2004. The references can be found on the Bank of England’s website. I am indebted to David Aikman, Gertjan Vlieghe and Tony Yates who worked closely with me on the subject of this lecture over a long period. They should truly be regarded as co-authors. I am also very grateful to John Campbell, Gerd Gigerenzer, Robert May, Jim Poterba and many colleagues at the Bank for helpful comments and discussions. I would like to thank Tony Leandro (Actuarial Profession), the Met Office, Helen Bray and Adrian Gallup (both of the Government Actuary’s Department) for help in gathering and interpreting data used in this lecture. Kath Begley provided excellent research assistance. *      *      * “What fates impose, that men must needs abide; It boots not to resist both wind and tide”. (William Shakespeare, Henry VI part 3, Act IV Scene 3) 1. Introduction My subject tonight is risk: how we think about, how we talk about, and how we manage risk. So let me start by thanking all of you for coming and taking the risk of spending an hour with a central banker. Few writers have put central bankers in their place, but one of them was Nancy Mitford, whose centenary we celebrated last Sunday. In The Pursuit of Love and Love in a Cold Climate she describes the marriage of Linda, the heroine, to the son of the Governor of the Bank of England. The marriage between Linda and the incredibly boring Tony is doomed from the outset. As Lady Montdore explained, “Bankers don’t seem to be much to look at - so extraordinarily unsuitable having to know them at all, poor things, let alone marry them”. I don’t suppose Lady Montdore would have come to this lecture, but if she had I would point out to her that life is full of surprises. Risk, luck, fate, uncertainty, probability theory - we all have names for the game of chance. Most decisions in life involve risk. Sometimes we embrace it, as when we enjoy a bet on the Grand National, and sometimes we avoid it, as when we insure our houses against fire. The playing of the hand we are dealt may be a pleasure in bridge but a burden in life. We accept that Lady Luck has her part to play in our personal lives. But in our collective life - public policy - the role of probabilities rarely takes centre stage. An informed discussion of public policy issues, however, requires an analysis of the risks and uncertainties involved. Whether in policies for health or transport, matters monetary or meteorological, in times of war and peace, decisions should reflect a balance of risks. Yet policy debates continue to be permeated by the “illusion of certainty”.1The reluctance to give adequate prominence to risks may reflect the fact that many of us feel uncomfortable with formal statements of probabilities. Probability theory is relatively recent in our intellectual history, dating back to a flowering of ideas around 1660 from Pascal, Leibniz, Huygens and others.2 Despite advances since then, statistical thinking remains prone to confusion and is often avoided. Television weather forecasts in Britain rarely employ the language of probabilities used by the meteorologists themselves. Professor Gigerenzer of the Max Planck Institute in Berlin has demonstrated in a series of studies how poorly doctors, lawyers, and other professionals understand probabilities. And despite Seneca’s maxim that “luck never made a man wise”, airport bookshops stock titles on how to become rich by successful investors and entrepreneurs who are confident that their success is the result of outstanding business acumen rather than good fortune. Many of these misunderstandings stem from a failure to grasp basic statistical concepts. Juries are not informed that, in a country of our size, multiple cot deaths are likely to occur several times a year, that several people will have DNA that matches the incriminating sample, and that in themselves these                                                       1 To use the phrase of Professor Gerd Gigerenzer who has done more than anyone to draw attention to the lack of public understanding of risk. 2 For an intellectual history of probability theory see Hacking (1975) and Bernstein (1996). BIS Review 73/2004 1 
coincidences are not evidence of guilt. Bookshops do not stock such titles as “I would have been a billionaire if only Lady Luck had been faithful”.3In my lecture tonight I want to illustrate two propositions. First, in a wide range of collective decisions it is vital to think in terms of probabilities. We cannot avoid taking decisions, so we must accept the need to analyse the uncertainty that inevitably surrounds them. H.G. Wells is often reported as saying that, “Statistical thinking will one day be as necessary for efficient citizenship as the ability to read and write”. And that is even more true today when we are inundated with statistics from every quarter. Second, in order that public discussion can be framed in terms of risks, the public needs to receive accurate and objective information about the risks. Transparency and honesty about risks should be an essential part of both the decision-making process and the explanation of decisions. I want to illustrate those two propositions by considering as an example public policy about pensions - an issue, you might think, of particular interest to many of us in the Academy. When the Pensions Commission reported in October, it highlighted the financing gap in our present system. But we must not lose sight of the equally important question of what are the risks incurred in pension provision and how should they be shared among us? It is not my intention to make any recommendations. That is for the Pensions Commission next year, and the Government in its turn. But I do want to show that risk is at the heart of the issue. 2. The nature of risk “In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes” wrote Benjamin Franklin in 1789. Great man though Franklin was, it is clear that there is indeed substantial uncertainty both about death, or at least its timing, and the contributions or taxes required to pay for our pensions. When thinking of how much to save for retirement, there are three main risks to consider. First, how much will we be earning in the future? Second, what will be the rate of return on our savings? Third, how long are we likely to live? Tonight I shall focus exclusively on longevity risk - the uncertainty about how long we shall live - in order to focus on my two propositions about probabilistic thinking and public policy.4None of us know how long we shall live. But we can assess our chances by looking at the experience of others. A key distinction is between individual and collective risk. Chart 1 plots the observed mortality rates at different ages for women in England and Wales in 2002, the most recent year for which detailed data are available. (A similar story can be told for men). The most common age of death for women was 87, but many died at very different ages. Mortality among individuals varies greatly - individual risk. But there is also significant uncertainty about the average length of life of a generation as a whole - collective risk. Longevity has changed markedly over time. Chart 2 shows female mortality in England and Wales in both 1902 and 2002. It shows the remarkable reduction in infant mortality during the twentieth century as well as the fall in mortality in middle age. Of particular relevance to decisions on pensions is the expectation of life conditional on reaching retirement age. That is directly relevant to the purchase of an annuity on retirement. Over the past century the normal retirement age in public service in this country has been constant at age 60. Chart 3 shows the distribution of deaths by age conditional on having reached the age of 60 in England and Wales in both 1902 and 2002. A woman who was 60 in 1902, and subject to the mortality rates of that year, would have expected to live for another 14½ years. By 2002 that expectation had increased to 23½ years. Individual risk - that we die either earlier or later than the average for our cohort - can be insured by taking out life insurance against early death or by purchasing an annuity to insure against a later                                                       3 Among recent discussions of misperceptions of probability are Gigerenzer (2002) and Taleb (2001). 4 There is a large literature on uncertainty about earnings and productivity growth; see, for example, MaCurdy (1982), Abowd and Card (1989) and Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). Uncertainty about future returns on financial assets is the essence of the modelling of financial markets. An excellent introduction to this area is contained in the two 2003 Nobel lectures by Robert Engle (2004) and Clive Granger (2004). 2 BIS Review 73/2004 
death.5 Collective risk - that average expectation of life will rise or fall in the future - cannot, by definition, be shared among members of the same generation. The principle of insuring individual longevity risk is that those who live longer than average can be paid using the contributions of those who die earlier than average. But if the average itself rises all contributions must increase - there is no possibility for insuring changes in the average from within the cohort. Can we quantify this risk? The expectation of life has risen significantly over the past century. But how will it change in the future? To answer that question we need to model and quantify longevity risk. 3. Modelling and quantifying risks Quantitative modelling has been one of the great advances of the social sciences over the past fifty years. But forecasts, whether of longevity or any other economic or social variable, inevitably require a judgment about how far the past can inform us about the future. Projecting longevity is fraught with difficulty. In his First Essay on Population, Malthus wrote in 1798 that “with regard to the duration of human life, there does not appear to have existed, from the earliest ages of the world, to the present moment, the smallest permanent symptom, or indication, of increasing prolongation”. We know now that in 1798 life expectancy in Britain was around 40. Today it is nearly 80. There is no agreed method of forecasting life expectancy. The most widespread approach is to assume that life expectancy will gradually approach some limit determined by medical knowledge and our choice of lifestyle. A key uncertainty is what the limit to life is, and demographers have pursued many ways of estimating it.6 But successive forecasts of the limit to life have been disproved as actual life expectancy data surpassed the supposed limit. Chart 4 plots the forecast limits to female life against the life expectancy achieved by the longest lived female population. As life spans have increased, forecasts of the limit to life have been revised up. The fact is that we simply do not know how life expectancy will change in the future. Unforeseen, indeed unimagined, developments in medical science could change the prospects for life expectancy radically. In the end we have to face up to our ignorance. Providing insurance against longevity, whether as private annuities or public pensions, rests on an ability to calculate the risks involved. But our present degree of knowledge means that, in the terminology of Frank Knight (1921), there is both risk, which can be quantified, and uncertainty, which cannot. The extent of past uncertainty about life expectancy can be seen in the revisions to its forecasts made over the past 20 years by the Government Actuary’s Department. Nor has the financial sector itself proved better at forecasting. Chart 5 shows successive forecasts of expected length of life for men aged 60 published by the Actuarial Profession, a body of life assurance companies and annuity providers. It shows how reductions in mortality were expected by the industry to lead to rises in length of life. For example, the pink line shows the Actuarial Profession forecast made in 1980 that a man who was 60 in that year could expect to live another 20 years. At that time, it was thought that someone who reached 60 in 1999 would live a further 21 years. But by 1999 the forecast was that a man of 60 would live another 26 years. Over a twenty year period, expected length of life was revised up by 5 years. Length of life has risen faster than the industry anticipated, as can be seen by the                                                       5 The first estimates of mortality rates using bills of mortality from the City of London were published by John Graunt in 1662. But the widespread use of such data to price annuities began only with the calculations of Richard Price in 1780 and the Institute of Actuaries in 1869. In Holland more accurate calculations of the prices of annuities date back to de Witt in 1671. See Poterba (2004). 6 Manton et al (1991) and Caselli and Vallin (2001) describe alternative approaches to inferring the limit to human life. Some estimates assume that life expectancy will converge to that of the longest-lived population; for example, that life expectancy in the West will rise to that in Japan, the country with the highest life expectancy. But the level in Japan has itself increased significantly over the past century. So what determines Japan’s life expectancy? Another approach is to examine how life expectancy might change if everyone adopted lifestyle patterns that increase longevity. Mormons and Seventh Day Adventists seem to live longer than the rest of us, but exactly which aspects of their lifestyle we should adopt is not entirely clear. See, for example, Enstrom (1989). Yet another approach is to work out the contributions that different human diseases make to premature death, and calculate the hypothetical life expectancy that would result if medical science were to be able to eliminate these diseases. This ‘cause elimination’ approach was adopted in the 1950s by Pichat. The number derived was 75. This is the number that the UN used until the early 1980s in their population projections. The number used from then on has been about 85, based on a similar approach by Benjamin (1982) and Olshansky et.al. (1990). And the evidence on a limit to increases in the human lifespan is mixed; see for example, Kannisto et.a.l. (1994) and Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999). BIS Review 73/2004 3 
upward shifts over time both in the forecasts of expected life and in the rate at which it was expected to increase.7That there are large and unavoidable uncertainties in forecasting longevity is clear. The key unknowns are evolutions in lifestyle, diseases and the ability of medical science to combat them. No amount of complex demographic modelling can substitute for good judgements about those unknowns. The danger of relying on computer modelling is well illustrated by the World Health Organisation’s early estimates of the future spread of AIDS, which, at the time, was a significant unknown in forecasting life expectancy even in developed countries. AIDS was first recognised in 1981. The virus responsible for AIDS, which we now call HIV, was identified in 1984. To date, around 20 million people are thought to have died from the disease worldwide. The proportion of those who are infected with HIV who go on to develop AIDS is now thought to be close to 100%. But the spread of HIV, and hence AIDS, has been very uneven. At the end of last year the percentage of adults infected with HIV was estimated at 0.2% in the United Kingdom, 21.5% in South Africa, 37.3% in Botswana, yet only 3.9% in Angola. Why do infection rates differ so much between countries? In the 1980s the World Health Organization and associated researchers made rather optimistic projections of the impact of AIDS on populations in Africa using extremely detailed computer models of population structure. Complex demographic models were combined with strong simplifying assumptions about sexual behaviour. Unfortunately, this led the modellers to ignore those factors most critical to the spread of AIDS. They assumed that the probability of transmitting the HIV infection was a function of the number of sexual acts, not the number of partners of infected persons. But it is crucial to distinguish between the two.8 Ten acts with one partner have a smaller impact on transmission of the infection than one act with each of ten different partners. As Professor (now Lord) May, President of the Royal Society, pointed out, ignoring this simple and crucial distinction led to a serious underestimate of the rate at which AIDS was likely to spread.9 By building elaborate models of demographic variables for which a great deal of information was available and making simple assumptions for behaviour about which little was known, the large models used by the World Health Organisation produced misleading results. The fact that few data on sexual behaviour were available was not a good reason for focusing on demographic variables - the researchers were looking for the key under the lamp-post rather than where it fell. Quantitative models are obviously essential to explain empirical evidence. But the idea of a single comprehensive model, whether of a population or an economy, which can capture all the relevant features to explain all phenomena is an illusion.10 There is no substitute for thinking about the underlying process which is generating the data. Robert May’s article “Uses and Abuses of Mathematics in Biology”, published earlier this year, should be compulsory reading for anyone involved in public policy. In pointing to the dangers of models so complex that intuition is impossible, he writes, “It makes no sense to convey a beguiling sense of ‘reality’ with irrelevant detail, when other equally important factors can only be guessed at. … Remember Einstein’s dictum: ‘models should be as simple as possible, but not more so’” (May, 2004). In many areas, successful public policy depends on a quantitative analysis of risks by experts and researchers. It is important that the general public understand that such assessments are only judgments. To enhance confidence in those judgments experts need to engage in a debate among themselves about what they know and what they do not know. On the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee the nine members debate among themselves our current state of knowledge of the                                                       7 The data in Chart 5 are for occupational pension holders of Actuarial Profession member institutions. These individuals are typically wealthier than the rest of the population, and for that reason tend to live longer. 8 Peterman et. al. (1988) found that the probability of infecting a partner was unrelated to the number of sexual acts with that partner. 9 The large models made the further simplifying assumption that the rate took one of only two values. In fact, it varies widely among the population. Robert May, and his colleague Roy Anderson, showed that a key driver of the proportion of the population eventually infected was the “variance of the rate of acquisition of new sexual partners”. Simulations of the proportion of the population ultimately infected with AIDS are sensitive to that variance, and plausible differences in the number of their partners among different people changed the estimate of the proportion likely to be infected from 25% to 90%. 10 Many non-economists believe that economists use a single “model” to explain all economic phenomena. Hence the interest of many commentators in “the model” that is alleged to generate the forecasts of inflation and economic growth published by the Bank of England. But, as we never cease pointing out, the Bank uses not one but many models to help us understand particular aspects of economic behaviour. The relevant models change from one forecast to another. 4 BIS Review 73/2004 
behaviour of the economy. The results of that discussion are published once a month, and the Committee, as it did yesterday, appears regularly in front of Parliamentary committees. So I turn now to the question of how information and judgments of risks can be communicated to the general public. 4. Communicating about risks with the public Although it is often impossible to be precise about the risks surrounding a decision, it is vital that policymakers resist the temptation to communicate a false sense of certainty. Two key principles should govern the communication of risks to the public. First, information must be provided objectively and placed in context so that risks can be assessed and understood. Second, experts and policy-makers must be open about the extent of our knowledge and our ignorance. Transparency about what we know and what we don’t know, far from undermining their credibility, helps to build trust and confidence in policy-makers. (a) (Mis)understanding probabilities The first principle states that information about probabilities should be placed in context. A simple example illustrates the difficulty we all have in interpreting probabilities when the context is unclear. The stock market is volatile and difficult, if not impossible, to predict over short periods. At the beginning of the week the chance of the market rising over the following week is roughly the same as the chance of its falling. So if I were to predict the direction of the market movement correctly for five successive weeks you might think that I knew something you didn’t. Indeed, you might be willing to subscribe to an investment service with that sort of track record. So let me explain to you how one might create the illusion of clairvoyance. Select around 6000 or so names and addresses from the London telephone directory. Divide the names into two groups. To the first write predicting that the market will rise over the coming week. To the second write predicting a fall in the market. At the end of the week keep the 3000 or so names who were given the correct prediction and discard the others. Divide those names in turn into two groups. To the first predict a rise in the market and to the second a fall. Repeat this process for five weeks, at which point there will be around 200 people to whom we could write the following letter. “You may well have been sceptical when you received our first letter, but by now you will know that we have worked out the secret of predicting successfully the direction of movement of the stock market. You know that our method really works. To subscribe to our investment service please send £5000 by return”. Quite what our President, as the former Deputy Chairman of the Financial Services Authority, would make of this scheme I do not know. But it illustrates vividly that the interpretation of ex post outcomes depends critically on understanding the ex ante process which generated those outturns. Another example shows that it is not just lay people who find statistical inference difficult. Experts of all kinds do too. The advent of DNA profiling in the 1980s led to the use of match probabilities in criminal cases. The jury is told that the probability of finding a match between the sample taken from the scene of the crime and the DNA of the defendant is, for example, only 1 in 500,000. That is sometimes taken as evidence that the probability of the defendant being innocent is also only 1 in 500,000. Such an inference is incorrect. In a city such as London where there might be about 5 million people who could have committed the crime, around ten people would have DNA that matched the relevant sample. Hence, in the absence of any other evidence, the probability that the defendant is guilty, far from being overwhelming, is only one in 10. Of course, in practice other evidence is usually available. But this incorrect statistical reasoning has swayed enough cases to be given its own name - the prosecutor’s fallacy.11The cases of Sally Clark and Angela Cannings, both convicted and imprisoned for the alleged murder of their own children, show the desperate consequences of the false use of statistics to create a presumption of guilt to resolve the cause of apparently inexplicable events. Both women were convicted by juries which had in all likelihood been influenced by the assertion that the probability of two cot deaths in the same family was extraordinarily low. That assertion was based on the assumption that cot deaths in the same family were independent events, a view for which there was                                                       11 See, for example, Thompson and Schuman (1987). BIS Review 73/2004 5 
no scientific evidence and which is a priori implausible.12 The assumption of independence was crucial to the prosecution evidence against Sally Clark that the odds of two cot deaths in a family such as hers were 1 in 73 million and so would be expected only once a century. Given the complex and conflicting medical evidence, it would not be surprising if that striking and simple statistic had played a role in helping the jury come to its conclusion. In fact, as pointed out by Professor Ray Hill, the statistical evidence on cot deaths suggests that in England and Wales we should expect several cases a year.13 Thankfully, both women were eventually released after winning their appeals, albeit largely on other grounds. Why then do probabilities cause us so much difficulty? Our understanding of probabilities evolved through counting the frequencies of various events, whether the number of days in summer on which it rains or the outcomes of tossing a coin. All this was part of our evolutionary experience long before the concept of probability was invented in the seventeenth century. In his book Reckoning with Risk, Gigerenzer argued forcefully that risks should be presented not as probabilities but in terms of natural frequencies, which correspond to our experience in counting events. Although people do understand probabilities in familiar contexts, such as betting on horse races or tossing a coin, it is not easy to calculate odds when the context is unfamiliar. (b) Explaining probabilities How then can we best present information about risks to the public? Both the Monetary Policy Committee and the Met Office face this problem almost every day: the former in explaining the outlook for inflation and the latter in forecasting the weather. Both have independently developed similar visual representations of forecasts that avoid the use of the word “probability”. Chart 6 shows the forecast for inflation over the next three years published by the Bank of England in its latest Inflation Report on 10 November 2004. It is in the form of a ‘fan chart’. We do not say that in our view inflation will be 2%, or any other number. Such a statement is incoherent because a forecast is inherently probabilistic. So we represent the uncertainties by the coloured bands in Chart 6.14 Their interpretation is as follows. If we found ourselves in economic circumstances identical to today’s on 100 occasions, we would expect that inflation would lie within the darkest central band on only 10 of those occasions. As we increase the width of the coloured section by moving from the dark central band to the lighter shades of red further out, the number of outturns that we think will lie within the section increases. The bands are drawn so that the number of outturns increases by 10 for each change of colour intensity. The inflation outturn would be expected to lie somewhere within the entire coloured area on 90 out of 100 occasions. On the same day that the Bank of England produced its forecast for inflation, the Met Office produced a forecast for the temperature in various towns over the following ten days. Chart 7 shows this ‘plume chart’, as the Met Office refers to its fan charts, for the town of Reading. I will leave a detailed explanation to meteorologists, but the interpretation of the temperature plume chart parallels that of the inflation fan chart closely. The width of the plume chart indicates the degree of uncertainty about future temperatures, and different colours suggest different probability bands. And the probability of the central temperature projection - in this case the solid blue line - is extremely small. I am not suggesting that the BBC use such charts in its forecasts, but surely it might give a little more freedom to the meteorologists to use probabilistic thinking in describing the outlook. Such charts can also be used to illustrate uncertainty about longevity. Chart 8 constructs a fan chart for female life expectancy at birth in the United Kingdom derived from the latest forecast published by the Government Actuary’s Department. The width of the fan chart shows how forecasts of life expectancy are likely to change in the future, as new information and ideas about mortality evolve,                                                       12 To understand the concept of independence consider the example of a church spire that is struck by lightning several times. Is this just coincidence (implied by the assumption that the strikes are independent of each other) or does the spire have certain characteristics that lead it to be struck regularly? Given our knowledge of spires and lightening the latter is more plausible. Similarly, there may be characteristics, genetic or other, and still largely unknown, that make particular families more likely to experience cot deaths than others. 13 Hill (2002) and (2004). See also Dawid (2004) and Eggleston (1978) for a discussion of the difficulties courts find with the concepts of conditional probability and Bayes’ theorem. 14 The forecast for inflation is based on the assumption that interest rates follow the path expected by financial markets over an average of the fifteen days prior to the finalisation of the Inflation report. 6 BIS Review 73/2004 
causing forecasts to be revised - assuming that news about life expectancy arrives in the future at about the same rate as in the past. The colour shading depicts the same probability bands as used in the fan chart for inflation that I showed earlier. Chart 8 illustrates the uncertainty about longevity. Of course, statistics and their visual representation can be both used and abused. The design of charts has gone backwards since that (shown as Chart 9) of Napoleon’s march to Moscow and subsequent retreat constructed in 1861 by Charles Joseph Minard, Inspecteur-Général des Ponts et Chaussées and, appropriately given tonight’s theme, en retraite. Brilliant in conception and the quantity of information which it conveys, the chart shows the devastating losses suffered in Napoleon’s fateful Russian campaign of 1812. So I do not underestimate the difficulties of promoting the better understanding of statistics in discussions of public policy.15 Too often figures are bandied about without a careful description of where they came from and what they might tell us. As we learn from the Rime of the Ancient Statistician (with apologies to Samuel Taylor Coleridge): Figures, figures, everywhere Enough to make us sink Figures, figures, everywhere But none to help us think. The second key principle governing the explanation of risk to the public is the open recognition of the limits of our present knowledge. The failure to do that is damaging to public confidence in policy-makers. The BSE affair showed the danger of claiming greater certainty than the science warranted. And in the Angela Cannings case, the Court of Appeal observed that, “not so long ago, experts were suggesting that newborn babies should lie on their tummies. That was advice based on the best-informed analysis. Nowadays, the advice and exhortation is that babies should sleep on their backs - Back to Sleep. This advice is equally drawn from the best possible known sources”. As the Court of Appeal pointedly continued, “It is obvious that these two views cannot both, simultaneously, be right”. Expert advice is invaluable, but it is not infallible. As Robert May said recently, “open contention of opinion is exactly what has served science so well over the centuries, and I believe we simply must learn to extend this openness to all forms of science advice in policy-making. Such open publication of advice, and frank admission of areas of uncertainty, ultimately engenders confidence” (May, 2003). That is the spirit in which the Monetary Policy Committee was created and continues to function. The challenge is to extend that spirit to other areas of policy.16Effective communication of the relevant risks is vital. Thinking about how to present information may seem to be the role of a spin doctor. But whereas a spin doctor wishes to claim certainty for the correctness of his master’s decision, presenting accurate information about risks to the electorate at large is essential to democratic accountability. As one of the more illustrious members of the profession might have said, “spin doctors don’t do doubt”. That is the trouble with much debate on public policy. As Voltaire put it, “Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is an absurd one”.175.  Managing risks Managing risks is about sharing risks with others. By finding ways of pooling risks we share both the upside and downside with others. This is beneficial because typically we dislike extremes. In the language of economics, we are ‘risk averse’. A key part of managing risk is the design of institutions that determine the ultimate incidence of risk. The Pensions Commission performed a valuable service in making us aware of the size of the shortfall in our current savings to finance future pension provision. It will report next year on various ways of closing this funding gap. But there is an additional and fundamental question of how to design a pension system which shares risk optimally among individuals and generations. Longevity risks are both individual and collective in nature. Collective risks raise difficult issues of fairness between generations. Individual risks are easier to handle.                                                       15 On the use and misuse of statistics see Best (2001) and Briscoe (2000). An outstanding analysis of common mistakes in visual representations of statistical data can be found in Tufte (1983, 1990). 16 Robert Rubin, former US Treasury Secretary in the Clinton Administration, has stressed the importance of probabilistic thinking in policy-making (Rubin and Weisberg, 2003). 17 Letter to Frederick the Great, April 16, 1767. BIS Review 73/2004 7 
In theory, individual longevity risks can be pooled through private annuity markets. As long as the provider of the annuity, typically an insurance company, knows how long we will live on average, then additional payments to the long-lived will be exactly offset by fewer payments to the short-lived. By pooling risks, annuity providers can offer insurance against longevity. But to offer a single annuity is risky. In Sense and Sensibility, Fanny Dashwood explains to her husband the drawbacks of providing an annuity to his family: “if you observe, people always live forever when there is any annuity to be paid them. An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over and over every year, and there is no getting rid of it”.18Only a small fraction of savings are invested in annuities.19 One explanation for this is that annuity providers find it difficult to distinguish the healthy from the sick ex ante, the former purchasing more annuities than the latter, leading insurance companies to offer annuities on less attractive terms thus discouraging their purchase.20 This “adverse selection” is important - it is approximately 20% more expensive to buy annuities as an individual than in a group scheme.21Collective risks raise additional problems. Longevity risk to a particular cohort can be shared only across generations. Those generations who are alive today can pool risks through financial markets. But sharing across all generations, including the unborn, requires collective or public insurance through variations in the national debt.22Consider an annuity provider who faces the risk that an increase in the average longevity of its pool of annuitants will lead to a shortfall in its funds. The annuity provider would clearly like to hedge this risk in some way. One way of doing that would be for it to have assets on its balance sheet that pay out more if the average longevity of its annuitants increases. Financial markets are currently developing ‘longevity bonds’ along these lines.23The interest rate on longevity bonds is linked to some measure of unexpected changes in average life expectancy. In the case of the recently announced European Investment Bank-BNP Paribas bond, the payout each year for the next 25 years will be a fixed sum multiplied by the proportion of people in England and Wales who were 65 in 2003 that are still living in that particular year. So if five years from now 90% of the cohort are still alive, the payment in that year will be 90% of the fixed sum. The cash flows to a buyer of this bond will decline over time, but decline less rapidly if people live longer. The demand for such a hedge against longevity risk we might expect to come from pension funds and other providers of annuities. The supply might come from lifeinsurance companies, who benefit from increased longevity to the extent that fewer early deaths mean lower claims, and financial intermediaries collecting the savings of those younger investors prepared to bear some of the longevity risk of the old.24How close private markets can get to providing the optimal amount of risk sharing is hard to say. Private annuity markets which could pool individual longevity risk are small. For collective longevity risks, the burden of unexpectedly high longevity for a particular cohort should be spread over as many generations as possible. In theory, this provides a potential role for government to share risks across generations.                                                       18 Fanny Dashwood is claiming that annuities lead to “moral hazard” to use the modern jargon: the provision of an annuity changes behaviour in a way that increases life expectancy. 19 See Yaari (1965) and Davidoff et al. (2003). For a discussion of pension arrangements in the US see Diamond (2003, 2004). 20 For a theoretical study of annuity provision under adverse selection, see Brugiavini (1993). 21 Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), for instance, note that 65 year old men who voluntarily buy annuities live about 20 percent longer than other men. Pauly and Zeng (2003) found that in the United States adverse selection made it impossible for a private market in prescription drug insurance to function. 22 It is possible that families, or more accurately dynasties, can provide such insurance themselves through changes in the bequest which they make to their descendants: passing on a larger bequest if the current generation dies earlier than expected and a smaller bequest if it survives for longer than expected. But only a small proportion of bequests seems large enough to act as a buffer in this way. 23 As far as I am aware, the first instrument offering a return specifically to aggregate longevity was issued by Swiss Re, a large reinsurance company, in 2003. 24 To the extent that insurance companies offer both life insurance and annuities, they may be able partially to hedge the risks. 8 BIS Review 73/2004 
There are two ways in which government involvement can, in principle, improve risksharing. First, collective schemes, whether compulsory or employer-based, avoid the costs of adverse selection associated with individual provision. Second, by combining taxes on current employees with deficit finance (i.e. taxes on future employees), statefunded pensions can transfer risks across generations in ways private markets cannot. Alternatively, the government could issue its own longevity bonds. Private annuity providers could use them to hedge aggregate longevity risk. By assuming longevity risk the government would make it possible for the private sector to purchase such bonds and in turn support a private market in annuities. What has happened in Britain over the past few years has been that the impossibility of obtaining longevity risk insurance has been a contributory factor to the sharp decline in private sector provision of defined benefit pensions. Over the past ten years, membership of private sector defined benefit pension schemes that are still open is estimated to have fallen by 60% (Pensions Commission, 2004). It is not clear why the market has not developed an annuity or pension product indexed to aggregate longevity which would allow financial institutions to pass the collective longevity risk onto the policy-holders. What is clear is that individuals have now been asked to take on more and more risk because the absence of annuities means that they now bear both individual and collective aspects of longevity risk. There is something to be said for the view that longevity risk is more efficiently shared collectively, leaving the private sector to provide insurance against individual mortality. The question of who should issue and who would buy longevity bonds merits further study.25I have so far discussed only longevity risk. Clearly, any discussion of pension reform must include also the other key collective risks: to productivity, rates of return and fertility among others. We do not, of course, start with a clean slate. Existing government institutions - whether by design or default - already have important risksharing properties. Means-tested pensions and other benefits, as well as the National Health Service, already give the government a major role in the sharing of risks. But in reforming our pension system, it is important to separate two issues. First, how should we pay for the cost of present pension commitments? Second, what is the right structure for our pension system: which risks should be borne individually and which collectively? A debate is needed over whether present arrangements imply too much or too little sharing of risk. We should remember also that insurance is based on ignorance - ignorance of the outcomes facing each individual. But knowledge can turn risk into certainty. The advent of genetic testing could undermine a private market in insurance against longevity and illhealth. Even if insurance companies could not require testing as a condition of insurance, the fact that tests were available could increase even further the degree of adverse selection in such insurance markets. Pooling risks caused by unequal genetic inheritance might no longer be feasible. Insurance would become instead a question about redistribution, and hence a matter for public policy. 6.  Conclusions In this lecture I have stressed that most public policy decisions are a matter of the balance of risks. There is no certainty. Indeed, it is the illusion of certainty that undermines much public debate. As Bertrand Russell said, “The whole problem of the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain of themselves, but wiser people so full of doubts”. Recognising and modelling risks means understanding the limits to our present knowledge. Communicating risk is about transparency. When information on risks is provided to the public, it is often in a form that is hard to assess. Thinking carefully about communication is important to the level of public debate. The quantity of information is less relevant than its quality - sometimes less is more. And managing risk means making choices - collective choices - on the basis of a rational shared assessment of the risks involved. We cannot avoid uncertainty. So let us face up to it.                                                        25  The question of who should bear collective longevity risk has been discussed by Blake and Burrows (2001), Blake (2003), Dowd (2003), Cox and Lin (2004a, 2004b), Willets (2004), Auerbach and Hassett (2002) among others. BIS Review 73/2004 9 
  BIS Review 73/2004 10 
   BIS Review 73/2004 11 
  12 BIS Review 73/2004 
BIS Review 73/2004 13 BIS Review 73/2004 13  
 14 BIS Review 73/2004 
Tom Alweendo: Prospects for a monetary union in the Southern African Development Community (SADC)  Address by Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the Bank of Namibia’s annual governor’s address, Windhoek, 18 November 2004.  *      *      * Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: I am happy to welcome you once again at our annual event, where over the last five years I have shared my views on a number of issues of economic nature. This evening, I am going to share with you my views on the prospects for a monetary union in the Southern African Development Community (SADC). This topic is by no means new and it has been discussed by various speakers on various occasions. However, because of its importance it is worth repeating and hopefully we will start building a consensus around the issue. The issue of monetary integration that is meant to ultimately lead to a monetary union on the African continent is being addressed at two levels. The first level of discussion is the continent-wide, where under the African Union the continent shall establish a common monetary policy and therefore a common central bank. The Association of African Central Banks (AACB) has been requested by the African Union to prepare the establishment of the African Central Bank and the time framework. The AACB has suggested a tentative work program that will see the African Central Bank being established by the year 2021. The second level of discussion with regard to monetary integration is taking place at regional level, where all five African regions are expected to work on regional monetary integration. In the Southern African region, SADC is working on a program where we are going to establish a common central bank in the region by 2016 and a common currency by 2018. The year 2016 sounds far enough, but this is a mere twelve years from now. Namibia’s position with regard to a SADC monetary union is further complicated by our membership to the CMA. At the CMA level, we have also started with preliminary discussions that more and more points at the establishment of a CMA central bank ahead of the SADC central bank. An argument could be made that since all CMA member countries are members of SADC, it will be better for Namibia to concentrate on the SADC monetary union discussions. However, this will only be true if one was certain that the SADC discussions will go ahead as per the agreed timeframe. The concern here is that the CMA is a de facto monetary union, except that the function of making monetary decisions is exercised by one member country only. This is not an acceptable arrangement and we need to find a more equitable solution where decision making power is exercised by all member countries. The decision to discuss the continental monetary integration issue at two levels was seen to be the only realistic strategy if we were to succeed. This is so because the continent is faced with diverse economic and social challenges and to try to discuss integration at continental level only will be foolhardy, at best. Joining a monetary union will mean giving up your national currency and adopting a new currency or a currency of a larger country. To some people giving up your currency is a provocative notion that could be equated to treason. This is especially true for small, developing countries that might have just gained their political independence. The idea of being subsumed by a larger country is not appealing at all. Why, then, should a country want to enter into a monetary union? The increased interest in monetary integration is closely linked to the process of globalization, especially financial globalization, which has been a dominant feature of discussions at various forums. In today’s globalized financial markets, capital has become too mobile and cross-border investment too vast. Today world financial markets are too large, economies are closely integrated and financial technology too innovative. In this context, the initiatives for free trade areas, customs unions and common markets are clearly designed as strategies of promoting a region within the global economy. Increasingly, the globalization process in terms of integrated markets is seen as a mechanism to enhance and promote the region’s BIS Review 72/2004 1 
competitiveness vis-à-vis other trading blocks and enlarged internal markets. The key elements of this process are the removal of the internal trade barriers and free flow of the factors of production especially labour and capital. In a globalised financial market, the effectiveness of an independent monetary policy is questionable, especially for small open economies with one form or the other of fixed exchange rates arrangements. It is argued that it is very hard for a country to simultaneously maintain a fixed exchange rate and an open capital market while pursuing an independent monetary policy geared towards domestic economic policy. A country can opt not to be part of the financial globalization, except that the outcome will not be desirable. What is likely to happen is that such a country will be isolated and might become further marginalized in terms of its participation in the world economy. I must also hasten to add that while globalization is being portrayed as good for the world, it is also true that in itself globalization will not benefit those countries that are not prepared to take advantage of the new system. In order to benefit from a globalised economy, I do recognize three issues that are of critical importance. First, a country needs to ensure that it has the necessary human skills capable of competing effectively within the world economy. Second, a country would need to have an institutional arrangement that conforms to international standards. Examples here are that your institutions must practice good governance; you must have an effective accounting regime; and you must have clear demarcation of functions and responsibilities among your institutions. The third issue I believe is important is an effective legal framework, where businesses and individuals alike are certain that their legal contracts are enforceable in a timely manner. In our region, the increasing interest and momentum for the creation of a monetary union seems to revolve around two main considerations. The first is that the establishment of a monetary union in combination with free trade agreements is increasingly being seen as part of a strategic push to integrate the region. In this regard, a monetary union is seen as a way of reinforcing regional cohesion and demonstrating a commitment to regional solidarity. Indeed, the harmonization and unification of monetary policy represents the deepest form of economic and financial integration. The second consideration for the formation of a monetary union is the desire to counteract perceived economic and political weakness which dates back to the period of colonial rules by putting in place regional institutions, of which a monetary union and common currency would be strong symbols. It would also appear that the launching of the European monetary union has influenced this process. A strong argument and motivation for a monetary union is that it brings a number of benefits. The most often cited benefits are the increased intra trade, price stability, increased aggregate investment, and the elimination of the exchange rate risk. It is argued that the elimination of the exchange rate risk would allow for increased capital inflow and regional investment opportunities resulting in welfare gains and growth. It also reduces transaction cost within the region incurred when changing one currency to another. Besides increased intra-trade, economic theory and experience also suggest that a single regional currency is expected to have a more stable internal and external value. Therefore, the benefits of price stability and monetary policy credibility are more likely to be realized in a monetary union. This is especially true if the regional monetary authority is autonomous in carrying out its functions and where its primary objective is price stability. It is also suggested that a monetary union would improve macroeconomic stability by ensuring fiscal and monetary policy credibility. This is necessary for attraction of investments, which eventually translates into economic growth as potential investors would only invest if they have full confidence that they would get sufficient returns on their investments. There are also costs involved in participating in a monetary union. By far the most often talked about cost, is the loss of autonomy to manage monetary policy. Arguably, national autonomy over monetary policy is supposed to give a country the maximum freedom and flexibility, through the use of various monetary instruments such as interest rates and reserve requirements, to steer the economy in a particular direction. Given that monetary policy is a key instrument of macroeconomic management, the constraints imposed by a monetary union on the pursuit of country specific objectives may therefore be viewed as constituting a hindrance to achieve country specific economic goals. This point is important especially for SADC countries that are at different stages of development and with different degree of financial and economic structures. Such diversity would make it difficult to sustain a monetary union. Therefore, having a unitary monetary policy for the region would be a daunting task 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
especially given the fact that our countries have different shocks that may require different policy responses. Yet, financial globalization has taught us that the use of an independent monetary policy is severely limited. With globalization, cross-border capital flow is inevitable and this makes independent monetary policy ineffective especially for small developing countries. The logical conclusion is that such countries will be better-off with a monetary union since they cannot, in any case, effectively implement independent monetary policy. Another cost associated with monetary union is that the ability of the government to conduct fiscal policy is constrained by the limits collectively agreed and imposed in respect of budget deficit financing. The imposition of limits on deficit financing is necessitated by the desire to prevent member states to run large unsustainable deficits that could put upward pressure on interest rates and exchange rates in the entire monetary union area. I would, however, want to believe that the restriction on deficit financing is a benefit and not a cost, because it encourages prudence in fiscal management. A monetary union will be more feasible among countries with open economies and strong trade links with each other. Furthermore, a monetary union is likely to be successful if there is a significant degree of economic convergence among the member countries in respect of some of the macroeconomic variables. In the SADC region, empirical data indicates that the region does not meet all the criteria suggested by the optimum currency area theory, neither is there convergence in most of the economic variables. The process to establish a SADC monetary union will therefore be long because of the macroeconomic convergence that must be established first. The lack of convergence in key macroeconomic variables may suggest that the region is not yet ready for a common currency. However, I must add that it may not be crucial to meet all the criteria prior to the formation of a union. It is possible for member countries to agree to meet some of the criteria only after the formation of the monetary union. Experience has also taught us that in the case of the European Union, it was not only the economic argument that was the defining factor in the formation of the monetary union, but also the political drive for unification. It is therefore important to have political champions to promote the cause for a SADC monetary union. In the European example, Germany and France were the political champions for their monetary integration. Let me conclude by saying that, in general a monetary union is desirable as it is likely to promote macro-economic stability and economic growth among member states. However, a monetary union should not be seen as an end in itself but as part of a process for wider economic integration in the region. To ensure a successful implementation of a SADC monetary union within the agreed timeframe, it is important that member countries intensify and redouble their efforts towards the realization of this noble objective. In particular, member countries would need to pursue appropriate policy measures in order to satisfy the convergence criteria. Given the importance of the issue and the sensitivities around it, it is crucial that the citizens of the member countries are properly informed of the desirability of a monetary union. A SADC monetary union will also have its unique challenges. Member countries should therefore prepare themselves if they were to optimally benefit from the new arrangement. For example, member countries would need to strategically position themselves such that they increase their share of intra trade and investment within SADC and beyond. In the case of Namibia, we need to continue with the diversification of the economy towards manufacturing and services. We also need to do more in terms of concrete action plans to develop our human capital. This is a vital area where a lot has been said so far, but there is little evidence that suggests that we are succeeding in building human capital that is ready to compete effectively in the global economy. Thank you for your attention. BIS Review 72/2004 3 
Goh Chok Tong: Building on our reputation and reaching for new horizons Address by Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 30 November 2004. *      *      * I.  Introduction: a central bank of excellence I am happy to address the MAS Staff Seminar, especially as this is the first time I am speaking to all of you. In the few months I have been Chairman, I have met many of you and been briefed on the work of MAS. I am impressed by the professionalism, dedication and dynamism of our officers. We have a good team here at MAS.  MAS has played, and continues to play, a vital role in Singapore’s development. Through its conduct of monetary policy, MAS has helped to ensure a sound macro-economic environment, so critical to our economic competitiveness, stability and success. MAS’ supervisory and developmental efforts have also contributed immensely to the growth, dynamism and resilience of the financial sector. Our financial sector employs 5% of the workforce but accounts for about 12% of GDP. MAS has earned a reputation as a central bank of excellence. We are well respected as a regulator for our technical skills, credibility and integrity. We must build on this and reach for new horizons. This is the only way to ensure that Singapore stays ahead of the competition. Today, I would like to focus on the key strategic thrusts for MAS over the next five years. II.  The changing geopolitical landscape In conducting monetary policy, in supervising financial institutions and in developing Singapore as a financial centre, MAS must be keenly aware of the larger geopolitical picture. International events and politics play a big part in the economic prospects of our region, including Singapore. Let me first sketch for you the geopolitical situation. Though there are many uncertainties and serious challenges, international relations are essentially stable. The US is unrivalled as the pre-eminent global power. As terrorism is a serious threat to the American homeland, the global fight against terror will remain President Bush’s overriding priority. He will have to find a way to stabilise the situation in Iraq, hold elections and hand over the task of rebuilding Iraq to the Iraqis. He will want to rebuild ties with Europe. On the economic front, President Bush will try to keep the US economy humming, while managing the growing trade and fiscal deficits and weakening dollar. In Asia, both China and India are on the rise. They will exert an increasing influence on global economic developments and trade and capital flows.  China is now the location of choice for a wide range of manufacturing activities. It produces goods so cheaply that even Bangladesh complained about it. When I was in Bangladesh recently, they complained that Chinese textiles were edging out their own textiles in Bangladesh. But China is not a sweatshop for cheap, shoddy consumer goods. MNCs and Chinese companies produce high-quality goods there for the international market. However, China’s rapid growth also presents major domestic challenges. The Chinese leadership understands well the dangers of overheating in the economy and has been applying the brakes to bring about a soft landing. In addition, China has to grapple with capital account liberalisation and financial system reforms. India, too, is rising but along a different path. It is rapidly becoming a powerhouse for “soft” infrastructure businesses such as software development, business process outsourcing and creative industries. India, too, has its own set of challenges, particularly in the areas of fiscal and structural reforms. But the Congress-led coalition Government, under Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, is committed to the path of reform and liberalisation.  Japan appears to be shaking off a decade of sluggish growth. Its recovery is due to the effects of many years of structural reform and strong external demand. But not everyone is convinced that this recovery is self-sustaining. BIS Review 72/2004 1 
In ASEAN, peaceful elections and leadership transitions have taken place in the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia. In Singapore, too, we have a new Prime Minister and several new Ministers. The new leaders in ASEAN will have the opportunity to address economic and security challenges together, hopefully in a bold, creative and pragmatic manner. The rise of China and India presents both opportunities and challenges for ASEAN. To seize the opportunities and meet the challenges, these new leaders must work with their other colleagues to speed up the integration of the ASEAN economies. When I met a group of Japanese industrialists recently, they lamented that the target date of 2020 to achieve the ASEAN Economic Community was too far away. They urged ASEAN to integrate aster into one single market so that it would be an attractive destination for Japanese investments besides China. Terrorism and regional security are major problem areas. The fight against terror will continue for many years. Victory can only be achieved through a sustained and united global effort. The most important dimension of the fight is the ideological one - between mainstream Islam and the extremist elements. If the extremists are not defeated in this intra-Islam ideological fight, there will be a constant supply of terrorists out to create terror and chaos. Tensions have heightened in the Taiwan Straits and the Korean Peninsula. While Taiwan’s economy is becoming increasingly intertwined with China’s, politically, Taiwan appears to be taking steps to move permanently away from China. The risk of a miscalculation leading to military conflict is high in the next few years. The consequences of such a war will make the war in Iraq look like a skirmish. Asia will be in turmoil. Its development will be set back for many years. North Korea is another potential trouble spot. Fortunately, whatever their differences, the key players share a common interest in the peaceful containment of the issue.  III. Five-year strategic plan What does this mean for us in MAS? It means we have to anticipate events and plan for uncertainties. It means we have to be proactive, not just react to events after they have taken place. This is what the work-plan is about - planning our work over the next five years, in the context of likely scenarios.  I believe, barring a war in Asia which all countries must work hard to prevent, we can be optimistic about our future. Singapore is situated at the heart of a dynamic Asia. Our economy has undergone major restructuring over the past few years. It has regained its competitiveness. We are expanding our economic space and have shown that we can manage change as a people. There is no reason why Singapore should not continue to do well. The MAS Strategic Planning Exercise has yielded three inter-linked and mutually reinforcing priorities for the next five years. These are not new goals. They are priorities. Let me elaborate on them and the key strategies to support them. Strengthening our position as a leading financial centre in Asia Our first priority is to strengthen Singapore’s position as a leading financial centre in Asia. We will work closely with the financial industry to enlarge our investor base, build greater liquidity and depth in our financial markets, and expand our reach beyond traditional markets. To succeed, the industry needs to attract talented and dynamic professionals from a broad range of disciplines and experiences. I am pleased that the industry has established the Financial Industry Competency Standards Committee to develop internationally-aligned competency benchmarks for the whole financial sector. This will guide industry efforts towards deepening and broadening our talent pool so that it is on par with those in other leading financial centres. Fund management and private banking activities build up the investor base for our financial centre. The wealth management business has grown rapidly and prospects are bright. Strong economic growth in Asia has led to an accumulation of wealth in both the government and private sectors. To capture a share of this growing Asian wealth, our financial institutions must offer products and services that meet global standards. On our part, MAS will continue to promote a conducive regulatory environment and provide appropriate incentives to support the growth of new areas such as alternative investments, structured products, trust services and philanthropy advisory services. 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
MAS will also work with other government agencies to develop a holistic “Best Home” environment for qualified high net worth individuals. We have just devised a permanent residency scheme for individuals who place at least S$5 million with MAS-registered financial institutions. We hope this will boost total assets under management and attract high net worth individuals and their families to take up residency here. We must also develop a solid domestic investor base. In 1999, MAS and GIC announced plans to place out a total of S$35 billion in foreign assets for management by private sector fund managers. The initiative has attracted many international fund management companies to set up offices in Singapore and has catalysed the growth of total assets under management. Some firms have established their regional headquarters here. These companies have helped to broaden the range of products here beyond plain vanilla equity mutual fund products and develop more sophisticated skills and expertise. MAS has decided to place out an additional S$5 billion to external fund managers. The funds will be invested in Asian equity and fixed income markets. This recognises the investment opportunities in Asia and will also help to anchor and grow specialist skills in Asian investments in our financial centre. This will be on top of what GIC recently announced it will place out for external management. Liquidity and depth in Singapore’s treasury and capital markets is another critical success factor for our financial centre. Singapore can serve global issuers and investors as the gateway to ASEAN markets. We want to promote the ASEAN region as an asset class for capital markets investments. We will work with key players, including the Singapore Exchange (SGX), to forge regional exchange linkages, integrate market infrastructure, harmonise regulatory frameworks and promote regional electronic bond trading. SGX already has a link with the Australian Stock Exchange and is in discussions with Bursa Malaysia and the Tokyo Stock Exchange. The ASEAN Finance Ministers agreed at their meeting in April to explore alliances and linkages among ASEAN securities markets to facilitate access to these less mature markets by international investors. A Linkages Task Force, chaired by MAS, will make its recommendations next year. In the treasury market, we have maintained our position as the world’s fourth largest forex trading hub after London, New York and Tokyo. We continue to rank as the second largest over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives hub in Asia after Japan. We will build on these strengths and deepen our markets by developing the structured finance market. The asset securitisation market has already taken off, with structured products accounting for more than half of the Singapore dollar debt market. This will be further boosted when Singapore’s first loan securitisation programme for Small and Medium Enterprises is launched. ASEAN will continue to be an important market. We should build closer ties with some of the fast emerging ASEAN economies. For example, we have made a proposal to Vietnam to connect our two economies, including our financial markets, so as to reap the benefits of synergy. Vietnam is receptive. We are approaching this at a pace which Vietnam is comfortable with. Besides ASEAN, we should also position ourselves to play a bigger role in other growing regions. I am pleased to note that our local players have embraced globalisation to capitalise on opportunities in the region and beyond. In response to increased competition, our local banks have consolidated and expanded abroad. They remain profitable, sound and well-capitalised, and are becoming regionally competitive. China, India and the Middle East offer rich opportunities for both wealth management and capital markets activities. Singapore can play a useful intermediary role to serve the needs of Chinese companies seeking funding and expansion overseas. SGX has taken the lead and attracted more than 50 Chinese companies to list in Singapore. Over 1,000 Chinese companies have set up offices here to tap opportunities in the region. We must continue to sharpen our competitive advantages to draw more Chinese companies to use Singapore’s financial services. We are close to concluding the Comprehensive Economic Co-operation Agreement (CECA) with India. This will reinforce the trend of Indian financial institutions and companies using Singapore as a base for expansion overseas, and allow Singapore-based financial institutions to benefit from India’s growth. We saw our first Indian listing this year. Banks such as ICICI Bank and State Bank of India are also serving the large non-resident Indian community and facilitating their fund raising activities from Singapore. BIS Review 72/2004 3 
The Middle East has a combined GDP that exceeds ASEAN’s. Post 9/11, the Middle East is increasingly looking towards Asia in order to reduce its dependency on the West. There is a window of opportunity for us to play a bridging role. Singapore will host the inaugural meeting of the Asia-Middle East Dialogue (AMED) in June next year. To expand our economic space and strengthen political relations, I have visited several countries in the Middle East and will visit more next year. MAS should continue to work with other government agencies to deepen our engagement with the Middle East.  The market estimates that of the US$1.3 trillion in Middle East private wealth invested overseas, less than 10% is invested in Asia. Some US$100 billion or more could flow into regional markets to tap diversification benefits. This presents an opportunity for the asset management companies and capital markets industries here to develop investment funds and structured products, including Islamic financial products, to manage a portion of this wealth. Maintaining excellence in a riskier environment Our second priority is maintaining excellence in our core central banking functions in a riskier environment. In recent years, the external environment has become more volatile and complex. At the same time, our economy has been undergoing significant structural adjustments. We must ensure that the formulation and conduct of monetary policy continue to be robust and flexible. We will further strengthen our monetary policy formulation process by enhancing our forecasting, surveillance and research capabilities. We intend to reinforce our macro-econometric model by introducing new features that will enable us to better assess the impact of risks on key sectors and relationships in the economy. In the area of surveillance, we have started an intensive industry consultation process as part of our exchange rate policy review. We will continue to fine-tune this process. To enhance our understanding of the economy, we are constructing a flow-of-funds framework to get a better understanding of financial flows across different sectors of the economy. Changes and increased volatility in financial markets also pose challenges for the implementation of monetary policy. Singapore dollar capital markets have grown enormously over the last five years. Foreign participation has gone up. More foreign investors are likely to participate in our markets when Singapore Government Securities are included in the World Government Bond Index next January. Our market surveillance must broaden as the mix of market participants becomes more diverse. As the volume of trade in Singapore dollar securities increases, our management of the Singapore dollar will become more challenging. We must constantly review and improve our intervention strategies and our communication with the market. We must also continue to strengthen our regulatory and supervisory framework, in line with changes in the industry and evolving risk issues. As our local players go regional and expand their activities, we must take our approach to consolidated and integrated supervision to the next level. We will enhance our framework for supervising local banks’ securities and asset management operations overseas, as well as fine-tune the framework for the integrated supervision of banks engaging in capital markets and insurance activities. In addition, we have to co-operate more closely with other regulators in order to adequately supervise the institutions operating in our markets. As more financial institutions turn to outsourcing, we will review the need to supervise companies providing significant outsourcing services to our institutions. With the convergence in product offerings by different types of financial institutions, we need to harmonise our regulatory requirements and supervisory practices to prevent arbitrage. We are currently developing a common risk assessment framework for banks, insurance companies and capital markets intermediaries. To complement our oversight functions, we are putting in place basic safety nets for depositors and policy holders, as well as working towards the further empowerment of consumers. Disclosure requirements are currently in place but the presentation of information is often less than satisfactory. As more complex investment products emerge, this situation will become untenable. We will work towards refining existing disclosure requirements. Consumer education efforts will also be stepped up. Feedback obtained from the national financial literacy survey to be launched early next year will help us to tailor our consumer education programmes. To help consumers resolve disputes with their financial institutions promptly and affordably, we are facilitating the setup of a one-stop Financial Industry Disputes Resolution Centre, or FIDReC. It will 4 BIS Review 72/2004 
serve consumers across different sectors and ensure consistency in processes. We have also recently announced that we will publish details of market conduct regulatory actions where it is in the public interest to do so. This will further enhance market discipline. Leveraging and building on our reputation The third priority for MAS is to leverage and build on our reputation. Singapore has acquired an international reputation for its strong macro-economic performance, its robust and vibrant financial system and its high standards of regulation and supervision. This reputation has accorded us some influence in the international financial community. This influence has in turn helped us to expand our economic space by opening doors to strategic partnerships and removing market access barriers. With influence, we have been able to keep abreast of key developments and ensure that our views are heard and heeded. To leverage and build on our reputation, MAS must continue to deepen existing relationships and build new ones. We must engage in active dialogue with our external counterparts, as well as play an active role in regional and international co-operation. Our efforts in key regional fora like ASEAN and the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP) will help to accelerate the pace of liberalisation and integration of the region’s financial markets. This will benefit the entire region. In the international arena, MAS must continue to play an active role in promoting sound macro-economic policies and a stable global financial system. We are already engaged in and contributing to many diverse fora, covering areas like monetary policy, regulation and supervision, financial stability, corporate governance, anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing. As a good global citizen, Singapore will continue to work with like-minded jurisdictions to keep the international financial system stable and safe. Singapore fully supports all international and regional collaborative efforts to fight terrorism and cross-border crime. We will work with other countries to establish a reciprocal basis for co-operation in fighting crime like money laundering and terrorism. But in co-operating with others, we must uphold certain principles. This is also an integral part of preserving our reputation. Our co-operation will be provided within a structured framework, in accordance with our domestic laws and with adequate safeguards to prevent abuse. For example, we will not entertain attempts at fishing for banking information and other spurious requests. As with all major international financial centres, customer confidentiality is a cardinal principle of our financial sector. It will only be lifted by a Singapore court order and only if the safeguards set out in the Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act are met. These provisions do not shield criminal activities. Singapore will continue to participate actively in the fight against crime, money laundering and terrorist financing.  Going forward, we will work to deepen the sharing of knowledge and practices with jurisdictions that approach us for assistance through training programmes. We believe that we can make contributions on economic and financial issues, particularly those pertaining to the region. For instance, our unique monetary policy framework has proved to be sufficiently robust and flexible to cope with shocks in the external environment. We are keen to share our experience through research papers, policy dialogues and seminars with developing countries which are experimenting with intermediate exchange rate regimes. IV.  Conclusion Let me conclude. I have outlined our priorities for the next five years. Our emphasis is on action. We must translate the seminar findings and conclusions into a set of practical initiatives and implement them. We must be prepared to take calculated risks and adapt as we go along. This will require not just hard work and dedication, but also a spirit of openness, inquiry and enterprise. I am confident that together we can achieve our goals for MAS and Singapore. BIS Review 72/2004 5 
Jean-Claude Trichet: South Eastern European challenges and prospects Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 29 November 2004. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I am delighted to talk here in Vienna to this distinguished audience at the conference on South Eastern Europe, the first of its kind organised by the Österreichische Nationalbank. Let me also warmly congratulate the OeNB and Governor Liebscher for the initiative. When I think of the recent enlargement of the EU in central banking terms I cannot do so without thinking of the contribution of the OeNB, which has been involved in enlargement issues from the very beginning. This was thanks to its long-standing expertise on central and eastern Europe. With this event, the OeNB clearly demonstrates once more that it is, inside the Eurosystem, at the forefront of the analysis of European integration. The topic that we have for today - South Eastern European challenges and prospects - is indeed a broad one.1 Challenges refer mainly to those that arise in the process of transition from a centrally planned to a market economy. In this respect, they are similar to the ones that those eight countries faced that joined the EU earlier in the year. But, as our friend and coparticipant in this conference Governor Nicholl of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina puts it, for countries in the former Yugoslavia there are also two other transitions with their own particular challenges: the transition from being part of a larger state to being independent democratic countries and the transition from war to peace. I do not intend to dwell on these issues but they are indeed important when thinking about South Eastern Europe. In setting the stage for the discussions today and tomorrow, I will focus my remarks on three aspects. I will first make some remarks on the economic and monetary performance of the region; I will then touch upon the process of economic and financial integration into the EU and, lastly, I will briefly discuss the use of the euro in the region. As I will explain in more detail, economic and monetary performance has improved over the last years, although much remains to be done. Economic links with the EU have been strengthening. These links are also based on a widespread use of the euro. Economic and monetary performance in South Eastern Europe South Eastern Europe is a diverse and complex region, characterised by a relatively low level of income compared to that of Western Europe. The seven countries considered here as South Eastern Europe have a combined population of around 53 million people, while the combined GDP in 2003, at nominal exchange rates, amounted to around 120 billion euro. This gives an average GDP per capita of around 2,300 euro. Even when one adjusts for purchasing power standards, income per capita across the region stood in 2003 at only 26% of the EU average (compared to the equivalent figure for the new Member States of around 48% of the EU average). Another feature common to the countries in the region is the relatively fast growth that has been experienced in recent years. Annual real GDP growth in the region has been above 4% since 2001 and catching up in real incomes is taking place. In 2003, for a third year in a row, the economies of the countries of South Eastern Europe grew faster, on average, than the countries in central Eastern Europe and the Baltics that joined the EU last May However, estimates suggest that, in real GDP terms, the economies from South Eastern European countries are still below from where they stood fifteen years ago, reflecting slow progress in transition in the early 1990s and economic disruptions due to wars and political turmoil. Thus, in order to catch up with living standards in the EU strong growth is needed to foster real convergence.                                                        1  Within the context of this conference South Eastern Europe is understood to comprise the following countries: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, FYR of Macedonia, Romania and Serbia and Montenegro. BIS Review 72/2004 1 
Monetary performance across the region has also seen significant improvements in the recent past. Up until 1998 no fewer than four countries in the region (out of 7) had inflation rates that exceeded 20% annually. After 1998 disinflation has proceeded and the median inflation rate among the countries in the region has remained in the single digits ever since. This is not to say that there are no challenges ahead on the disinflation front. In some cases inflation remains high and the challenge remains to continue bringing inflation down. In other cases, adjustments to administered prices and indirect prices may still cause a pick up in inflation. In those circumstances, the challenge is to avoid that temporary spikes in the inflation rate translate into increases in inflationary expectations. Progress in bringing inflation down is being accomplished through a variety of monetary and exchange rate frameworks. One can classify the regimes in place in three different groups: (i) euro-based currency boards (Bosnia and Herzegovina and Bulgaria); (ii) pegs or managed floating with the euro as a reference currency (Croatia, FYR of Macedonia, Romania and Serbia); and, (iii) independent floating (Albania). In addition, there are two territories within Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo and Montenegro) where the monetary and exchange rate policy is determined by their unilateral euroisation - an issue to which I will return to later in my remarks. As the title of the panel discussion that will take place this afternoon highlights, country specific circumstances have called for different choices of monetary and exchange rate policy and changing circumstances may have called for changes in the approaches to be followed. I will not expand on this issue further than to emphasise that regardless of the actual monetary and exchange rate framework chosen, it is crucial to consolidate a culture of price stability, buttressed by independent central banks. Outside the realm of monetary and exchange rate policy I would like to briefly touch upon fiscal and external developments. In the area of fiscal developments, it is fair to recognise that the fiscal deficit for the region as a whole stands at its lowest level, in terms of GDP, since the beginning of transition. Nevertheless, this should be interpreted with caution, particularly in light of the very positive output developments that have been observed recently. The more positive side of the economic cycle provides in fact a fitting opportunity to procede further with fiscal consolidation, as well as with the necessary reforms of the structure of fiscal expenditures and revenues. Developments in the external balances of the countries in the region provide a sobering reading. Current account deficits have increased over the last three years, and stood, for the region as a whole above 8% of GDP in 2003. While these deficits may partly stem from a natural and welcome recapitalisation of the economies in the region, fast credit growth may have contributed to exacerbate the current account deficits in a number of countries. Of course, given the low levels of financial intermediation that characterise the economies in the region, the increase in lending activity is to some extent a welcome sign of a financial sector that is performing its role within the economy as a whole. However, given the links that have often been identified between lending booms and banking and currency crisis, it is clear that authorities in the region had in a number of cases to take steps to avoid credit growth that may be too fast. More broadly, countries in the region still lag behind those in central Eastern Europe and the Baltics, as measured by indicators such as the EBRD’s transition indicators. Improvements in the quality of the judiciary, the overall business environment and, generally, institutional reform are needed. On the positive side, it is noteworthy that, among all transition countries, it is precisely in the South Eastern European region where one have seen most progress in the last year or so. One cannot help but to associate this progress with the pull that enlargement of the EU may provide. Economic and financial integration with the EU In recent years we have observed a number of developments that are testament of the ongoing process of economic and financial integration between the South Eastern European region and the EU. The EU is by far the most important trading partner for the countries in the region, accounting for between half and three quarters of the foreign trade of the countries in the region. Moreover, export performance of these countries has remained positive regardless of economic conditions in their main export markets. At the same time, the old trading patterns within the regions are long gone, leaving trading integration among South Eastern European countries at a very low level. More needs to be done, for example through the implementation of bilateral free trade agreements already signed, in this area. 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
Another element pointing towards economic and financial integration between the region and the EU is the recent increase in inflows of foreign direct investment. While precise figures are hard to come by, such FDI inflows often come from the euro area. This is well known here in Austria - which ranks among the top five leading investors in no less than four countries in the region. In addition to the financial sector, FDI has typically concentrated in manufacturing industry as well as transport and telecommunications. Often, manufacturing activity in the region is well integrated into the production structures of Western European economies, which have been attracted by the comparatively low costs in South Eastern Europe and a relative geographic proximity. For the region as a whole, FDI as a percentage of GDP was close to 5% in 2003. It is to be noted that this level is low compared to the central Eastern Europe and the Baltic countries. The cumulative FDI inflows into the countries of South Eastern Europe over the period 1989 to 2003 has been on average less than USD 700 per capita, approximately one third of the comparable figure for central Eastern European and Baltic countries. I mentioned briefly investment in financial intermediaries as an area where euro area investors have been particularly active. In fact, euro area banks and financial institutions have been the most important investors in the respective banking sectors, contributing to financial development in the region. Let me now turn my attention to the use of the euro in the region. Use of the euro in South Eastern Europe South Eastern Europe is a region where one can see the use of the euro as an international currency in all its dimensions. The OeNB has done much work to document this. The ECB also monitors regularly developments in the international role of the euro, including its use South Eastern Europe. As you all know, the Eurosystem takes a neutral position regarding the internationalisation of the euro. In this regard, it is also worth recalling the position adopted, already by the Ecofin in November 2000, that countries aiming at EU accession cannot use unilateral euroisation as a way of circumventing the stages foreseen by the Treaty establishing the European Community for the adoption of the euro.2 As a financing currency, euro denominated debt is regularly issued by the countries of the region, which also, as I noted above, often make use of the euro as an anchor, reserve and intervention currency for their monetary and exchange rate frameworks. The euro is also being increasingly used as an invoicing currency in the international trade of the countries in the region. In the case of Bulgaria, for which a longer span of data is available, we have seen that while 37% of Bulgarian exports were invoiced in euro in 2000, the figure had risen to 61% in 2003. The increase is particularly notable given the fact that Bulgarian exports to the euro area accounted for only 51% of total Bulgarian exports in 2003, compared to 42% back in 2000. That is, while in 2000 Bulgarian exports to the euro area were greater than its exports invoiced in euro, by 2003 the opposite was true. Euro cash inherited the role of a store of value that some legacy currencies, principally the D-mark and also the Austrian schilling, had played in some countries in the region. But the introduction of the euro also coincided with an interesting development in the region. In a nutshell, the euro cash changeover was accompanied in many South Eastern European countries by a strong increase in euro-denominated deposits. In many countries, particularly in the former Yugoslav republics, households deposited cash in legacy currencies - previously kept “under the mattress” - with banks rather than exchange them directly for new euro banknotes, reflecting increased confidence in the respective banking systems.  Concluding remarks Let me conclude by focusing on the prospects. To a large extent, these prospects can be summarised in just a few words: progress towards EU membership. Of course, countries in the region are at very different stages in their path towards EU membership, which is reflected in their different status as candidate and potential candidate countries. Indeed, Bulgaria and Romania are expected to sign the accession treaty next year whereas other countries are still preparing negotiations on stabilisation and                                                       2  Report by the (ECOFIN) Council to the European Council in Nice on the exchange rate aspects of enlargement, Brussels, 8 November 2000, Council of the European Union press release no. 13055/00. Also reiterated in “Policy position of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank on exchange rate issues relating to the acceding countries,” Frankfurt, 18 December 2003, www.ecb.int. BIS Review 72/2004 3 
association agreements. Moreover, there are not only economic, but also political criteria countries have to pass to transform the current EU perspective into real progress towards association or accession. Let me also emphasise that the ECB and the Eurosystem as a whole is a contributor to this process, not least through the provision of technical assistance. Cooperation among central banks has involved twinning projects - led by some Eurosystem National Central Banks in particular Banque de France, Banca d’Italia and De Nederlandsche Bank - with the Bulgarian National Bank and the National Bank of Romania, as well as visits and training, all geared towards sharing information and know-how. It has taken place in a large number of areas, such as payment systems, supervision and financial stability, statistics, central bank operations, etc. Looking ahead, such technical assistance will continue to intensify as countries progress towards aligning themselves with EU regulations and directives. Also the Joint Vienna Institute, co-sponsored by the OeNB, has played a crucial role in offering training opportunities to staff of the central banks of the region. The recent enlargement to ten new Member States, as well as the progress in the accession negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania and the decision to begin negotiations with Croatia serve as powerful reminders that the enlargement of the EU remains an ongoing process.  However, for all countries in the region, no matter how far they have already travelled on the road towards the EU, there is no time for complacency. Clearly, the speed at which South Eastern European countries progress towards accession to the EU depends on the policies followed. It is the culture of stability and the exercise of responsibility in economic policy-making that are the crucial ingredients to achieve the bright prospects that lie ahead for the region. 4 BIS Review 72/2004 
Toshihiko Fukui: Overall review of the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy  Statement by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control before the Committee on Financial Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 28 October 2004.  *      *      * Introduction The Bank of Japan submitted its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control for the second half of fiscal 2003 to the Diet in June 2004. I am pleased to have this opportunity to present an overall review of the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy.  I.  Developments in Japan’s economy Japan’s economy continues to recover. Overseas economies, one of the factors behind this recovery, are maintaining their expansion, although decelerating somewhat from their high growth so far. In the United States, growth in private consumption has decelerated due partly to the rise in crude oil prices. The pace of increase in the number of employees has also slowed compared with early spring. However, it appears that momentum for economic expansion is being maintained, since corporate profits and business fixed investment have been increasing. East Asian economies, particularly the Chinese economy, continue growing relatively fast.  Amid these developments in overseas economies, Japan’s exports and production have been on a rising trend, albeit at a slightly slower pace, leading to an improvement in corporate profits and an expansion in business fixed investment. This virtuous cycle is a factor behind the current economic recovery.  Another factor behind the economic recovery is the considerable progress being made in dealing with structural elements such as excessive capital stock, debt, and labor in the corporate sector, and the vulnerability in the financial system, all of which had delayed the recovery of the Japanese economy. As a result of the progress in these adjustments, corporate profits have increased substantially and the employment situation has been improving.  Looking forward, Japan’s economy is expected to continue recovering with the ongoing expansion of overseas economies and the easing of structural adjustment pressure in Japan, although attention should be paid to factors such as the effects of the significant rise in crude oil prices on both the domestic and overseas economies and developments in global IT-related demand.  On the price front, domestic corporate goods prices have been rising due to the strengthening at home and abroad of the prices of commodities such as crude oil and to the improvement in supply and demand conditions. Consumer prices (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis), in contrast, continue to fall slightly on a year-on-year basis partly because the increase in productivity and the restraint on labor costs by firms have absorbed the effects of the rise in commodity prices.  The money market remains stable overall against the background of the Bank’s provision of ample liquidity. In the capital markets, long-term interest rates rose somewhat toward the middle of 2004, but have been moving at around 1.5 percent recently. Stock prices have been generally firm with the ongoing economic recovery.  The environment for corporate finance is becoming more accommodative on the whole, although it remains severe for firms with high credit risks. The lending attitude of private banks is becoming more accommodative, and the lending attitude of financial institutions as perceived by firms has been improving. The pace of decline in credit demand in the private sector is becoming somewhat moderate. Under these circumstances, the rate of decline in lending by private banks has basically been diminishing. Moreover, the fund-raising environment for firms in the capital markets through CP and corporate bonds remains favorable, and the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued continues to be above the previous year’s level.  BIS Review 72/2004 1 
II.  Conduct of monetary policy The Bank has been conducting the quantitative easing policy with the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank as the operating target. In accordance with the current target range for the outstanding balance of “around 30 to 35 trillion yen,” the Bank is providing ample liquidity to the money market. The Bank has also made a commitment to maintain the quantitative easing policy until the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis.  The Bank’s commitment has contributed to stabilizing market participants’ projection of future interest rates, and thus market interest rates have been stable. In this situation, firms have been able to raise funds at low interest rates. The commitment’s positive effects through interest rates on the economy will strengthen as corporate profits increase with economic recovery.  With these policy effects in mind, the Bank has firmly maintained its quantitative easing policy with the commitment based on the CPI.  The Bank has been making efforts to make credit intermediation in the market more diversified and efficient so that monetary easing effects permeate throughout the economy, and these efforts are expected to improve the Japanese financial and capital markets in the long term. As part of such efforts, the Bank started to purchase asset-backed securities (ABSs) in summer 2003, and the total amount of ABSs purchased to date has reached around 1.5 trillion yen.  In addition, in May 2004, with a view to enhancing the liquidity of Japanese government securities (JGS) markets, the Bank introduced a facility which temporarily provides the markets, as a secondary source, with JGSs held by the Bank when market participants experience difficulties in securing specific issues. The Bank has been making a wide range of efforts to improve the infrastructure of financial markets and will continue to do so.  III. Purchases of stocks held by commercial banks The Bank had been purchasing stocks held by commercial banks since November 2002 to reduce the risk that stock price fluctuations might impact negatively upon the business management of individual financial institutions, potentially resulting in instability of the financial system as a whole. This program was wound up at the end of September 2004. The accumulated total of stocks purchased by the Bank amounted to 2,018.0 billion yen.  Conclusion Japan’s economy is expected to continue recovering with the ongoing expansion of overseas economies. To ensure that this recovery will become sustainable and to overcome deflation, the Bank considers it essential that a wide range of economic entities continue to make efforts to revitalize the economy.  The Bank is determined to firmly support Japan’s economy from the financial side by maintaining monetary easing with the commitment based on the CPI even in a situation where the economy continues to recover.  2 BIS Review 72/2004 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Life in a two-headed monetary system - the Swiss experience  Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 50th Anniversary of the Bank of Israel, Jerusalem, 29 November 2004. *      *      * 1.  Introduction  It is almost a common-place to state that the birth of the euro on January 1, 1999 was a milestone in the process of European integration. Giving up national sovereignty in monetary matters was without doubt a very bold move of historical proportions. It will have long lasting economic and political consequences. It is meant to promote efficiency, transparency, and growth. The creation of a single currency should also act as catalyst towards further European integration. Moreover, and this is really what I would like to focus on today, the creation of the euro has changed the world’s monetary landscape. I believe that one can say without fear of exaggeration that it has led to a new international monetary order. Countries such as Israel and Switzerland, situated on the periphery of the euro area, are affected as well. I would like to share with you some of our experiences in this regard, and I would be very interested to know to what extent these findings apply to your country too.  2. Our pre-euro worries  Quite frankly, my colleagues and I at the Swiss National Bank were somewhat worried before the introduction of the euro. Although we fully appreciated the benefits that Switzerland would draw from the creation of the euro in terms of increased transparency and lower transaction costs, we were also quite concerned about the possible risks. Three of these came to mind.  First, we feared that the Swiss franc might be in for a bumpy ride. In the past, whenever the dollar was under attack, international investors turned their attention to the German mark and the Swiss franc. Their status as safe-haven currencies meant that at times of turbulences on foreign exchange markets they would move well beyond what economic fundamentals could justify. In fact, the Swiss franc often revealed a tendency to appreciate even more than the German mark, a phenomenon that was generally attributed to the relative narrowness of the Swiss financial markets. Now with the German mark gone, wouldn’t all attention focus almost exclusively on our currency? Would it not mean that in a dollar crisis the franc would have to bear even more of the adjustment than in the past? Even more frightful, what would happen if the euro itself were under attack? The last thing we needed was for the franc to become the first currency in the line of fire, or something like the lightening rod of the international monetary system. A second apprehension that we had was that it might become very difficult in the future to conduct an autonomous monetary policy. Switzerland, together with Liechtenstein, would now be totally surrounded by a single monetary zone. As you know, Switzerland, like Israel, is a small open economy, and I emphasize both the words small and open. Indeed, we are widely open. Nearly half of our national income is generated abroad, and the European Union is by far our largest foreign partner. About two thirds of our exports head in that direction, and we are one of the best customers of the EU. We are also very small, meaning that although we have no significant impact on the rest of Europe, we are very exposed to foreign shocks, whether they are real or monetary in nature. Our activity is highly correlated with that of the eurozone. Under these conditions, would the SNB still be in a position to conduct an independent monetary policy? Would it be realistic to expect the SNB to follow a course that deviated from the one set by the European Central Bank, or would the SNB be forced to shadow the actions of the ECB?  The question of an independent monetary policy is not just a matter of safeguarding the appeal and the prestige of our jobs as Swiss central bankers. The stakes are much higher. For one thing, even if Swiss activity and economic conditions more generally are highly correlated with events in Europe, the correlation is less than perfect. Our economy, although offering many similarities with those of Germany, France, and Italy, also has its specific features. Thus, Switzerland is very well endowed with physical and human capital. As a consequence, the return on capital is relatively low and wages are comparatively high, particularly so for unskilled labour. We thus tend to specialize in capital intensive and high-value added activities. External shocks tend to impact on us in a way that is not quite the BIS Review 72/2004 1 
same as on the rest of Europe. Moreover, we also have to cope with home-brewed shocks. It is for these reasons that we are eager to keep an autonomous monetary policy.  Furthermore, if markets became convinced that in the future the SNB’s actions would simply mimic those of the ECB, they would rapidly force a convergence between Swiss nominal interest rates and those of the eurozone. Our real interest rates might remain lower for a while, given our relatively large supply of physical capital, but a tendency towards equalization would nonetheless set in. What this might mean for us is a higher rate of inflation for some time, together with a collapse in asset prices and in domestic gross capital formation. A mixture of higher interest rates and high, sticky wages would be very harmful to our economy.  The third fear that was sometimes expressed, although here I must say I was rather sceptical myself, was that the euro would gradually render the Swiss franc obsolete. With many of our trading firms billing and paying their suppliers in euros, there might be a tendency for them to adopt the euro more generally for their accounting as well as for their domestic transactions. Some people even went as far as predicting that before long wages would be paid in euros. Shops, hotels and restaurants would rapidly be forced to accept euros, so that visitors from abroad would no longer see the need to convert their euros into francs. Eventually Swiss consumers themselves would follow suit, so that Switzerland would be de facto integrated into the eurozone.  More than national pride would be hurt by such an “euroization” of the Swiss economy. For one thing, such a development would entail the loss of seigniorage income. With a monetary base of about 40 billion francs (26 billion euros), that is about 5’700 francs (3’700 euros) per person, seigniorage in our case is far from trivial. But even more seriously, the loss of monetary autonomy caused by a displacement of the Swiss franc by the euro would prevent the SNB from creating liquidity in case of need.  To a large extent, the fears that we had reflect the more fundamental debate about fixed versus flexible exchange rates. Which foreign exchange regime is appropriate for a given country at a particular time? Although this view is not universally shared, many economists argue in favour of a corner solution: either purely flexible exchange rates, or rigidly fixed ones. Intellectually, I tend to share this view, except that I would like to take it one step further: either purely flexible exchange rates, or monetary union. Rigidly fixed exchange rates do not constitute a polar case. In fact, they accumulate many drawbacks. Thus, fixed exchange rates have never been known to be fixed for very long. Fixed exchange rates are fixed until the day they change, and when they do change, they tend to do so brutally in an atmosphere of crisis, of pain, and of tears. No, I believe that if one really aims at exchange rates that are irrevocably fixed, then one should go all the way, that is, one should opt for monetary union. As long as two currencies are distinct, their relative price might change. So the options boil down to a choice between purely flexible exchange rates and monetary union. Needless to say, since Switzerland is not a member of the European Union, joining the eurozone is not an option worth discussing at this stage. Far from being a second best solution, fixing the franc against the euro would rather cumulate all the negatives, by suppressing our monetary independence, and, at the same time, exposing us to all the dangers of speculative attacks by setting us up, the back against the wall, alone against the market.  3.  Our post-euro experience What has happened since January 1999 has proven very reassuring. Our worst fears did not materialize, and indeed, in some ways, the outcome was even much more positive than we could have hoped for. First, let me briefly sum up our experience with regard to the fears of “euroization” and of the loss of our monetary degree of freedom. As expected, the Swiss franc was not crowded out by the euro. Sure, the euro circulates in Switzerland, just like the Swiss franc is being used in neighbouring France, Germany, and Italy, but the phenomenon remains marginal, and it does not exceed the use the French francs, German marks, and Italian liras in the pre-euro world. This is not surprising for, even though the euros (and dollars for that matter) are happily accepted in Swiss shops, cafés, and hotels, the exchange rate is usually unattractive and the change is given in Swiss francs. Shopkeepers and restaurant owners are not in the business of providing financial services, and foreign tourists are still better off changing their euros at banks or using their credit cards. True, Swiss firms use the euro extensively, some do much of their billing in the European currency, and a few of them have even switched their accounting to euros. Some natural hedging takes place as well, although it is not clear 2 BIS Review 72/2004 
how efficient this is. It is worth pointing out, however, that some of our largest firms do much of their billing and their accounting in dollars, while others continue quite happily to use the Swiss franc. The fact that “euroization” has not taken place should not really surprise us. There have been other examples of small independent currencies surviving in the neighbourhood of much larger monetary zones. The example of the Canadian dollar comes to mind. The Loonie has been floating for the past several decades, and it has served Canada rather well. More generally, there is nothing to be gained in having more than one currency for transaction purposes. Much of the benefit that allows one to get around the double coincidence of wants gets lost if several currencies circulate simultaneously. “Dollarization” only occurs in those countries where hyperinflation threatens. This is not about to happen in Switzerland which has a long established record of price stability. The fear of losing our monetary independence was clearly misplaced as well. Over the past six years the SNB has repeatedly demonstrated that it can act decisively and independently, often well before the ECB. Given its openness, Switzerland was badly affected by the world slowdown a couple of years ago. The situation was made worse by the fact that our main trading partner, Germany, was itself severely hit, and to compound our difficulties, the worldwide capital overhang had a very adverse effect on our exporters, many of whom specialize in the production of capital goods. Exceptional circumstances require extraordinary measures. From March 2001 to April 2003, the SNB cut interest rates aggressively, lowering the target range for our reference rate, the three-month Libor, by 325 basis points, from 3.5% to just 0.25%. And earlier this year, the improved performance of our economy has allowed us to take some of our interest-rate easing back, even though the ECB did not budge.  What about the stability of the external value of the Swiss franc? Here, I must say, our fears proved not just to be unfounded, but the reality turned out to be much more favourable than we could have hoped for. The exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro ended up being much steadier than expected, in fact even steadier than it used to be against the German mark, not to mention the French franc and the Italian lira. Over the past six years, the real exchange rate has moved within a relatively narrow band little more than five percentage points wide. Except for the immediate after-September-11 period, when the Swiss franc appreciated significantly, the external value of the franc has largely reflected economic fundamentals. In fact, even the post 9/11 safe-haven effect was relatively mild compared to what we experienced in the past, during the seventies and the eighties, for instance. But vigilance is of the essence. Recent foreign exchange market developments show that in highly turbulent times the Swiss franc can come under upward speculative pressure. This may interfere with our domestic monetary strategy and can eventually trigger corrective policy actions.  4.  A new international monetary order  I truly believe that one can make the case that the introduction of the euro has brought about a new international monetary order, that it has produced an element of stability that benefits many countries, not just Europe’s immediate neighbours, but nations around the globe. As we have seen, movements in the dollar/mark exchange rate were magnified as far as the Swiss franc is concerned in the past, but are much dampened since the birth of the euro. When the euro depreciated against the dollar at first, the Swiss franc did so too, but to a much lesser degree. And later, when the euro recovered against the dollar, the franc appreciated as well, but again to a lesser extent. In order words, our effective exchange rate has been less affected, the movement of the dollar being offset, at least to some extent, by a movement of the euro in the opposite direction. It seems to me that this phenomenon has benefited not just Switzerland, but also many other countries with their own independent currencies, such as the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, and Norway. I would be very curious to know what your experience has been in this respect.  This evolution might not last. Perhaps it is the outcome of chance, but it has been sufficiently persistent over the past few years to be noticeable. Maybe one day some bright graduate student will write a thesis on this topic, and confirm or falsify my hypothesis, but in the meantime let me outline why I think that there are some good reasons to believe that the stability of the international monetary system has been enhanced by the creation of the euro.  I do not think that anybody would argue that the world as a whole today makes up an optimal currency area. Our planet is not yet ready for a single currency. We are therefore bound to live in a world with n, n greater than one, currencies. For the second half of the 20th century, we lived with one dominating BIS Review 72/2004 3 
currency, the U.S. dollar, and many, less important currencies, such as the British pound, the Japanese yen, the German mark, the Swiss franc, and so on. Moreover, the United States is a largely closed economy, so it could regard fluctuations in the external value of the dollar with benign neglect. Of course, most other countries, being rather small and quite open, were fully exposed to turbulences in foreign exchange markets, but there was not much they could do about it. There were several episodes when the internal stability of the dollar was threatened as well, with U.S. inflation rates in the double digits. The flight into more stable currencies put considerable pressure on these.  Today, the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape in some important ways. First, as the new kid on the block, the euro commands attention and respect. In economic size, the eurozone nearly rivals the United States. There is now an obvious alternative to the dollar as an instrument of portfolio diversification. If investors have doubts about the dollar, there is no need any longer to rush into the Swiss franc, the euro will do just fine.  Second, the eurozone, although not quite to the extent of the United States, is largely a closed economy. Movements in the euro are far less devastating than movements of similar magnitude in the Swiss franc or in the German mark. The euro is much more capable than any other currency to take on the role of shock absorber against the U.S. dollar. The eurozone, in some ways, is the large closed economy that the world needed as the counterweight to the U.S. economy. Be it by intent or by chance, the new, two-headed international monetary system, far from being a freak of nature, is a harmonious and balanced construct that should benefit all small open economies, not least Switzerland. There is a third reason why the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape and should fundamentally prove beneficial to the stability of the international monetary system, and that is competition. Even though the U.S. monetary authorities do not have a mandate that is as specifically directed at price stability as the ECB does, investors now have a choice and can vote with their feet. Thus the pressure is on the United States to deliver price stability as well. I find it very unlikely that we should again experience any time soon double digit inflation rates in the United States, and this is very good news indeed for the continued health of the international monetary system.  The two-headedness of the new international monetary system confers special responsibility to the guardians of the dollar and the euro. Does this mean that their role and duties now extend beyond their respective monetary areas? Should the Fed and the ECB become the policemen of the international monetary system? I do not think so. Markets tend to police themselves. The greatest contribution that the United States and Europe can make to the good health of the global economy is to keep their house in order. Price stability and responsible fiscal and trade policies in both the European Union and the Unites States would go a long way in ensuring that the new international monetary order is a framework for world growth and prosperity.  5.  Conclusion Our experience convincingly demonstrates that a flexible exchange rate regime and an autonomous monetary policy are perfectly feasible in a world dominated by two currency blocs. The external value of the franc today is much more likely than in the past to reflect fundamentals. We are now free to pursue domestic policies destined to improve the working of our economy, without excessive concern about external implications. Ultimately, the markets’ reaction will give us an objective assessment of our action.  All in all, the introduction of the euro has been a very positive development for the international monetary system in general, and for Switzerland in particular. We benefit from the greater transparency offered by the euro and the lower transaction costs made possible by its creation. Perhaps for the first time in history, we are surrounded by an area that shares the same monetary policy objectives as we do, namely price stability. This explains to a large extent why the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate has been relatively stable over the past five years. But the presence of a single European currency has per se also shielded third currencies - like the Swiss franc - from too much volatility in the case of dollar turbulence. At the same time, we keep the trump card of an independent monetary policy that enables us to respond very rapidly to the specific needs of the Swiss economy. Between 2001 and 2003, we have thus lowered interest rates more quickly and more decisively than the ECB. Once economic activity showed signs of recovery, we were able to gradually shift to a less expansionary stance, again well 4 BIS Review 72/2004 
before any similar move by the ECB. With inflation around the one percent mark, we enjoy price stability and our interest rates lie clearly below corresponding rates in the eurozone.  Thanks to enhanced stability in Europe with the introduction of the euro, a two headed international monetary system is good news for small countries. It provides them with a more stable environment than the former dollar-based regime. Today, the euro and the dollar act to some extent like mutual shock absorbers. As a result, small currencies are closer to their economic fundamentals than earlier, which gives third countries a real opportunity to implement independent monetary policies aiming at price stability. BIS Review 72/2004 5 
