Marion Williams: What is in store for the Barbadian economy as we enter the CSME Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Barbados Employers Confederation, St Michael, 16 March 2005. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and President, Dr. Hensley Sobers; Members of the Executive Council; Mr. Harry Husbands, Executive Director, Barbados Employers Confederation; Ms. Shirley Farnum, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Social Security; Mr. Vincent Burnett, Deputy Chief Labour Officer; Mr. Raull Harris, Executive Director, Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry; Mr. Trevor King, Executive Director, TVET; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak to the employers of Barbados at this BEC’s annual luncheon on the topic of the CSME. I am, however, a little alarmed that you may be expecting something of a crystal ball address and that I will be in a position to tell you what is really in store for us under CSME.  Let me say that economics is about probabilities and economists will never say they are sure about anything in the future. They will advise that there is a high, low or medium probability of an event occurring or that certain outcomes are likely. I am afraid that is precisely what you are about to hear from me. One of the basic reasons for the creation of the CSME was that it had become clear that the future for small countries and small entities in the rapidly globalising world was becoming increasingly difficult. In negotiations, organisations have little time and patience for dealing with a myriad of small countries. Secondly, if one wants to be heard, it was very clear that size made a difference to the willingness of others to listen. The significance given to your view is greater when you are larger and you are therefore able to have somewhat more negotiating influence. In addition, if you can trade without barriers in a single economic space the possibility of growth and expansion is enhanced and the hurdles, legal, administrative, regulatory, etc. are lessened. As a single market we can now offer our members better terms of operating, and greater freedom from barriers than we offer any third country. For these reasons the Caribbean had very little option but to form itself into a single market. We have created a greater single economic space and a greater market for ourselves in which we are the beneficiaries. As you are aware, the requirements for the proper functioning of the CSME are the removal of restrictions on the free movement of goods, services, persons and capital and the right of establishment. The intention is to reduce the economic vulnerability of regional economies by providing an avenue to expand trade and investment opportunities, thereby lowering consumer prices and improving standards of living across the region. Enhanced levels of competitiveness should result from the extension of the gains of specialisation in production and should fortify the region’s position in the global economy.  There will, however, be losers and gainers. CSME will influence all spheres of economic activity across Barbados, potentially translating into significant gains for the more efficient business entities. It has already contributed to the demise of some of the less efficient companies. The financial transactions that underpin the free movement of goods and services will intensify with greater trade, facilitated by the removal of capital account restrictions in some countries. However, the gains are expected to offset the losses, and should lead to better resource allocation and a net welfare-improving outcome for the country, and without doubt for the region as a whole. We have already removed the barriers to trade in goods and services. We have made some strides in the removal of barriers to movement of persons, but there is a long and difficult road ahead here as witnessed by the frequent dialogue on this topic. In terms of financial liberalisation, we have removed the barriers to the movement of capital in the form of equity capital but there are other areas of financial liberalisation to be addressed. BIS Review 20/2005 1 
The Productive Sectors At the sectoral level; to date, the integration process under CSME has proven to be especially challenging for some industries in the Barbadian economy. Already, there has been a contraction in output of the manufacturing sector and a deterioration of the current account position. Efforts to bring Barbadian businesses up to international standards will therefore necessitate a restructuring of their production processes, with a possible redirection of resources to those areas where the country may have a demonstrated comparative advantage. It is easy to speak in general terms of restructuring production processes but those on the ground need to translate this into actual implementable changes in production. Some of the weaker entities have already dropped out as a result of competition, and it is important now that we nurture the remaining entities – presumably the more competitive ones - and assist them in holding their own in the more open environment. Several suggestions have been tabled to assist the manufacturing sector in becoming more competitive. These include the development of specialty products, particularly those that command higher prices in the international market and an emphasis on higher value-added products.  Understandably, with the right to establish anywhere in the region, industries will gravitate to locations with abundant resources, with low energy costs and competitive wages. High production costs, related to high wage rates, and a dearth of abundant natural resources place Barbados at a disadvantage vis-à-vis its CARICOM counterparts, in the production of most goods. This means that higher levels of productivity will be required of Barbados. It also suggests that we may have to look at our capital - labour ratios and retool our enterprises to make greater economies and make greater use of state-of-the-art equipment. At the same time, where Barbadians see the opportunity for operating competitively elsewhere in the Caribbean, they should seize it. This option is now open to potential investors. We know, on the ground however, that there are tremendous challenges and that nationalism is still very strong in the Caribbean, despite CSME, but these are hurdles that we will have to cross. Meanwhile, investors wanting to enter into the wider Caribbean should do so as long as the competitive environment and the prospects are good, provided of course, it is affordable at the macro level. On the other hand, Barbados has always been a strong supplier of services. A well-educated workforce, good infrastructure and a favourable business environment, can translate into significant gains in the provision of services, and many entities have already moved to supplying their services cross-border. We have seen it in the construction sector especially. In addition, consultancy services of every form and description have been provided to the rest of the Caribbean by Barbadians for decades. We must not, however, believe that because we may have a comparative advantage in services – and I say, “may” – that the competition is any less stiff than it is in the trade in goods. We must compete here as aggressively as we compete in any other sector. In addition, as globalisation overtakes regionalism, we have also to simultaneously compete with the entry of companies from third countries outside the region in the provision of services. The technology permits it and it will be very difficult to exclude them. We ignore them at our peril. Employment With labour set to move freely within the region under the CSME, the implications for the employment situation in Barbados have come under increasing focus. While production is expected to gravitate towards lower-wage jurisdictions, labour would theoretically be attracted to higher-wage jurisdictions, of which Barbados is generally acknowledged to be one. This would indicate a potential surplus of supply over demand in the Barbadian job market, at least in the short-run, which could push down wages. However, it should also be noted that, at least in theory, the integration of regional labour markets should ensure that over time, equilibrium is reached between labour supply and demand across the region. A number of other factors could affect the analysis, such as the comparative cost of living in Barbados as opposed to other regional jurisdictions. Furthermore, given that the categories of labour currently being allowed to move under the CSME are those principally with higher skill levels, with which Barbados is perhaps more heavily endowed than other jurisdictions, it is possible that there could be a net outflow of labour from Barbados – provided Barbadians are prepared to accept lower wages elsewhere. 2 BIS Review 20/2005 
The External sector The contraction in activity in the productive sectors also has implications for the external account of the country. This is particularly worrying to the extent that the fall-off in production is being accompanied by a significant rise in retained imports from the region. Indeed, the steady deterioration in Barbados’ export performance has its genesis in the provision of duty-free access for CARICOM goods from the early 1990s and the resulting increase in competition in the domestic market, which seemingly impaired local producers’ export capacity. Imports in particular from Trinidad have grown tremendously. However, judging from the shopping of Barbadians in Trinidad, shoppers are buying, not only Trinidad-produced goods. If this is so, then we may have to ask ourselves why is it not possible to purchase these goods directly – is it sourcing? Surely we have a reputation for being a nation of traders! The challenge for our balance of payments is further compounded by the liberalisation of the capital account required under CSME. The removal of exchange control restrictions on capital account transactions within the union essentially constitutes a removal of restrictions with the rest of the world, given that some other countries within the Area do not have exchange controls on extra-regional capital transactions.  However, in the absence of capital controls, capital flight is possible where there is a differential between the domestic interest rate and interest rates abroad. Unbridled outflows could therefore put the maintenance of Barbados’ current fixed exchange rate regime at risk. Consequently, while capital account liberalisation process is ongoing, we are proceeding cautiously with regard to certain types of transactions in order to avoid any significant disruptions arising from unregulated short-term capital flows. Liberalisation also has implications for the independence of monetary policy. Whereas, domestic economic circumstances might indicate the need to keep interest rates low, if regional rates are high, in the context of an open capital account, then there is more pressure to raise rates in order to keep money at home, even though the domestic cost situation would suggest that interest rates be kept low so as to reduce the cost of operations of businesses. On the other hand, many of the changes associated with the CSME, e.g. the enhanced ability of companies to establish a commercial presence anywhere in the region, could result in increased capital flows into Barbados, provided that we maintain and encourage an attractive investment climate. We have already seen this inward flow with respect to the banking system. Under the CSME regime, current trends in the financial sector are likely to be reinforced, in that the cross-border provision of financial services, as well as the integration of financial markets, will become even more of a reality. This should produce a number of benefits for consumers: widening the range of financial services available to consumers, lowering the cost of these services and generally promoting competition and greater efficiency in the day-to-day transactions taking place within the Barbadian economy. However, full advantage can only be taken of these benefits in the context of full liberalisation. It will therefore be important to judge how far and how fast that liberalisation process can take place without creating domestic disruption and excessive loss of foreign exchange reserves. The spate of mergers and acquisitions which have taken place in recent years have been influenced by the need for corporations to benefit from economies of scale. With large corporations now dominating almost every sector in the field of finance, regulators will have to guard against any attempts by financial institutions to abuse the rights and privileges associated with the CSME by engaging in anti-competitive practices. However, with consolidated supervision and policy harmonisation forming an integral part of the CSME process, it is anticipated that this potential problem should be kept at bay. Mergers and acquisitions have been more evident in the banking and insurance industries – it may abate but I do not think that it is over. At the level of securities trading, I expect to see continuing strong activity. Hopefully, within the next year or two, we will see greater harmonisation of the stock exchanges in the region, where there are similar listing rules, similar take-over criteria and, most importantly, trading from a single book. I consider that the establishment of a single stock exchange creates the opportunity for the development of a Caribbean numeraire currency. Certainly, if there is one book there should be one currency in which transactions are denominated. If we do nothing about it – it will be the US dollar – by default. If we take a conscious step to create a regional numeraire currency – and it could be of BIS Review 20/2005 3 
equivalent value to the US dollar so as to eliminate any conversion difficulty when we actually do create a single transactions currency in the region. I think also that the use of a regional credit rating agency will become increasingly important. We already have one in the Caribbean Information and Credit Rating Services (CARICRIS). In order to encourage surpluses in the country to be invested in deficit countries it will be important that potential investors know the value of their investment. The recently established regional rating agency will help to establish the value of corporations across the region so that an investor in Barbados can more easily rely on specialists in the field to value the quality of companies and the strength of the balance sheet of companies – say – in St. Lucia or Dominica. A number of steps of this kind to set up institutions which facilitate regionalism are being taken both by governments, government related institutions and by the private sector. These are the kinds of tripartite initiatives which we need to ensure that the appropriate framework for the smooth functioning of the CSME is property enabled. In order for the CSME to function effectively, there is a need to harmonise, and I would go so far as to say, “unify”, the rules and guidelines governing the conduct of businesses across the region. The CARICOM Secretariat has started with the financial sector and has framed a Financial Services Agreement. This is a very important step as it sets out guidelines within which the sector should operate. However, we will need to do more to minimise and, preferably, eliminate the differences in our legislation, and in our criteria for establishment in the various sectors, in order to eliminate regulatory arbitrage and reduce corporate legislative shopping within the Caribbean. I strongly feel that our Chambers of Commerce across the region must be strongly involved in the process. This means, by implication, our Employers Confederation as well. I believe that this is why the distinction is made between the single market and single economy. Yes, we can more quickly become a single market – however, in order for us to see ourselves as a single economy our economic and corporate rules and legislation will need to be more closely harmonised. In a sense, we are fortunate, in that the basis of our system is British – though in recent years many countries have modelled themselves on Canadian legislation - that is, the English-speaking Caribbean. However, harmonisation within the French and Spanish-speaking Caribbean will be a little more complex.  The implications of the CSME for employers as Human Resource professionals are many. It will be important that HR departments work within their organisations to ensure that high standards are set and that excellence is rewarded, for it is through this process that the good candidates show their worth and the entire level of performance is lifted. Rewarding mediocrity in the same way that we reward high performance, breeds complacency and leads to low levels of productivity. We have to keep on lifting the bar so that employees know what is expected of them. In this way, our workforce will be able to hold its own and retain their jobs against the competition in the face of free movement of labour. It is a well-known fact that those who emigrate are usually those who are willing to work hard. Barbadians must be aware of this, and instead of trying to keep them out, they must be prepared to work harder. I take the opportunity here to speak of training. In the context of CSME, our training must be futuristic. We need to look not only at where our firms are today, but where they wish to be and how they get there. If productivity requirements mean greater state-of-the-art equipment, then we must train persons in these fields. I constantly say that we are technologically challenged. When the high-tech gadgets which we buy fail – there seem to be a few people who can fix them. HR trainers must therefore be conscious of the training requirements which will make us globally ready – if we are globally ready we will be CSME ready. We will need to use the Internet more, use journals - find the right areas where training is being delivered, and encourage investment in training. This is the one sure way in which our labour force can be prepared to compete in CSME. If you aim for the skies you may land in the treetops. Aim or the treetops you not may get off the ground.  I am aware that employers and especially human resource professional will wish to focus on the issue of culture assimilation within enterprises, and on the application of ground rules which are based on giving the best candidate the job – especially where in today’s environment, that candidate may not be a Barbadian national. However, we have always had to deal with these issues, so this is not new. My only advice is that the most important challenge facing Barbados is to improve its competitiveness. I believe that if employers and HR professionals focus on this they will get the desired responses from their employees. 4 BIS Review 20/2005 
In some organisations the development of pay-for-performance appraisals are being considered. This may, at first, appear to have nothing to do with CSME. However, it has to do with motivation, hence it has to do with getting the best, getting the best employees means improving our competitiveness – so we are back to what is good for us in order to flourish within CMSE – improved competitiveness. We will all need to put systems in place that will ensure that our employees aim for high levels of productivity, this will include reducing work stoppages, reducing absenteeism and a closer control of wage costs. This, coupled with the nurturing of a culture of greater entrepreneurship, will be the key to getting the best out of CSME. Already, given the reduction in the rate of tax from $40,000 to $37,500 and other tax related concessions, there is likely to be a significant increase in disposable incomes. Last year, there was a tremendous surge in spending. Net domestic assets of the banking system, which comprise credit to government and credit to the private sector, rose by 50%. We are looking at a situation where disposable incomes will rise even further in 2005 because of the tax benefits that have been given. Ask yourselves “Is there really scope for giving wage increases on top of that? What will happen to disposable incomes? What will happen to spending?” I hesitate to incur the wrath of the unions, but I am an economist and the numbers stare me in the face. I suggest that you put in to your employees that we put Barbados first and that competitiveness is very important – for the good of themselves and future generations.  Conclusion In conclusion, there are several steps still to be taken to ensure hat CSME becomes the opportunity which we are convinced it can be for Barbadians. However, not all of these initiatives are in the laps of the officials. Yes, the further liberalisation of the external capital account is. However, the restructuring of the productive sectors to make them more competitive is another major challenge facing the country going into the CSME, and it requires a combined effort. With judicious action at the policy-making level, and with the support and input of the public sector, these challenges can be met. On balance, the CSME can produce net benefits to the Barbadian economy by providing a harmonised framework for policy formulation, as well as a larger market, with greater opportunities for employment, investment, production and trade. One that will provide Barbados with the economic and bargaining power necessary to combat external threats and overcome resource constraints. However, what’s in store will, to a large extent, depend on our willingness to seize the opportunities presented to us. We can chart our future in CSME – not one sector or group alone – but with every group, sector and organisation determining what it wants and setting out to get there.  What is in store for us in CARICOM will be largely determined by the efforts we make and by the initiatives we take to influence the outcomes we want.  BIS Review 20/2005 5 
Zdeněk Tůma: The interrelationship between monetary policy, price stability and financial stability Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the European banking and financial forum 2005, Prague, 22 March 2005. *      *      * Mr. President, Excellencies, Governors, distinguished guests,  It is an honour to be opening the central bankers' forum. As the main part of the conference program concerns the financial sector challenges and opportunities in the “New Europe”, the central bankers' panel has to necessarily reflect the close, particularly topical, issue of the financial stability and its relationship to a reasonable monetary policy conduct.  While my colleagues will discuss mainly the particular issues of financial stability, I, having the privilege to be the chairman of the panel, would like to frame the discussion using a more general and historical context. Bearing this perspective in mind, I would like to point to the interrelation between the ultimate goal of monetary policy, the price stability, and the financial stability.  First of all, let me start with the definition of financial stability, simply assuming that price stability does not need any further explanation. To be as brief as possible, financial stability can be defined as the soundness of the financial system, that is, its resilience against various shocks. What I understand as a sound financial system can be thought of as a system that, firstly, enables individuals to do all the payments they want at the very moment they like, and, secondly, enables individuals to smooth their consumption across time by saving and borrowing.  In this respect, the financial stability issue, which arose during the nineties, is not a completely new one. Indeed, it has been of a significant importance since banking emerged. The long years of commodity money system (so called “golden standard”) could be characterised as years when money supply, i.e. the supply of gold, was so exogenous that it was even out of the central bank's control. Consequently, monetary policy was relatively easy to do, just establishing the parity between the central bank banknotes and the gold, but the role of the central bank as a lender of last resort was relatively constrained. Under those circumstances, the financial stability was naturally of a high importance, because for any commercial bank the attempt to “run” the bank could be deadly. Moreover, this could cause stampede runs on others banks and bring the whole system to an end, as the central bank's ability to provide the additional currency would be constrained by its gold reserves. To protect themselves, the commercial banks and the central bank established clearing houses to provide, in case of the run on any particular participating bank, the currency to each other. That was in fact a financial stability remedy, of course, being a product of its time.  After the Second World War the abandonment of the “golden standard” changed things completely. The introduction of the fiat money changed the monetary policy framework dramatically, forcing the financial stability issues to take back seats in the central banks considerations. There were two main reasons for financial stability being less of a worry. First, by using the fiat money the role of the lender of the last resort was not limited anymore. The central bank could lend to commercial banks as much as they wanted to borrow, just printing new money. There was no need to hold a parity to anything. Second, many central banks faced serious troubles in order to meet their ultimate target, the price stability, within the new fiat money environment. Therefore the policy focus shifted and huge effort was concentrated on finding a new appropriate policy framework.  The situation was even more complicated due to the fact that both aforementioned points were closely interdependent. To illustrate this point, let's assume that there was an inflationary pressure which caused redistribution disturbances to the financial system as it led to the redistribution of wealth from lenders to borrowers. The central bank either had not established the appropriate framework for dealing inflation yet, or even worse, inflation had not been viewed as an undesirable phenomenon. On the other hand, the central bank was ready to fulfil its role as a lender of last resort. But saving the commercial banks from imminent bankruptcy further increased inflationary pressures. At the end this caused kind of inflationary trap. It was not surprising that during those times the financial stability was not of a main concern for the central bank.  As the central banks learnt during the second half of eighties to deal more properly with inflationary disturbances, the price stability was broadly achieved again. Consequently, the interest in financial BIS Review 20/2005 1 
stability issue has been increasing during the nineties. In my opinion, there are two main reasons for it. First of all, central banks have learnt one important rule: that their role of the lender of last resort is something the central bank should be ready to fulfil, but in fact it is optimal, never to do it in practice. Second of all, the financial system is in the end completely incomparable to the pre-World-War-II system. Nowadays, we live in a global world and, although we are more capable of minimising the impact of inflationary disturbances, there are other types of shocks arising.  To sum up, the main message we can learn from the history is that price stability as the ultimate goal of monetary policy is not in contradiction with the effort to achieve the financial stability. Indeed, on one hand, price stability is a necessary condition to achieve financial stability, as the inflationary disturbances have the potential to cause serious damages to the financial system; on the other hand, a sound financial system enables the monetary policy to smooth its actions in order to achieve price stability.  Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  2 BIS Review 20/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore English translation of an interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 16 March 2005. *      *      * [Question] International competition has grown over the past few years. Europe's competitors are no longer just the United States and Japan. Many emerging economies, especially in Asia, are now highly competitive. There is a lively debate going on in many circles about Europe's economic decline.  [Answer] I believe that Europe needs to redouble its efforts to become more competitive. Failure to do so would be very costly. The ECB fully subscribes to the substance of the Lisbon agenda (the aim of which is to turn the European Union into the most competitive market in the world by 2010 – Il Sole-24 Ore editor's note) and to the European Commission's wish to press on in this direction, in line with the recent report on the same issue put together by former Netherlands Prime Minister Wim Kok. A good deal has been done, but we believe that a great deal more can still be done. [Question] Everyone is stressing the need to introduce further structural reforms.  [Answer] The lag that has built up between Europe and the United States in terms of productivity growth since the mid-1990s is partially due to a lack of structural reform. It is not our intention to play down the difficulties in reforming the economy or in persuading society of the need for what are sometimes unpopular measures, but we also know that new reforms will help to boost economic growth, European prosperity and employment. In this sense, the ECB backs governments and all social partners in their efforts to introduce these measures. [Question] The ECB prefers to look at the euro area as a whole, but not all member countries are in the same situation. Some of the larger countries are particularly behind in the race for greater productivity.  [Answer] You are right. The Governing Council of the ECB has to look at the region as a whole, in the same way as the Federal Reserve System in the United States looks at the US economy rather than at the economies of Massachusetts or California. That said, each individual European economy has its assets and its liabilities. [Question] In that connection, what are your views on Italy?  [Answer] Italy has numerous qualities, including a very inventive and creative productive sector and dynamic small and medium-sized enterprises. But I will not pretend that it does not also have its weak points. Among these I could mention the increase in the unit labour cost, which has not helped the economy's competitiveness over the past few years. [Question] For a long time Italy was able to stay competitive through the devaluation of its own currency. Now, with the euro, that strategy can no longer be pursued and its economic difficulties are more apparent.  [Answer] The birth of the euro has put an end to intra European currency crises, exchange markets and interest rates market tensions and bond market risk premia. It has enabled Italy, as well as the other eleven economies, to enjoy a historically low cost of money. This is a considerable advantage that should be fully recognised. Before the introduction of the single currency, we explained that in the Monetary Union indicators of competitiveness, as for example unit labour costs, would be very important to monitor in order to ensure the success of individual national economies. It is very important to introduce economic reforms today precisely to reduce the unit labour cost through appropriate labour productivity progress. [Question] But in many countries there is growing concern over international competition at a time when the implementation of economic reforms is also triggering uncertainty on the welfare front. Some days ago the European textile industry called on the European Commission to levy duties on Chinese goods. What do you think of that option? Can the introduction of duties make up for the lack of flexibility in the exchange rate?  [Answer] I will of course respect the division of responsibilities amongst the European institutions: it is up to the Commission and the Council to make their judgment. As regards the ECB we see BIS Review 20/2005 1 
international trade as an important element which has contributed to global growth and prosperity. Since World War II open trade has functioned as an effective win win game. And it is true that the very rapid development of the big emerging economies, in particular in Asia, is a new important challenge for all the industrialised economies and calls for equally rapid adaptation of Europe to this new global deal.  [Question] In recent weeks the ECB has been stressing the fact that in Europe not much use is being made of the new technologies that could help to boost the economy's productivity. Can you explain the reasoning behind your concerns?  [Answer] There are a number of signs that are suggesting that the IT revolution has not yet materialized in the European labour productivity progress. In the United States it occurred between mid 1990’s with the disappearance of the so-called “Robert Solow paradox” (“Computers are found everywhere but in the productivity data” – Il Sole-24 Ore editor's note). So we are convinced that fresh efforts are needed in Europe to take full advantage of the IT revolution and to foster research and technological innovation. Scientific and technological progresses today are remarkable and are calling for renewing the production process not only in the manufacturing sector but also in the services industry. I trained as an engineer, and from that point of view too I am amazed when I see how fast scientific progress has been in recent years. [Question] Yet Europe has made considerable efforts in this field over the past few years. Some countries are out in the forefront in terms of Internet and mobile phone use. Why do you believe that the euro area still lags behind?  [Answer] We suspect that the IT revolution is taking its time to materialize because Europe has to reckon with goods, services and labour markets that are still not very flexible, or in any case less flexible than in other economies. We are convinced that less flexible economies and companies benefit less and later from scientific progress. Moreover, I would add that Europe is unfortunately not yet at the heart of technological and scientific innovation. So, in that sense, we have to renew our efforts in research, innovation and the economy of knowledge, while at the same time making our economic fabric more flexible. [Question] But some countries in Europe are managing better than others.  [Answer] That is true. There are countries where the virtuous cycle of economic reform, IT revolution and increased productivity, growth and employment have taken root. I would mention the Scandinavian countries and Ireland in particular. From that point of view, there is no need to look outside the Union: There is no lack of reference points in Europe and in the euro area that can be taken as effective benchmarks for those countries that are having greater difficulty in pursuing reform. [Question] Many people in Europe are convinced that in the current context – not only the economic context but also the social context – a more flexible Stability and Growth Pact would be useful. That issue is at the heart of a debate among the EU's Member States right now.  [Answer] This is a very important issue. You know the position of the ECB’s Governing Council which has been expressed already a year ago. The proposal of improving the efficiency of the preventive arm of the Pact is a good one and we supported it from the very beginning. But we think that as far as the corrective arm of the Pact is concerned it is important to fully preserve the nominal benchmark of 3% deficit and the integrity of the excessive deficit procedure. The Commission proposes. The Council will decide. It was, and it is, our duty to say what we think taking into account the crucial importance of the Stability and Growth Pact for the cohesion of Economic and Monetary Union. In any case, whatever the decision is we will be faithful to our mandate and maintain price stability.  [Question] In this context of low growth and low output, the fact that the population is ageing plays an important role too. Is that a factor that the ECB takes into consideration?  [Answer] That is a very important feature. In many euro area countries we are seeing a gradual increase in the less dynamic and less active part of the population, which in general leads to a fall in consumption and investment with the resultant negative effect on the economy. That is another reason why reforms of the health and pension systems and the labour market are crucial. In some countries, specific policies have been adopted to correct this demographic trend.  2 BIS Review 20/2005 
[Question] Of course, low growth in productivity also has an impact on inflation.  [Answer] Of course. Low growth in productivity means higher unit labour costs. Cost-generated inflation tends to rise, and that certainly does not make the ECB's task any easier, given that our job is to maintain price stability within the Monetary Union. [Question] On the subject of inflation, the ECB has estimated the euro area's non-inflationary potential growth rate to be between 2.0% and 2.5%. Can you confirm that estimate?  [Answer] The ECB relies in this field also on assessments of market economists’ consensus and on analyses conducted by other major international organizations. We have noticed that this estimate has been revised downwards recently. If I were to mention a figure today, I would say that a number of estimates are getting closer to 2% than to 2.5%. [Question] Drawing to a conclusion this structural analysis of the European economy's problems, allow me to ask you one more question on the economic climate. What is the ECB's forecast for growth in Europe in 2005? Is the monetary institute optimistic?  [Answer] We are neither optimistic nor pessimistic. Rather we are realistic and humble in front of facts and figures. The ECB's economists have revised downwards their growth projections for 2005 (from 1.4%-2.4% to 1.2%-2.0% – Il Sole-24 Ore editor's note) as a consequence of the slowdown in the second half of 2004. There have recently been signs of greater dynamism in investments and in internal demand. We will have a clearer picture of the situation with the figures for the first quarter of 2005. I would say for the time being that we can stand by our diagnosis of continued moderate growth in the euro area. BIS Review 20/2005 3 
David Dodge: Inflation targeting - a Canadian perspective Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the National Association for Business Economics, Washington DC, 21 March 2005. *      *      * Good afternoon. Three years ago, when I last addressed this group, I spoke about the conduct of monetary policy in the presence of economic shocks. In those remarks, I made passing reference to the Bank of Canada's inflation-targeting framework. Today, I am happy to accept your invitation to return and talk in more depth about how we use inflation targeting as our monetary policy anchor.  The invitation is timely, given that the Bank of Canada's inflation-targeting agreement with the Canadian government is up for renewal next year. At the Bank, we are always reflecting on our framework, deciding what works well and what we can improve. Against that backdrop, we have watched with interest the debate taking place here in the United States - inside and outside the Federal Reserve - about whether that institution should join the ranks of inflation-targeting central banks. As part of that debate, the minutes of the February FOMC meeting show that my colleagues at the Fed had a discussion about the merits of inflation targeting last month. According to the minutes, arguments were made both for and against the adoption of an explicit inflation target. Those in favour spoke of how such a target can anchor inflation expectations, add clarity to monetary policy decision making, and help with communications. Those opposed said that the benefits of adopting a target were unlikely to be large, that adopting a target might bias or constrain policy, and that it might appear - and I stress the word "appear" - to be inconsistent with the Fed's dual mandate to promote price stability and maximum employment.  Before I proceed with my remarks today, I want to make it absolutely clear that my purpose here is not to weigh in on the debate within the Federal Reserve. I would not presume to tell the Fed what it should or should not do. Rather, I want to talk about the Canadian experience with inflation targets. However, in doing so, I will address some of the arguments raised at the FOMC meeting that I just mentioned. I will begin by discussing the Bank of Canada's legislated mandate, and how inflation targeting helps us to meet the objectives of that mandate. I will then talk about some of the choices that we have made to establish and refine our particular framework. I'll discuss some of the benefits that we can attribute - at least in part - to inflation targeting. And I will conclude by touching on some of the issues still facing us as we look to the future. Our Mandate and Objectives Let me start with the Bank of Canada's legislated mandate. It is interesting to compare our mandate with the one spelled out in the Federal Reserve Act, given that the nature of the Fed's mandate is often cited as one reason why it should not adopt an explicit inflation target. The pieces of legislation that govern the Bank and the Fed do contain some clear differences. But in terms of the conduct of monetary policy, it is the similarities that are more striking. Our mandate is broadly set out in the preamble to the Bank of Canada Act. The preamble was drafted in 1934 and, of note, has not been substantively amended over the past 70 years. The preamble calls on us to "regulate credit and currency in the best interest of the nation." It goes on to say that the Bank should mitigate "fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." By comparison, the most recent revision of the Federal Reserve Act calls on the Fed to maintain growth of credit and the money supply "commensurate with the economy's long-run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."  The Fed's mandate is a bit more specific than ours in that it states directly that monetary policy should aim at having the U.S. economy operate at full capacity. But the main point is that both central banks have references in their mandates to production, prices, and employment. Indeed, a key goal for all central banks is to conduct monetary policy so as to provide favourable conditions for maximum, BIS Review 20/2005 1 
sustainable long-run growth, while recognizing that monetary policy alone is not sufficient to bring about that growth. So the question is, What is the best way to operate monetary policy in order to provide the conditions for sustainable growth, bearing in mind the words in our mandate: "so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action"? Over the years, central banks have tried various frameworks in attempting to answer this question. First, central banks tried fixing exchange rates to gold; most later tried fixing their exchange rates to those of other countries. Some central banks tried to target credit or the growth of monetary aggregates, while many relied solely on their own judgment. All of these frameworks have had their problems, which I won't go into today. But over time, what has become clear is that the best way for monetary policy to promote sustainable economic growth is to anchor expectations about the future purchasing power of money. What we have learned from the bitter experience of many countries - including Canada and the United States - is that when monetary policy chases short-term goals, mistakes are made, uncertainty is increased, and fluctuations in economic activity are aggravated. Focusing on domestic price stability - however that term is defined - is the best contribution monetary policy can make to economic stabilization and sustainable long-term growth. Indeed, as my predecessor Gordon Thiessen put it, "Focusing on price stability helps us to guard against the sort of systematic [policy] errors that often occurred when we tried to aim directly at output and employment."1At the end of the 1980s, the Bank of Canada faced the question of how to pursue price stability in a way that would allow it to accomplish three things: first, help to anchor expectations about the future purchasing power of money; second, give the Bank a guide for the conduct of policy; and third, help us to explain to markets, politicians, and the Canadian public what we are doing and what actions they could expect from their central bank.  By 1991, the Bank and the Government of Canada had agreed that inflation targeting was the right framework for pursuing this objective. We considered targeting inflation as the best way to achieve high, sustainable growth of output and employment. To be clear, inflation targeting is not an end in itself. Rather, it is the best means of fulfilling our commitment to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada. The Canadian Version of Inflation Targeting Let me now say a few words about some of the particular choices we have made over the years to shape our inflation-targeting framework. A central bank that wants to target inflation and run an independent monetary policy must allow its currency to float. As you know, a monetary authority cannot control both the domestic and external values of its currency. We have one instrument, so we can have only one target. Thus, with inflation as our target, we naturally operate with a floating currency. Once the Bank and the government agreed on the concept of inflation targeting, we needed to make some choices to put the concept into practice. Our goal of price stability came to be defined as low and stable inflation. Like many other central banks, we chose a target for the annual increase in the consumer price index (CPI). Initially, our focus was on inflation reduction. So it was announced that the target would decline gradually - from the 3 per cent midpoint of a 2 to 4 per cent target range at the end of 1992 to the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range by the end of 1995. The target has remained there since. Let me take you through some of the key decisions that we made in 1991, and the rationale behind our choices, as we set out the details of our framework. First of all, why did we choose the CPI as our target? The key reasons were that it is widely understood and is the measure of inflation most familiar to Canadians. Choosing a well-known indicator as a target makes it easier to explain our actions and to be accountable to Canadians. However, movements in the prices of particularly volatile components of the CPI can cause the index to fluctuate sharply. So we use a measure of core inflation as an operational guide. This measure strips out the most volatile components and the effect of changes in indirect taxes on the rest of the index, giving us a better understanding of the trend of inflation.                                                       1  G. Thiessen, "Can a Bank Change? The Evolution of Monetary Policy at the Bank of Canada 1935-2000," The Thiessen Lectures, (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2001), p. 79. 2 BIS Review 20/2005 
Second, why have a range? While we emphasize the 2 per cent target, we have a range - as many central banks do - because monetary policy operates with long and variable lags. If we tried to target inflation too precisely we could have "instrument instability;" in other words, we would be adjusting our policy interest rate sharply and frequently, which would lead to greater instability in the economy. Further, measured inflation itself can be volatile as specific prices adjust. But to be clear, the range does not represent a zone of indifference - we do aim to achieve the 2 per cent target.  Third, given that we must always be forward looking as we conduct policy, what time frame would we choose to achieve our target? From the beginning, we said that if a demand shock pushed inflation away from the target, we would conduct policy so as to return inflation to target over a period of 18 to 24 months. This is because our research suggests that it takes 12 to 18 months for changes in interest rates to have most of their impact on output, and 18 to 24 months to have most of their impact on prices. Of course, there is always uncertainty about the lags involved, and I'll have more to say about this later on. To be sure, there will always be times when there are large swings in relative prices in the economy - energy prices being a good example. Under inflation targeting, the objective is not to try to offset or stifle these relative price movements. Our experience has been that with a clear inflation target and with well-anchored expectations, these types of relative price shocks have only a one-off effect on the price level, and do not feed into ongoing inflation.  Before I leave this section, I want to emphasize two points about our inflation-targeting framework. The first is that we operate in a symmetric way, and we make it clear to everyone that we do so. By this, I mean that we worry just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about it rising above target. This is a tremendously important point. When the demand for goods and services pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. Just as importantly, when the economy is operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below target, the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate growth. Whatever the direction of the demand shock, the Bank of Canada will respond appropriately. This symmetry is our answer to the charge that central banks target inflation at the expense of growth. On the contrary, paying close attention to signs of deviation from our target promotes timely action in response to both positive and negative demand shocks. This is how we can keep the economy operating near its full capacity and thus keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. The second point I want to stress is that having an inflation target as an anchor is very helpful in terms of the Bank's accountability. If inflation persistently deviates from the target, we are committed to explaining the reasons why this is so, what we will do to return it to target, and how long we expect the process to take. Our Experience with Inflation Targeting Now let me turn to our experience with inflation targeting. Just as Canada was a pioneer at having a floating exchange rate, we were also among the very first to adopt inflation targeting. And as in other countries that have done so, the result has been unambiguously positive. Indeed, as Claudio Borio put it, "no country embracing inflation targeting has regretted doing so."2Back in 1991, Canada had several compelling reasons for moving to inflation targeting. Compared with today, inflation was still relatively high. Further, the Bank of Canada and the federal government wanted to minimize the possibility of a wage-price spiral developing in the wake of the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax. We recognized the importance of having both the general public and financial markets understand our actions. And as inflationary pressures built towards the end of the 1980s, we saw that the lack of a monetary anchor was leading to rising inflation expectations. As we look at Canada's record since 1991, in terms of inflation and economic growth, I can tell you that all of the benefits we had hoped would come from inflation targeting have, in fact, materialized. We expected that inflation would become more stable under a targeting framework - and it did so, sooner than we had anticipated. We expected that our credibility would increase and that inflation                                                       2  C. Borio, "Wrap-up Discussion." The Future of Inflation Targeting, (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 2004): p. 278. BIS Review 20/2005 3 
expectations would become well anchored under targeting - and this also happened. Indeed, short-term expectations quickly became anchored to our target, although longer-term expectations took a bit more time to fall in line. Together with marked improvements in Canada's fiscal position in the mid-1990s, our excellent track record on inflation added to our credibility. Private sector forecasts for inflation in Canada now average close to the 2 per cent target far into the future.  We expected that setting out a clear paradigm for operating under inflation targeting would bring benefits - and it did. Internally, focusing on inflation brought increased discipline and clarity to our monetary policy deliberations. But more importantly, being transparent about our operational paradigm has allowed markets and analysts to better predict how we will react to different economic outcomes. Financial markets and analysts now pay more attention to their own evaluations of the prospects for the economy and inflation in assessing the future path of our policy interest rate. Appropriately, they do not have to rely on the wording of our communications for guidance.  Empirical evidence shows that inflation targeting has been an unqualified success for Canada. Inflation has averaged very close to 2 per cent and has remained within the target range since we adopted our targets, with rare exceptions that were due mainly to large swings in the prices of oil or other commodities. Further, there is evidence that inflation targeting has been successful as a macroeconomic stabilizer, helping to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle.  Our symmetric approach to inflation targeting is crucial in this regard. Because we guard against both inflationary and deflationary pressures, businesses and individuals can make long-range economic plans with increased confidence. Scarce economic resources are no longer wasted trying to hedge against the threat of runaway inflation. And because our paradigm makes it clear that we guard against deflationary pressures, Canada has avoided any serious threat of deflation. Throughout all the shocks we have experienced, Canadian inflation expectations have remained remarkably well anchored on the 2 per cent target. At the time that we were considering the adoption of inflation targeting, we heard many of the same arguments against such a framework that we hear today in the United States. Some argued that inflation targeting could constrain our ability to act, or would take away our ability to apply our own judgment in the conduct of policy. Our experience has shown these concerns to be groundless.  Let me illustrate with a couple of recent examples. In the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, we lowered interest rates quickly and decisively to underpin confidence, which could have been profoundly shaken by the attacks. When a major loss of confidence did not materialize over the next few months, we were able to reverse course and withdraw some of that monetary stimulus. Our inflation-targeting framework did not restrict our ability to act. Indeed, because our paradigm is clear, financial markets were able to understand why we made these rapid rate adjustments. Another example is our reaction to the continuing realignment of world currencies over the past two years. The Canadian economy has had to adjust to sharp movements, not just in the external value of our dollar, but also in the foreign demand for many of our goods and services. Inflation targeting gives the Bank an important guideline for dealing with the currency appreciation, allowing us to maintain our focus on macroeconomic stabilization at a time when various sectors of the economy are dealing with the exchange rate shock. Our paradigm has given us the flexibility to apply judgment in the face of considerable uncertainty over this period. The Future of Inflation Targeting Before I close, let me say a few words about the future of inflation targeting in Canada. As I noted at the beginning, our current agreement with the federal government is up for renewal in 2006. So it is useful to think about those elements of our framework that we would not want to change, and other areas where changes might be considered. From the central bank's point of view, the basic arrangement of aiming inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range has served us well, along with the use of the CPI as our target. The CPI may not be a perfect indicator of inflation, but it is the most readily recognized and understood measure, and so likely represents our best option for targeting. However, given the volatility inherent in the index, the Bank has emphasized a core inflation measure for operational purposes. I would expect that these elements of our framework will remain in place. But good public policy demands that we continue to do the necessary research to confirm that these remain the best options.  4 BIS Review 20/2005 
Also, the Bank of Canada will continue to recognize the importance of communications and transparency to the conduct of monetary policy. Inflation targeting is a helpful tool for anchoring expectations, but its effectiveness is greatly enhanced when a central bank communicates well. And a symmetric approach to inflation targeting allows the bank to make a convincing case for its policy actions, even during difficult economic conditions. But I don't want to suggest that there aren't questions to be answered as we go forward. One question facing us now is whether 18 to 24 months is the appropriate time horizon for monetary policy to bring inflation back to target after various types of shocks. One type of shock that we have to consider is a major movement in asset prices. Do these types of movements in asset prices contain any information about future inflation beyond our typical policy horizon? And if so, what should we do about it? This is not to suggest in any way that we should try to target asset prices. Rather, the question is whether it would ever be appropriate to lengthen the time horizon for returning inflation to target. A similar question applies to exchange rate shocks. Globalization appears to have altered the way in which economies adjust to movements in exchange rates. This applies both to the adjustment of real economic activity to the shock, as well as the direct pass-through of exchange rate movements to prices. This raises the question of whether 18 to 24 months is too short a time horizon for monetary policy to deal with exchange rate shocks. On the other hand, the reduction in the persistence of inflation that we have seen under inflation targeting would suggest that it may instead be more appropriate to shorten the policy horizon. Given the success to date of handling shocks within an 18 to 24-month horizon, we should not change our framework lightly. But we need to think hard about the appropriate time horizon in dealing with various shocks as inflation targeting evolves in the future. Conclusion Let me close by emphasizing a few key points. There is no doubt in my mind that inflation targeting is the right monetary policy framework for Canada. Through our symmetric approach of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable, we have laid the groundwork for solid, sustainable growth in output and employment. In doing so, we fulfill our commitment to "promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada," as spelled out in the Bank of Canada Act. With inflation targeting, our policy is more focused, our communications are clearer, and Canada's inflation expectations are more solidly anchored. During a period when consumer price inflation is low and appears to be stable, it may be tempting to some to conclude that an inflation anchor is unnecessary. In my opinion, to reach this conclusion would be a huge mistake. On the contrary, it is particularly important at this time, in the face of large terms-of-trade movements and other shocks, that central banks have an anchor to keep monetary policy focused. From my perspective, inflation targeting is the best anchor we've seen. Of course, I'm not saying that inflation targeting is the end of monetary policy history. And, I love a good debate. So I hope that my remarks today may have helped to add some context to the ongoing discussions here in the United States. And I can tell you that we in Canada will continue to watch, with great interest, as the debate unfolds.  BIS Review 20/2005 5 
Sir K Dwight Venner: Issues of concern to the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank and the Caribbean region as a whole Feature address by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the opening of the new building of ABI Bank Ltd, Antigua, 5 March 2005. *      *      * Mr Chairman I would like to express my appreciation to the Directors, Management and Staff of ABI Bank Ltd for inviting me to be the Feature Speaker at the Opening of your new building. A few years ago, I performed a similar function for the ACB and you would appreciate that the ABI Bank could do no less than invite me to bless their own undertaking, and I could do no less than accept. In addition, the charm and persuasiveness of my dear friend, McAllister Abbott put the matter beyond any doubt. The ABI Bank Ltd has shown itself to be a very innovative institution. In addition, they respond to the regulatory concerns of the Central Bank fully realizing that in the business of finance, innovation must be balanced by prudence, and risks of any undertaking must be properly taken into consideration. I consider this to be a very timely opportunity given the times we live in, to comment on some of the issues which are of concern to the ECCB and the region as a whole. It is also an opportunity to share with you some of my views on how we are approaching these challenges as the Central Monetary Authority of the OECS. I would go as far as to say that this is a defining time for the region, as we seek to grapple with both external and domestic challenges of a very complex nature. There is also a great desire among our people for information and knowledge on the events that affect our lives at this time, and into the near and distant future. The possession of information particularly when it is accurate and credible gives those who have it considerable advantage over those who do not. In the economic and financial spheres, information is so critical to the conduct of business that the provision of certain types, for example, accounts, are legally required and have to be publicly certified. The use of information under certain circumstances, such as insider trading is legally prohibited and punishable by fines and imprisonment. Companies have to present statements of their performance to Annual General Meetings of their shareholders. Governments have to present their Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure to the Legislature, the elected representatives of the people or shareholders in the country, and the Budget is a public document. Individuals have to present their income and financial statements to the tax authorities so that they can be fairly assessed and make a contribution, so that in exchange the government can provide the services of law and order, sanitation, education, etc which add to the quality of life. All countries as members of the international community, and, in particular, the IMF have to transmit to that organization for official publication in a document entitled “International Financial Statistics” their National Accounts, Balance of Payments, Fiscal, Monetary and Price Statistics. These figures obviously are of critical importance to the country itself in two ways. Firstly, how can good policies be made if there are no timely and accurate statistics, and how can the progress of the country be accurately assessed if there are no reliable statistics to make the judgment? Secondly, if both foreign and domestic investors have no access to accurate data, how can they make serious decisions on potential investment opportunities? In both developing and emerging market economies, TV and radio stations, newspapers and business magazines keep the public well informed on commercial, financial and economic affairs. In this churning up of information, analysis and commentary, individuals and business firms are presented with increased choices for both saving and investment. In this environment, businesses rise and fall based on the performance of markets, and their ability to manage their resources. While speculation abounds this is mostly based on the review and analysis, no matter how cursory, of what is taken to be accurate and credible statistics produced and published at set periods by official or publicly acknowledged institutions. BIS Review 19/2005 1 
Information is such a critical part of this era that not only do we speak of the Information Age but three distinguished Economists have received the Nobel Prize for their work in this subject area. It is against this background that we can outline the external and domestic environment in which we exist, define the domain or theatre of action in which we operate, point out the goals and objectives we have set for ourselves and/or have been set for us, and review the policy tools we have at our disposal to meet these objectives. In the case of the external environment, we live in what has now been accepted as an increasingly globalised world. Barriers to trade and finance are being removed across the international community, and the spread of technology both in basic sciences and materials, as well as information and communication technologies have literally created a global village. This trend has inevitably presented challenges to all countries in different ways. Free trade regimes have had an impact on our traditional agricultural export commodities, such as bananas and sugar whose preferences are being gradually removed. In the financial arena, the proliferation of standards and codes, and the efforts of the OECD have had a negative impact on our embryonic Offshore Finance Sector. They have also posed a challenge to our indigenous domestic banks by making it somewhat difficult with their correspondent relationships. Fluctuating output of the world economy, and particularly in the countries we trade with, mainly the USA, Canada, the UK and Europe has a direct impact on our economic performance. The same is true in the case of the fluctuations in major currencies. We are linked to the US dollar so that fluctuations between that currency, the Euro, Sterling and the Canadian dollar have implications for us in the Currency Union. A major factor which impacts on the performance of our economies is the price of oil which in recent times has been at unprecedentedly high levels. It is our major import, and the price passes through to almost every item of consumption or production. Finally, the geopolitics of the international system, particularly the fight against terrorism has to be carefully examined, as it could potentially impact on our major foreign exchange earner, tourism. Domestically we have to treat with the fundamental issue of small size, both in terms of land mass and population. The question we have to pose for ourselves is, given the resources we have, what standard of living is possible and sustainable over long periods of time? The imbalance between expectations and resources in most countries shows up in the Balance of Payments on the external account and in the budget domestically. Not many, if any country, could like the US get away with running these twin deficits over any period of time, as they are almost self correcting as creditors both external and domestic will withdraw their support at some stage. In fact, in the US, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan has expressed his concern about the current situation. Antigua and Barbuda, as well as other countries in the Currency Union face this situation, and I can only urge that it be vigourously addressed. The OECS countries have understood more than the rest of the regional community the need for regional integration. While the bigger countries like Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago have felt that they had other options, the smaller islands have understood that it meant their very survival. This is a defining moment in the sense that we are about to embark on a new venture, the Caribbean Single Market and Economy, CSME and for it to succeed the OECS as a bloc must step up to the plate, define its interests and assert its leadership. We must, therefore, define to our satisfaction and acceptance a unique and coherent space called the OECS, which at least in an economic sense is continuous and coterminous. We have two concepts to engage our minds in this regard, first the OECS as an Economic Union, and the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union as a Single Financial Space. The only difference between the two is the absence of the BVI from the Currency Union as it uses the US dollar as its legal tender. The OECS is a highly integrated area as the Treaty of Basseterre, 1981 establishing the Organisation indicates. In Article 3 (2), it sets out a number of arrangements which if all implemented would result in the formation of a new state. The founders accepted that as very small states there were three overriding advantages to the arrangement – • To take advantage of the economies of scale and scope through sharing vital services; • To mitigate risks by spreading them over several countries;  2 BIS Review 19/2005 
• Enhancing their capacity to negotiate with third countries or groups of countries. The result is that the OECS is at a much higher level of integration than CARICOM with a common court, a common currency, central bank and stock exchange, a directorate of civil aviation, a joint pharmaceutical procurement system, joint diplomatic representation, and common projects in education and health, as well as joint regulation of telecommunications. We now need to focus on these achievements and use them as a platform for taking advantage of the CSME and other arrangements like the FTAA. We also need to see how each individual island can contribute to the whole instead of assuming that we will be worst off, or that one will gain at someone else’s expense. We need a different mindset in which addition and multiplication is seen as superior to subtraction and division. Having established the concept of a domain we must then identify the objectives of this entity. This will require the convergence of both regional and national goals. At the regional level there is the OECS Economic Development Strategy, the OECS Development Charter, and the objectives set at a Special Meeting of Heads in November 2002. Those were: • A sustainable growth rate of 6%; • An unemployment rate of less than 6%; • A poverty rate of less than 6%; • Maintaining and achieving the Human Development Indices goals consistent with the Millennium Development Goals; and • The transformation of our economies into internationally competitive entities. At the national level, these objectives can be gleaned from manifestos, development plans, medium term economic strategy papers, public sector investment programs and budgets. The policies which are available to achieve these objectives are - • Monetary • Fiscal • Trade • International Economic Relations • Incomes • Structural • Social • Environmental Let me on this occasion confine myself to monetary and financial policies, given the occasion for which we are gathered. The ECCB in assessing the situation both domestically and internationally has identified consistent with the objectives set by the OECS Heads two major objectives which are also consistent with the purposes of the Bank as set out in Article 4 of the ECCB. These are Stability and Development. Under Stability the Bank has two goals, namely – Monetary Stability and Financial Stability. Monetary Stability is tied to the performance of the exchange rate. We have chosen a fixed exchange rate regime, and have managed to successfully maintain this at 2.7 EC to the US dollar since July 1976. This has required us to maintain a very high level of foreign exchange reserves, presently 96% to the currency in circulation. This is above the legal limit of 60% and is approximately equivalent to four months imports where the benchmark is three months. In order for this parity to be maintained, we focus our attention on the performance of the Balance of Payments, the fiscal and debt ratios of the countries, and the competitiveness of the currency as assessed by the Real Effective Exchange Rate. The Monetary Council has therefore set a number of benchmarks in the fiscal and debt areas which member governments have been requested to adhere to. BIS Review 19/2005 3 
Financial Stability is related to the safety and soundness of the banking system and the effective regulation of non-bank financial intermediaries. This requires the appropriate legislative and legal framework and the capacity to effectively regulate the financial system. Let me put these two stability conditions in a way that the ordinary layman would understand. If the currency is devalued, the ability to purchase goods from abroad will be decreased and the prices of all goods will go up due to inflation. Also, on the other hand, if wages and prices increase faster than productivity we will become less competitive. The Monetary Council has recommended to governments that they establish Tripartite Committees comprised of representatives from the government, private sector and the trade unions to monitor wages, prices, employment and productivity. With respect to financial stability, whereas in the case of the devaluation you will lose the ability to purchase more goods and services, in this case, if a bank closes you will lose all of your money. A proper legal and regulatory environment is therefore vital to the maintenance of stability. Stability can therefore be spelt out under the following headings with the appropriate responsibilities assigned to different institutions: • The Central Bank has the responsibility to maintain the external and domestic value of the currency; • The Central Bank in conjunction with the Governments has the responsibility of ensuring the safety and soundness of the financial system; • The Banks have the responsibility of ensuring the safety of their obligations to their depositors; • The Government has the responsibility that they keep their obligations for salaries, services and debt repayments. Without this stability, growth and development will be very difficult to achieve, much less maintained. This brings me to two fundamental premises which I have taken great pains to bring to the attention of our governments and citizens, and will continue to do so on every available occasion. Number one is that banks do not lend out their own money. They only lend what is deposited with them. It is therefore depositors money which is at risk. Secondly, governments can only provide services with money which they take in through taxes or its citizens. If the government provides a particular service it can follow several procedures. Firstly, it can decide on full cost recovery, that is, if it cost $100 to provide, they will charge $100. It can outsource the service so that an external firm provides it. The firm will charge the full cost plus, unless the government subsidises all or part of the service. It can provide the service free of cost to the consumer. In the case of the subsidized and the free provision, the question would be, who pays? The simple answer is the Tax payer. There is, of course, another route where these costs can be shared with other countries in the OECS, thus bringing down the unit costs.  These issues are important, not only in informing our citizens of our reality, that is, that there is no free meal and that someone has to pay or someone has to be held responsible, but also that they have developmental costs and implications. With respect to costs, the expense of running so many services which have to be passed on to individual tax payers or business firms either directly or indirectly impacts negatively on our productivity and competitiveness. This high cost of government means less disposable incomes for individuals and higher running costs for businesses. The implications are that if we get our citizens into the mode of depending on the government for everything this will not get them into the creative spirit of creating wealth and jobs. We must always remember that a nation is the aggregation of all its individual citizens and that if the nation is experiencing difficulty all of its citizens are also suffering in one way or the other. In rectifying the problem there has to be some level of equity in sharing the pain, but the basic fundamental problem still remains and has to be treated with. To give a basic example, suppose an individual earned $10,000 a month and was able to spend through credit $15,000 a month. At the end of the year he/she would be in debt to the total of $60,000. At this point the creditors would say we have stopped extending credit and you now have to start paying back. If the repayment period was one 4 BIS Review 19/2005 
year, the individual would now have to live on $5,000 a month, which is quite a drop from $15,000. Of course, they might be given more time. The moral of this example is that this holds for individuals, firms and governments. Speaking directly to the question of development, the ECCB sees its role to be in the area of money and capital market development once the stability conditions have been treated with. We have analysed the gaps in the system and are proceeding along the lines of establishing markets and institutions, putting in place the regulatory framework, and removing legal and administrative barriers to the creation of a single financial space. In the area of markets we have the following: • A common market for the EC dollar and foreign currencies; • An IBM to provide liquidity for banks; • A RGSM to provide markets for government securities; • A securities market for shares; • A secondary market for primary mortgages. With respect to institutions we have established: • The Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange Depository and Registry; • The Eastern Caribbean Home Mortgage Bank. We are now working on an Eastern Caribbean Enterprise Fund to be followed by an Eastern Caribbean Unit Trust. A number of supporting institutions such as the Eastern Caribbean Institute of Bankers, the Eastern Caribbean Bankers Association, and the Eastern Caribbean Institute of Accountants have also been established. We need to have close liaison with the OECS Bar Association and we hope that a vibrant OECS Business Council will be created to push the development of the private sector in the region. We need the support of our governments and our people to create a highly sophisticated and internationally competitive financial sector, which can pave the way to the achievement of our goals and objectives. We are confident that this is the correct path to proceed on and that with the political will of our governments, the innovativeness of our private sector, and the societal consensus of our people across the OECS, we will SUCCEED. However, in conclusion, we must remember that success comes before work only in the dictionary. BIS Review 19/2005 5 
Sir K Dwight Venner: Is the OECS economic union a viable option for St Kitts and Nevis in the context of globalisation and the advent of the CSME? Text of the 3rd lecture in the Public Education Programme by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the University of the West Indies, St Kitts, 10 March 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen We meet in what could only be described as a defining moment for St Kitts and Nevis and the rest of the OECS in particular, and the CARICOM in general, as we seek to respond to the fundamental changes which are taking place in the international system on one hand, and the domestic circumstances which confront us on the other. It is of vital importance that all members of our community, the government, the private sector, trade unions, civil society and the public at large understand the changes that are occurring, the choices we have to make, and the consequences of these choices. This would involve the carrying out of research and the gathering of information on these issues and the wide dissemination of and discussion on them. Each sector and each country will have to define and elaborate on their general and specific interests, and be prepared to enter into discussions and negotiations with other parties to come up with common compromise, and strategic positions which will lead to progress for all. To get a comprehensive view of the situation we must start, so to speak, from where we sit by examining our particular and, if you like, peculiar situation in the most objective way possible. This means that we must set up an objective model devoid of party politics, subjective impressions and historical prejudices. We must then carefully examine the regional and international environment in which we exist. Finally, we must very carefully and objectively examine the options we have both domestically and between various kinds of external associations. St Kitts and Nevis is probably one of the smaller states in the international community with a population of 41,830, and a physical size of 104 square miles. It has a Gross Domestic Product of EC$984.4 m and per capita income of EC$17,577. The balance of trade shows exports of EC$161.5 m and imports of EC$383.4 m, giving rise to a deficit of EC$221.9 m. This is ameliorated somewhat by the inflow of tariff receipts, direct foreign investment and remittances. For us in the OECS, it is always interesting to compare our basic statistics among ourselves, and with other small, medium-sized and large countries. Another interesting factor has been the comparison of our basic resource endowments with our expectations. This poses a particular dilemma for us in the Caribbean because of our system of liberal democracy and our geographical position in the Western Hemisphere. Being in the Western Hemisphere, our choice of a standard of living is more aligned with that of North America and not Sub-Saharan Africa or Bangladesh. Our liberal democratic systems lead to governments having to make very generous gestures to remain in power, as opposition parties raise the bar with new promises in order to unseat them. A certain dynamic is then unleashed which could and has in many cases led to a certain level of instability in the public finances and the economy. I now speak in a generic way about all OECS economies of which St Kitts and Nevis is very representative. The structural issues of small size lead to a concentration of resource use, high unit cost and diseconomies of scale, high levels of risk and low negotiating capabilities with third parties or groups of countries. The point can be illustrated by using a number of very real examples. However, one which is most revealing, is an analysis of the population in relation to the capacity to supply critical services for itself. If you take the total population and subtract all of those who are under seventeen (17) and over (60) you will arrive at the potential labour force. Further subtractions can be made for the sick and those who are incarcerated. There is usually a certain level of unemployment and in some cases substantial underemployment. Having arrived at a proxy for the active labour force, one then has to evaluate the education and skill levels of that group. The numbers we arrive at from a population total of 42,000 in St Kitts and Nevis and even 150,000, as is the case in St Lucia is very small. This labour force is responsible for the total output of the country. BIS Review 19/2005 1 
The country is able to enjoy a certain lifestyle based on what it produces. The conclusion from this analysis is that the smaller the population, the more highly skilled it needs to be, as well as technologically advanced in order to have very high levels of output. Since the domestic market is so small, then most output has to be exported. The structure of our trade patterns ends up being extremely skewed with exports being highly concentrated in one or two sectors, and imports being very widely spread over a very large range of consumption, intermediate and capital goods. Being export competitive, therefore, is vital to the existence of such small economies. Cost factors, however, loom large because of economies of scale and scope. The tax base of small countries is by definition small, and the citizens of small countries have to pay, on average, higher taxes than larger countries, which can spread the taxes over a larger number of people. The level of efficiency in the use of resources in small countries must therefore be higher in small countries in order for their productive sectors to be competitive. The cost of infrastructure is reflected in higher debt servicing and therefore higher taxes. If one assumes that the private sector naturally has to carry higher tax burdens than individual citizens, then this is then reflected in their costs and in their competitiveness. This brings me to one of the two fundamental points I would like to make on this occasion. It is simply this, the government can only provide services which are paid for by its citizens, that is, the tax payers. When the government provides a service it can proceed along several paths. Firstly, it can charge the full cost recovery, that is if the service cost $40 to provide, then that will be the fee. Secondly, it can outsource the service to be provided by a private firm. In this case, the full fee will also have to be paid unless the government provides a subsidy. Thirdly, the government can provide the service free of charge. In the cases of the subsidy and no charge, the question can then be asked, who pays? The simple answer to that is, the taxpayer. There is no free lunch. The dynamics of this issue resides in the fact that whenever the public service receives an increase in salaries, the cost of the service increases. A corresponding factor, of course, is the cost effective delivery of this service in order to support the competitiveness of the economy. Governments have found themselves by default, and because of the pressures of the multiparty competitive political system, taking on much more than they can afford to. This is even more possible given the vulnerability of our economies to natural disaster, hurricanes, and income volatility. Physical and social safety nets are very costly as the insurance cost when spread over small populations is very high. This springs from two factors. Firstly, in a very small physical space any external shock will affect the whole system. Hurricanes will devastate the whole island and economic activities are so concentrated that they will be completely destroyed. Also, in a mono-crop or mono-activity economy, any change in external arrangements such as the removal of trade preferences, as in the case of sugar and bananas will have a significant impact. The picture we have portrayed of a small country, St Kitts and Nevis, if you like, is one of great vulnerability to outside shocks, leading to a concentration of economic activities, high unit costs of operation, and a population dynamic which makes it difficult to provide management for both the public and private sectors, and makes the provision of government services a very high-cost venture. What are the external circumstances faced by St Kitts and Nevis and the other small countries in the OECS. The general name for these circumstances is Globalisation. Globalisation is not a particularly new phenomena as certainly, in the late 19th century and up until the First World War, there was a significant amount of movement of not only goods and capital but also people throughout the international system. This came to an abrupt halt in 1913 and this movement of goods and capital did not resume until the 1950s. Major technological changes in means of communication such as containerisation and the use of large ships and aircrafts to transport both goods and passengers, and the increasing use of computers and telecommunications to transmit both information and specifically finance across countries, led to a fundamental change in the nature of globalisation. The flow of finance across borders has been simply stupendous. In the area of foreign exchange trading, this currently amounts to over a trillion and a half dollars a day. The speed and the magnitude of these and other flows of commercial bank lendings, portfolio purchases, and direct foreign investment have increased and improved the allocation of resources on a global basis. However, there has been a very significant downside from increased volatility and the many financial crises, in both developed and emerging markets. There has been a very significant lessening of barriers to trade in goods through the reduction and removal of both tariffs and quotas. The rise of the multinational corporation and the increasing 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
concentration of production through mergers and acquisitions in such critical sectors as banking and finance, defense and aerospace, oil, mineral production, telecommunications and commodities, such as forestry, is now a feature of the global economy. The spread of brands such as Coca Cola, Toyota, McDonalds, Sony, and Microsoft, all over the globe, in a very sublime way, is how much of the world sees globalisation, that is, from the consumers point of view. The wherewithal to buy these goods at locations all over the world is depicted by American Express, Visa and Mastercard. The vehicle for delivering goods quickly are represented by FEDEX and DHL. The production side is represented by the increasing importance of production and supply chains which farm out the production of various components of a commodity to locations which produce at lowest cost and highest quality. The NIKE brand, for example, has pioneered this kind of operation. Given the increasing openness and interdependence of the global economy, there is a constant striving for improved efficiency, competitiveness and market share by the formation of larger and larger entities at the firm or enterprise level, at particular locations in countries, and through groupings of countries. With respect to firms and enterprises, a large number of firms, in terms of their gross sales, are larger than individual countries when comparison is make with the GDP of those countries. In many countries there are large conurbations where production is concentrated. Such locations are found in Tokyo, Sao Paulo, New York City, Mexico City, Shanghai, Bombay, Los Angeles, Buenos Aires, Seoul and Rio de Janeiro. With respect to countries, there is an increasing tendency for finance capital to move to large countries or groupings of countries. By way of size, the largest economies in the world are the United States, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, France and China. China with its population of one billion and an economy which is growing between 9 and 10 per cent per annum is now drawing both finance and resources from the rest of the world at such a rate that it is having a marked impact on the global economy. As trade regimes become more liberalised in both goods and services, competition between firms and countries will increase. This is already being responded to by cross-border alliances between firms and an increasing number of bilateral and regional trading arrangements between countries. The European Union is the premier regional arrangement which now comprises twenty-five countries and has endeavoured, through integration, to maintain its bargaining power in trade matters in relation to the USA. In Asia, there are a number of cross country trade arrangements some of which involve only regional countries, and others which have the USA and other Pacific nations as participants. In Latin America and the Caribbean, and in Africa, regional groupings are seen as one strategy of managing the process of globalisation. There are specific issues, which affect our countries in this new era. They are – • The erosion of trade preferences through the implementation of new trade regimes, WTO, FTAA, EFA, CSME; • The adoption of new standards and codes adapted by international institutions which have had an effect on our embryonic off-shore financial sector; • The impact of terrorism which could have an effect on our main foreign exchange earner, tourism; • The impact on the price of oil of the demands by China and India, and the turmoil in the Middle East; • The performance of the US and international economies, and their impact on the local economy; • The impact of high interest rates and currency movements of the US dollar vis-à-vis other major currencies on our domestic economies. In the light of these global circumstances, both general and specific, what are the options facing St Kitts and Nevis and by extension the other OECS countries in this defining movement. There are five options or choices facing us – • To operate in splendid isolation; BIS Review 19/2005 3 
• To open up completely to the international economy; • To be absorbed into a large hemispheric country; • To raise the level of participation in the OECS to that of a full economic union with all that this option implies in terms of shared sovereignty; • To be an integral part of the CSME as a single unit. These options include two extreme and polar positions, that is, splendid isolation and complete openness. The option of being absorbed into a large hemispheric country, such as, the United States, Canada or Venezuela may or may not be a practical option given the preferences which both parties have. The two regional choices can be complementary depending on the choice of sequence. The first option which is put forward to indicate an extreme choice presumes that St Kitts and Nevis would match its resources with its wants and not depend on the rest of the world for finance, goods or services. The illustrations we presented, particularly with respect to exports and imports would indicate that this is not a viable option. The other polar extreme complete openness would or could result in the flooding of the St Kitts and Nevis market by goods, services and labour from outside in a way that would apply an extreme shock to the polity, the economy and the society. While globalisation would tend to lead in that direction, it is clear that even major economies like the USA which are much more capable of withstanding such shocks, are not exactly rushing to establish such an open regime. In the case of absorption into a large country – USA, Canada or Venezuela – even if the population of St Kitts and Nevis were in full support of this option, the countries listed, I suspect, would have serious misgivings in the context of the geopolitical repercussions of such an arrangement. We next come to the CSME which involves the removal of substantial restrictions between the countries of the CARICOM in the movement of goods, services, capital and labour across regional borders. The critical question then relates to St Kitts and Nevis’ participation either as a single entity or a member of a consolidated OECS Economic Union bloc. Let me address the issue in this way. All matters involving economic exchanges in this new dispensation, whether it is globalisation or the CSME require economic and negotiating capacity. Economic capacity can be defined in terms of large domestic markets, a high level of domestic output, and good economic policies and management. Negotiating capacity requires a skilled cadre of political, public service and business actors who have clearly defined goals and principles and are supported by a societal consensus on these goals and principles. If one puts the argument in this way, then large countries do have an advantage over smaller ones in terms of economic capacity with respect to large markets and potentially large domestic output. Small countries may redress some of this disadvantage by having good economic policies and management practices, as well as negotiating capacity. St Kitts and Nevis and the other OECS countries would seem to be severely disadvantaged in most of these areas making their participation in the CSME and other arrangements such as the FTAA, a very challenging proposition, and their ability to respond to globalisation, a matter of grave concern. Again, I say, this is a defining moment for us in St Kitts and Nevis and the other members of the OECS as we seek to identify and define our interests first of all, and then decide on the strategies that we must undertake to achieve these objectives. With respect to the CARICOM and the CSME, the group of countries constituting the OECS is a net importer of both goods and services, and has to export both commodities and services to third countries in order to acquire foreign exchange and incomes to buy such imports. Unfortunately, unlike the EU, there is no compensating mechanism for redistribution to support the development efforts of the OECS countries, and to balance the trade inequalities in the region. This is a very serious problem and could lead to much resentment in the countries of the OECS, particularly if there is no freedom of movement of labour to allow for some sort of adjustment. The argument which is being advanced is quite simple. The best option for St Kitts and Nevis and the other countries of the OECS is to access the CSME as a unified bloc so that they can advance their interests through enhanced economic and negotiating capacity. The associated argument is that the CSME’s success depends on the prior or parallel establishment of a consolidated and coherent OECS entity. Both historical and contemporary circumstances combine to 4 BIS Review 19/2005 
support these arguments. The fragmentation of the Caribbean region into separate sovereignties following the demise of the West Indies Federation led to the smallest states, the OECS having to delay their independence and then to establish sub-regional arrangements, which were given concrete expression in the Treaty of Basseterre (1981). There has been an apparent conceptual approach in the OECS which, given their very small size, is characterized by a very conscious effort to support regional initiatives. This is quite different in the larger countries which always seem to think they have other options. The Treaty of Basseterre embraces the ethos of this sentiment, and a serious reading of the Treaty is very illustrative of the intentions and means by which the countries are expected to advance the welfare of their peoples. The Preamble, as well as Annex A, which is the Agreement establishing the East Caribbean Common Market, speak volumes regarding the intent and method of implementation.  First, the Preamble, which states clearly the affirmation to achieve economic and social development for their peoples as enunciated in the Agreement establishing the Eastern Caribbean Common Market. It offers a strategic approach to critical issues as set out in the following: “ … Inspired by a common determination to strengthen the links between themselves by uniting their efforts and resources and establishing and strengthening common institutions which could serve to increase their bargaining power as regards third countries or groups of countries;…” It finally expresses a fundamental resolve in the phrase “ … Determined to satisfy the legitimate aspirations of their peoples for development and progress; …” It is important to note, contrary to some misconceptions, that the OECS Treaty is not antagonistic to wider regional movements, and sought to incorporate them or actively solicit their cooperation. Article 2 (4) states “Any other States or territories in the Caribbean region may apply to become Full or Associate Members and shall be admitted as such by a unanimous decision of the Authority. The nature and extent of the rights and obligations of Associate Members shall be determined by the Authority.” This clause applies to any Caribbean state, which could include Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana and Jamaica. It is not a discriminatory clause. Let us speculate that the current OECS members decided collectively to undergo a radical adjustment and transformation process and achieved a 10 per cent per annum real compounded growth rate over the next five years, while the CSME and other regional arrangements made no progress. Would this dazzling growth performance influence Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago to apply for membership in the OECS, or to have some closer arrangement on a bilateral basis? This shocking speculation is made simply to assert that there may be, other things being equal, a potential growth dynamic within a collective OECS Economic Union, which could accelerate the current rate of economic growth and transformation of the individual economies. This may place the OECS and the rest of CARICOM in a much stronger economic position. The fact of the matter is that the ECCU has achieved some basic economic objectives which can provide a platform for growth and development. In the monetary sphere they have achieved a stable currency, low inflation, and a safe and sound banking system. A programme of money and capital market development is now seeking to put in place institutions and markets to create a single financial space. The issue of economic union is now being addressed and this will be a fundamental advancement when placed in conjunction with the single financial space. Economic Union is at the upper levels in the hierarchy of integration arrangements. The literature sets the following levels in this hierarchy: • A Free Trade Area where goods are not subject to restrictions between member countries; • A Customs Union in which the members apply a common external tariff to third countries; • A Common Market in which there is the free movement of the factors of production; • Economic Union in which there is the coordination of economic policies; • Full Political Union which could either be a Unitary State or a Federation. The OECS countries have virtually free movement of goods, and virtually free movement of capital through the ECSE and the RGSM, a common currency and central bank, which implies the BIS Review 19/2005 5 
coordination of monetary policy. The status of the OECS, therefore, lies somewhere between a Common Market and an Economic Union. The situation, therefore, is that if the impediments to the creation of the single financial space are removed, and freedom of movement of labour is legislated, then the OECS countries would have created a new economic entity with command over more natural resources, and having a larger collective market size. Coordination and peer pressure would result in better policies, other things being equal. Negotiating capacity would be increased and the attraction of both private capital and loans on much better terms would be real possibilities. The concept of such a new entity would require a notion of a domain which had distinctive qualities. The objectives set by the OECS Heads of Government in 2002 of growth, 6 percent; unemployment of less than 6 per cent; poverty of less than 6 per cent; the maintenance and improvement of the Human Development Indices and economic transformation could be placed in the context of individual targets by each country. The economic union as an identifiable entity could then establish the range of policy instruments that would facilitate the achievement of these objectives. These would span the areas of monetary, fiscal, trade, international economic relations, income, structural, social and environmental. All these policies require coordination with each other in order to be effective. New political arrangements will be required in the economic union and single financial space for the realisation of our economic goals. Economic transformation is the major objective, and this will require at both the country and union level, a convergence of policies. At both levels, an improved allocation of resources will be essential for increased output. The establishment of an Economic Union, and the creation of a single financial space create a viable option for St Kitts and Nevis, and the other countries of the OECS. The enlargement of the economic space, which adds significantly to output and domestic market size, and locks in the convergence and coordination of policies, will provide a better platform for economic transformation than the current circumstances permit. The trajectory that one could see unfolding would be the consolidation of the tourism industry as the lead sector across the economic union with multidestination tourism being a critical element of the tourism strategy. The tourism sector would create linkages across the economic union with agriculture, light manufacturing and handicrafts being the major beneficiaries. Information and communication technology would be a critical element of the strategy both as a supporter of other industries and a dynamic sector in its own right. Finance will be the critical innovative sector as we proceed with our programme of money and capital market development. The Eastern Caribbean Securities Exchange is slated to be the cutting edge instrument for placing the economic and currency union in the forefront of the drive for sustained economic growth. It is now the de facto regional exchange with the objective being to move from the currency union, into the CARICOM and then into the international community. The Exchange is now attracting significant interest in the wider region and beyond even before the economic union and single financial space have been established. The prospects would, therefore, be quite promising when the supporting arrangements are put in place. The OECS Economic Union would be the most critical institution to increase the promise of the CSME. The OECS would serve as the pilot for successful integration arrangements and would solve what economists refer to as the large number problem in the CARICOM. That is, fifteen states would become eight, and the new OECS bloc would be large enough to command some leverage over the process. The Trinidad and Tobago manufacturing sector exports 60 per cent of its products to the OECS as a whole, which provides substantial employment in that country. The OECS would be in a position to negotiate reciprocal arrangements with Trinidad and Tobago. Also, in negotiating with third countries, a consolidated OECS would increase the bargaining power of the CARICOM, as well as its capacity to draw resources from the rest of the world. In conclusion, it would be fair to say that the joint and collaborative arrangements we have committed to, have been successful and enhanced our prospects for stability and development. The time is now appropriate for another leap of faith to safeguard the future development of our countries. OECS Economic Union is probably the only viable option that we have at this time, as we advance towards the CSME. 6 BIS Review 19/2005 
Joseph Yam: Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation? Remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the keynote discussion: “The euro: a stabilising factor of the international monetary system. Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?” before the Paris Europlace Financial Forum: the euro markets in a global investment strategy, Hong Kong, 21 March 2005. *      *      * It is a great pleasure to be here this morning to take part in this keynote discussion on the euro hosted by Paris Europlace. One of the great benefits of living in an international financial centre is the opportunity to share something of the life and culture of other parts of the world without leaving one's own city. We have always been fortunate in Hong Kong in our enjoyment of the fruits of European - and particularly French - civilisation. We are currently enjoying, as part of "The Year of France in China", the superb Impressionism exhibition at the Hong Kong Museum of Art: together with all of the excellent performances in our international Arts Festival, and the growing popularity of al fresco dining, this is helping to create a very European atmosphere in Hong Kong this spring. And, from what I see on the streets, I do not get the impression that the strong euro is having any effect on sales of European fashion.  Today's forum therefore seems to fit in very well with the European spirit now sweeping Hong Kong, and I congratulate the organisers on putting together a very lively and topical programme. It is a particular pleasure to be presenting together with Christian Noyer, Governor of the Banque de France. He has made some very thoughtful remarks on the first question for discussion. I intend to comment on the second question: "Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?"  But before I address this question, we need to ask another question: how ready is Asia for closer monetary co-operation? We are, I think, all aware of the considerable differences in the political systems, the cultures, the historical backgrounds, and the economic, financial and monetary systems of the countries in this region. I think it is largely accepted that these differences are greater than the differences between the various economies that make up the euro zone. Nevertheless, it is important not to overstate them. Nor should we overlook the regional integration already in progress in the trade, financial and monetary spheres. Let me briefly outline these three forms of integration.  About half of total trade in the Asia region is intra-regional trade. Trade integration has been largely market-driven, and the process has stimulated the signing of various free trade agreements, which will, in turn, encourage further trade integration in the region. Now it is true that slightly over half of trade within non-Japan Asia is processing trade geared towards meeting import demand outside of the region, in particular in the developed economies. But this reliance on demand from the developed economies has been decreasing, and is likely to continue to decrease. Trade integration within the region is therefore likely to grow.  Financial integration in the region shows a more mixed picture, and can be said to be high or low depending on what exactly is meant by financial integration, which is not at all clear. In terms of foreign direct investment, the degree of regional integration seems high if we look at the available figures on the sources and destinations of FDI within the region. The most striking examples are the various economies in the region as a source of FDI for China, and as destinations for FDI from Japan. But in terms of financial intermediation within the region - meaning the flow of savings into investments, other than FDI, through the banking, debt and equity channels - the degree of financial integration is not high at all. The very substantial, and growing, volume of domestic savings invested overseas goes mainly, on a gross basis, to the developed rather than the regional markets. There is, of course, traffic in the other direction, but this is of a much more volatile, potent, demanding, and at times predatory nature, and it can sometimes - as we saw in the late 1990s - be difficult to cope with, to put it mildly.  There is now a common desire among economies within the region to reduce dependence on the recycling of domestic savings through the developed markets, and therefore reduce vulnerability to financial shocks, by promoting greater regional financial intermediation. A number of regional initiatives are being implemented, the most notable of which is the Asian Bond Fund project, a collective initiative of 11 central banks and monetary authorities to develop bond markets in the region. A great deal of emphasis is also being placed on getting one's own house in order, by practising sound macro-economic policies and building robust institutions. Some attempts have been made at financial infrastructure integration: in Hong Kong, in particular, we have been operating US dollar and BIS Review 19/2005 1 
euro clearing systems and opening linkages with other jurisdictions and international systems. But it has to be said that, so far, these facilities have been serving domestic needs far more than regional needs. This is, I think, a reflection of the rather moderate level of financial system integration in the region. To take banking as an illustration, there may well be quite considerable integration across the borders of immediate neighbours: between Hong Kong and Mainland China, for example, or between New Zealand and Australia. But, for the region as a whole, this kind of integration is less striking than the presence of banks from the developed markets. For example, the number of US and European banks in Hong Kong roughly equals that of banks from the region. Similar observations may be made about the equity markets.  In declining order, we now come to monetary integration. There have, in fact, been some recent efforts at monetary co-operation. These began in 1995 with the collection of EMEAP bilateral swap facilities that provide US dollar liquidity secured against US Treasury securities. In 1997 the idea of an Asian Monetary Fund was aired, but it came to nothing. Then, in 1999, came the collection of ASEAN+3 bilateral swap arrangements under the Chiang Mai Initiative. These cannot be said to amount to efforts towards monetary integration. And, in fact, while ideas may have been thrown around from time to time, there has not really been any formal discussion among Asian authorities that I am aware of towards monetary union.  Why is this the case? I think it is mainly because the obstacles to union appear to be so daunting, and that the special considerations that apply to the Asian case throw up so many difficult questions. These "special considerations" are big matters, and they can be conveniently divided into three broad categories: economic, technical and political. Let me give a brief outline.  The economic issues concern the viability of an Asian monetary union. This would involve the replacement of regional currencies with a single one, implying a single monetary policy for participant states. A key concern, therefore, is whether it would work. Or whether the pressures would be so intense as to make an Asian monetary union unworkable from the outset. At the heart of this question is the degree of real economic convergence between potential members. Using the Maastricht criteria as a reference point for the degree of nominal convergence among Asian economies suggests that Asia is far from ready to cope with a single monetary policy. In 2003 only six Asian economies were able to keep their budget deficits below 3% of GDP, and only five had government debt levels of less than 60% of GDP. Only five economies had inflation rates within 1.5% of the three economies with the lowest rates. As for long-term interest rates, only six had bond yields within 2% of the three economies with the lowest interest rates.  Perhaps more fundamentally, the degree of real economic convergence among Asian economies is a lot lower than it was between European economies prior to the formation of monetary union. One measure of this is income dispersion, in 2003, the per capita GDP of Japan was about US$34,000, while that in the Philippines was less than US$1,000. Real convergence matters because complementarity and similarity in production and economic structure reduces the likelihood of so-called "asymmetric" shocks, or shocks that hit all member states in a different way calling for different monetary policy responses - something that is not possible under a monetary union. For emerging market economies, financial disturbances are an increasingly prevalent source of asymmetric shocks: the best illustration of this in recent years is the Asian financial crisis, and the differing effects - and the variety of responses - among the economies in the region may, for some, be the main argument against union.  It is tempting to conclude that the lack of nominal and real convergence among Asian economies is a serious barrier to a viable Asian monetary union. However, it has been suggested that full convergence is not a necessary pre-requisite to successful monetary union, and that the act of forming a monetary union will, by itself, force greater convergence among its members. As Governor Noyer has just said in his presentation, the introduction of the euro has increased the correlation between the business cycles of European economies, and has led to a more homogenous monetary transmission mechanism.  While the lack of economic convergence among Asian economies may make an Asian Monetary Union a more challenging prospect, it is interesting to note that quite a number of governments in this region have already chosen to sacrifice some monetary policy autonomy for exchange rate stability. Hong Kong, Mainland China, and Malaysia choose to fix their exchange rates against an external currency, the US dollar, while other regional economies operate managed floats. There are indications that some economies are considering using the renminbi as a reference currency in their currency regimes, although a hard peg to renminbi is still not possible until full convertibility is achieved. It might 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
also be the case that, while Asian economies are more diverse than European economies, they are flexible in ways that can compensate for the loss of independent monetary policy, for example, in their high degree of price flexibility and fast adjustment to economic shocks.  It may seem premature to turn now to the technical issues surrounding Asian monetary union, but the devil is in the detail. The first set of technical issues involves the exchange rate arrangements themselves, including the transitional arrangements prior to the introduction of a single currency. For example, would Asia adopt a basket peg or choose an anchor currency? If a basket, what would be the weights for individual currencies, and would the basket include external currencies, such as the US dollar? If a regional currency is chosen as the anchor, in the same way that the deutschmark was effectively the anchor for exchange rate arrangements leading up to European monetary union, would this be the yen or the renminbi?  Alternatively, could Asia move straight to a single currency? It is increasingly argued that, in a world of liberalised markets, the only viable exchange rate system is either a hard peg (like Hong Kong's Currency Board) or a free float. Soft pegs by their nature are vulnerable to self-fulfilling speculative attacks, as was demonstrated in Europe in 1992, Mexico in 1994-5, and Asia in 1997-8. Europe was able to move gradually to a system of fixed exchange rates with capital controls prior to the introduction of a single currency. But the high degree of capital mobility in a number of key Asian economies would make gradual transition in this way more difficult.  A further set of technical issues concerns the setting up of, and mandate for, an Asian central bank. This would require agreement on the monetary policy objective, country representation, and decision-making process of the central bank. Most important, the institution would need to be designed so that national interests are kept in check in order to deliver efficient monetary policy making at the regional level. The lesson from Europe is that agreement can be reached, but I have to say that the issues are quite daunting.  Related to this is the question of whether Asian governments have the political will to devolve monetary policy to a single central monetary authority. Asia is more disparate than Europe in its political systems, and it has often been noted that there is less of a tradition of cross-border institution-building here than there is in other regions. It is quite striking, for example, that the approach to free trade agreements so far has been rather piecemeal, where in Europe they have grown and developed from a strong and centralised common market. Indeed, one serious political obstacle that has often been pointed out is the lack of embryonic supranational bodies within Asia from which to launch Asian monetary union efforts. These disadvantages must, of course, be recognised. But, on the other hand, it should be remembered that European monetary union has been a unifying force - a common interest that has brought countries together.  All of these "special considerations" point to the conclusion that Asia is not yet ready to implement monetary union. In the process of discussing them, it may well turn out that Asian monetary union is a non-starter. But that does not mean that we are not yet ready to talk about monetary union. After all, it took Europe about half a century to move from the idea of monetary union to the reality. Despite the general consensus that the obstacles to union in this region now are greater than they were for Europe 50 years ago, I have a feeling that Asia will not take quite so long. I am not offering to make a bet on this, mainly because I do not think that many of us in this room will be around long enough to see how many years it really does take. But one reason that makes me think that Asia will not take so long is that we have a successful model to look to, which brings me to the main question: "Can the euro be a benchmark for Asian monetary co-operation?". My answer to this question is a resounding "yes". The creation of the euro has shown that effective monetary union can be achieved in a voluntary and co-operative way by countries with different economic, political and cultural traditions. While, as I have suggested in the discussion about "special considerations", there may be different ways of achieving a similar goal in Asia, the euro provides a precedent, a point of reference, a large realm of experience and expertise, and - I would certainly agree - a benchmark for any enterprise in monetary co-operation that we might wish to embark on in this region.  BIS Review 19/2005 3 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Are we still on the growth track?Summary of a speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the General Meeting of the Schaffhausen Regional Association of Industry and Commerce, Stein am Rhein, 18 March 2005. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * After the economic downturn witnessed in the second half of 2004 and at the beginning of 2005, the question arises whether Switzerland will remain on the growth track. Jean-Pierre Roth believes it is and anticipates GDP growth to be in the range of 1.5% this year. Owing to the favourable international economic situation, the economy in Europe is likely to pick up again, which will also benefit the Swiss export industry. At the same time, we can assume that domestic demand will continue to grow at a moderate pace.  The decline in important economic data during the last few months, however, suggests that economic growth in the first half of 2005 will remain weak. This notwithstanding, involves the risk of declining corporate and consumer confidence, which in turn would jeopardise economic development. It is also doubtful whether the weak dollar and high oil prices have already had their full impact or whether it is yet to unfold.  Based on such considerations, the National Bank decided to leave the three-month Libor rate at 0.75% in mid-March. It was a relatively easy decision to make for the Governing Board in that inflation prospects over the entire three-year forecasting period have improved. Consequently, an interest rate hike became less critical, and there was greater leeway to support economic recovery with an expansionary monetary policy. As soon as the recovery process is again under way, the National Bank will continue the normalisation of monetary policy. This is the only way of ensuring price stability in the medium term and preventing the economy from overheating.  BIS Review 19/2005 1 
Tom K Alweendo: Crime and money laundering - the challenges Address by Mr Tom K Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the African Banking Congress, Johannesburg, 8-10 March 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank the organizers of this event for inviting me to give an address on the topic of Crime and Money Laundering. The choice of this topic is so appropriate because of the challenges money laundering poses to the banking sector in Africa. Financial crime and money laundering is increasingly becoming a global phenomenon and this is not only a threat to the global banking sector, but it has the potential to become a threat to the civil and political spheres. Money laundering is conventionally defined as any process that is carried out to disguise or conceal the nature or source of or entitlement to money or property from criminal activities. Although countries have come up with different money laundering definitions in their statutes, it is important that any useful definition should recognize that crime of any nature is an act against society and as such, to launder any proceeds from unlawful activity or the contravention of any law followed by laundering should be encompassed in the definition.  A new dimension to what constitutes money laundering is with respect to terrorism, whereby legitimate or clean money is committed to the financing of unlawful activity. The definition of money laundering that encompasses any unlawful activity would be well inclusive and would provide law enforcement with a wider legal arm. The combating of financing of terrorism, which is an unlawful act, is in most jurisdictions provided for in separate legislations but linked to the mainstream national anti money laundering laws, especially in respect of detection. The anti money laundering legislations that are being promulgated by most jurisdictions have and are criminalizing the act of money laundering as defined above. This in essence means that these laws make the act of money laundering a criminal offence and that to launder money derived from criminal acts constitutes committing a crime punishable by law. In addition, the anti money laundering laws places a requirement for reporting institutions to report suspicious transactions, failure of which constitutes an offence by both the institution and/or officers of that institution.  The Meirium-Webster dictionary describes crime as an “act or the commission of an act that is forbidden or the omission of a duty that is commanded by a public law and that makes the offender liable to punishment by that law”. This definition pre-supposes the existence of a public law that sets out the details of the acts or omissions that national legislators consider to be punishable by that law. Laws are therefore designed to protect us and ensure our safety in all aspects: physical, financial, psychological and social. The extent to which money is laundered globally is estimated to be between $500 billion and $1 trillion. The wide range of the estimate highlights the difficulties associated with obtaining accurate data on this problem. This is the case because only a limited number of countries have set up anti money laundering regimes that are up and running and therefore able to provide appropriate statistics. The problem of lack of accurate money laundering statistics in Africa is compounded where the setting-up of anti-money laundering regimes is only gaining momentum now. It will take some time for Africa to build up accurate statistics on money laundering as this would have to be sourced from actual cases investigated and finalized.  Further, a good understanding of the national money laundering activities requires concerted national research and studies of the money laundering typologies commonly practiced in each country. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that the Institute for Security Studies in South Africa has initiated a number of researches and studies aimed at documenting the extent of money laundering in Africa, especially Southern Africa. However, the sufficiency and integrity of the statistics provided by the Institute is only as good as the national sources supplying the information. It is therefore imperative that national efforts to determine the extent of money laundering must be improved as these statistics are important for convincing the legislative and political processes on the need for legislative changes necessary for effective combating of money laundering. BIS Review 18/2005 1 
The anti money laundering laws protect the rights of individuals by providing for the articulation of what crime is, the acts of crime and the punishment thereof. Legislators, in consultation with their constituents through legislation on crime, lay the foundation for basic individual human rights and the attainment of inner individual self fulfillment. Crime and criminal acts work towards eroding these very basic individual rights. Despite the enactment of laws designed to curb crime and acts of crime, these evils still take place and are in most cases on the increase. The law enforcement agencies the world over are overwhelmed by the sheer size and sophistication that criminals are now employing to perpetrate their illegal deeds. The efforts on crime prevention are now compounded by globalization that has created what one may say is a global economy in which organized crime groups and individuals can and do generate huge sums of money by drug trafficking, financial crime, corruption, intellectual property crime, terrorism and human trafficking. Crime and money laundering is indeed a global problem which requires a concerted global response. In order to protect our respective financial systems from the destabilizing effects of crime and money laundering, it is imperative that we act and respond to this scourge with unprecedented resolve and commitment to combating it. Everybody has, therefore, a responsibility to combat money laundering, because its negative impact has a unique way of creating far ranging negative consequences. By tackling money laundering we would be attacking the criminals at their weakest and most vulnerable point - their money sources. In the past years since the start of the criminalization of money laundering and the enforcement of anti money laundering laws in the 1970s and more vigorously in the 1980s and 1990s, evidence from court cases and reported suspect transaction has given an indication that the most common money laundering typologies has been in the realm of drug trafficking, organized crime, corruption, illicit dealing in weapons, human trafficking, fraud and theft. The act of successful money laundering fuels the perpetration of the above crimes by providing the criminals with avenues to conceal their deeds from law enforcement agencies and ultimately provides them with the rewards for their criminality in the form of money which would then appear to be legitimate.  The concealment cycle for the proceeds of money laundering involves, firstly, the distancing of the criminals from the illegal proceeds (money or property), the obscuring of the money trail, hiding of the origins to eventually posses what would appear as clean money. The role played by globalization and ICT in the concealment process in money laundering has been aptly described by the following quote from a central banking thriller “Nest of Vipers” by Linda Davies: “the money screamed across the wires, its provenance fading in a maze of electronic transfers which shifted it, hid it, broke it up into manageable wads which would be withdrawn and re-deposited elsewhere, obliterating the trail”.  The linkage between money laundering and crime denotes that everybody as individuals is affected by money laundering. Crime erodes basic individual liberties in that it threatens their rights to life and entitlement to property. The consequences of crime and money laundering are bad for business, development, and the general rule of law. Governments have therefore got real reasons for spearheading the combating of money laundering. Another reason why money laundering should be combated is that if left unchecked, it would lead to the accumulation of economic power to organized crime. This development has the potential of eroding our political and social systems based on elected representation as we know them today. In other words, the social consequences for allowing money launderers to operate unchecked could spell disaster for stability and the rule of law. The financial sector, in particular the banking sector, more than any sectors, needs to operate in a crime and money laundering free environments. Banks deal with other people’s money and therefore rely heavily on reputation for probity and integrity. Without the public confidence from the law abiding citizenry it would be difficult for banks to conduct business in the form they do now. In instances where banks may condone and are active parties to money laundering, the end result is that legitimate business would avoid such banks. It is also conceivable that money laundering if perpetrated on a high scale would complicate the ability of banks to manage their operations and risks. This is so because banks will not be able to predict the movement of laundered money. Banks have also to be aware of the consequences of doing business with money launders or for unwittingly and fraudulently being used as conduits for money laundering. In jurisdictions where national anti money laundering laws have been promulgated, non complying banks and institutions have been subjected to hefty fines and in some instances the banking licenses have been known to have been withdrawn.  2 BIS Review 18/2005 
As a central banker, my concerns regarding the money laundering would immediately be that it would erode the effectiveness and management of monetary policy. Money laundering on a grand scale has the potential of changing the demand for cash, make interest rates and exchange rates more volatile and cause high inflation rates for a country. Money laundering is also bad for the economy and development in that it undermines legitimate business, competition and reduces the tax revenue to national authorities as launders would be operating underground outside the tax net. Money laundering is thus bad for the economy both nationally and internationally. Regulatory and supervisory agencies have a good reason to participate in the combating of money laundering in that if not contained, it would defeat their objectives and weaken the institutions under their supervision. The combating of money laundering should revolve around ensuring the ability of national and international agencies to find, freeze and the forfeiture of laundered money. This presupposes the existence of appropriate national and international laws and the capacity for implementation of those laws. In addition, the wide scope of affected stakeholders in anti money laundering efforts require an unprecedented level of co-operation both at national and international levels. Another important aspect of money laundering is the tendency and need for perpetrators to operate cross border schemes for the purpose of concealment and/or to take advantage of the uneven developments in the national anti money laundering regimes. This requires that countries should develop anti money laundering regimes that are moving in tandem in terms of speed and standards for detection and law enforcement. The international community and national agencies have indeed recognized the need to combat money laundering. To this end the first pre-requisite for combating money laundering is to have in place appropriate national legislation. Appropriate national legislations have to be crafted with local circumstances in mind while recognizing the need for taking into account the international nature of money laundering. To this end, the participation of multi-lateral agencies such as the United Nations, the EU, the AU, etc. is important in the formulation of international instruments necessary to combat money laundering. Anti-money laundering international instruments are essential for ensuring that the international community reacts to money laundering as a global problem. The international instruments provide a forum for bringing national efforts on money laundering into the international loop. To mention but a few, the following are some of the important international instruments that the international community have crafted: the Basel Declaration 1988; the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 1988; FATF 40+9 Recommendations, 1990, with numerous revisions; UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2000; UN Convention against Corruption; UN International Convention for the Suppressing of the Financing of Terrorism.  These are but only a few of the various international instruments that are critical to the success in the fight against money laundering. In addition, various multilateral organizations have been instrumental in advancing the cause for the fight against money laundering. The IMF and the World Bank have been very active in providing resources for capacity building and technical expertise. National jurisdictions are encouraged to ratify the international instruments as they provide the basis for ensuring appropriate national anti-money laundering laws and international cooperation. Critical to the international cooperation is the attendant national legislations pertaining to extradition of criminals who operate cross border money laundering schemes. Without having robust extradition laws, the criminals would have loopholes in the global sphere that would allow them to evade law enforcement agencies in a particular jurisdiction. The existence and membership to regional anti-money laundering groupings is important in that it contributes to the harmonization of laws and standards. In Africa, a number of anti money groupings have been created and have provided the needed impetus for ensuring that Africa as a whole is moving towards a uniform approach regarding the money laundering problem. It is important to note that legislative gaps that may exist at international and national levels will be exploited by the money launderers and make national anti-money laundering regimes ineffective. In line with the need to formulate appropriate national legislations, there is a need to formulate standards for anti-money laundering practices and institutions that should provide maximum effectiveness both at national and international levels. The G7 created Financial Action Task Force (FATF) that has crafted 40 + 9 recommendations aimed at providing international standards for anti money laundering, improving national systems for combating money laundering, strengthening the role of financial systems and for strengthening international co-operation. BIS Review 18/2005 3 
The combating of money laundering presupposes the existence of capacity and resources at national level. In Africa, this is a real challenge in that there are competing demands with regards to the procurement and utilization of scarce resources. The resources scarcity is more critical in the law enforcement spheres, since most national jurisdictions have less than efficient law enforcement agencies which are in most cases overwhelmed by the demands to enforce other national laws. Another important ingredient for the effective combating of money laundering is the need for political commitment, as well the support from affected industries and general populace. It is worth noting that through the AU and other multilateral agencies where African nations are members, a number of efforts are being made to ensure that Africa is not lagging behind. In Africa, a number of regional anti-money laundering bodies have been created and it is comforting to see the support these regional groupings are receiving from their respective authorities. The creation of necessary anti-money laundering institutions such as the Financial Intelligence Centers is an issue that each of the African authorities are busy working on. Financial Intelligence Centers are important for the detection of money launderers by linking the money flows to the perpetration of specific crimes. The pressures that the African banking sector is being subjected to for compliance with national and international anti-money laundering requirements, makes me to want to compliment our banking sector in Africa for living up to those requirements despite the costs involved in some instances. In one way or another banks in Africa have been working to ensure compliance with the important aspect of customer due diligence and have been improving on their institutional capacity to ensure that their systems and personnel are geared for their discharge of their responsibilities as reporting institutions. The challenges for Africa with regard to ensuring effective anti money laundering are immense more so in that innovative thinking may be necessary in some respects such as that the majority of the African economy is cash based. This may entail the setting of entirely home grown standards. The combating of money laundering has assumed an urgent impetus at both national and international levels as a result of the scale that money laundering has begun to assume, especially with respect to the financing of terrorist acts. The efforts being made to combat money laundering are beginning to bear fruits in that it is now taking center stage in all jurisdictions. No one wants to be left behind mainly due to the consequences of such a situation – those lagging behind might find it difficult to transact and do business with the rest of the complying world. In terms of setting up effective infrastructures necessary for combating money laundering, one can conclude that Africa and the international community is beginning to getting the upper hand on criminals. A word of caution is that despite the positive developments, the criminals are constantly devising more elaborate and evasive means to circumvent anti money laundering efforts. I would like to conclude by emphasizing that money laundering is a crime that affects every individual, business and government. It creates an important concern in that if unchecked it has the potential of fuelling crime and ultimately erodes the individual rights of citizens and affects national and international economic performance. The combating of money laundering requires first and foremost the crafting of appropriate laws and the creation of national and international capacity and the coordination thereof. All the above presupposes the need for political commitment at all levels. I thank you for your attention 4 BIS Review 18/2005 
Lars Heikensten: Introduction on monetary policy Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag Committee on Finance, Stockholm, 15 March 2005. *      *      * Allow me as usual to begin by thanking you for your invitation. I think it goes without saying that these hearings are a highly valuable feature of the open discussion of monetary policy that we are all keen to safeguard. It is also my hope that the hearings can help spread knowledge about monetary policy issues to a wider audience, especially since they are now broadcast live on television.  As is customary at the first hearing of the year I intend to begin by looking back on developments last year. As we all know, inflation turned out sharply lower than the Riksbank’s target in 2004. When that happens it is natural that a debate on monetary policy should arise in the public domain. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the discussions in the past year have been unusually lively. I commented on the debate in detail when I was here in October, but there may be reason to touch upon it again today. Subsequently I intend to present our current assessment of the inflation outlook and explain the interest rate decision we made yesterday, after which I will round off with some general reflections on Swedish monetary policy and the conditions under which it operates.  A look back at 2004 Developments in 2004 Sweden’s economic performance in the past year was characterised by high growth coupled with markedly low inflation. Economic growth last year was in actual fact considerably higher than normal; in the past 25 years growth has been higher on only six occasions. Even though demand in general grew strongly in 2004 the same cannot be said about employment. We have yet to see a clear turnaround in the labour market.  The Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions in 2002 and 2003, which are relevant to the inflation outcome in 2004, were initially guided by the measure of underlying inflationary pressures that the Bank has used most in recent years, UND1X. In 2003, though, the Bank shifted its focus for a period to the measure UND1X excluding energy prices. Inflation according to these measures averaged 0.9 per cent and 0.8 per cent, respectively, in 2004. In terms of the CPI, inflation was 0.5 per cent. The fact that CPI inflation turned out significantly lower than the other two measures is essentially because the fairly extensive monetary easing that began at the end of 2002 and continued through 2003 and into 2004 has kept down households’ mortgage interest expenditure. So why was inflation in 2004 so low? In order to get a better picture of one of the causes we need to go back to the turn of the year 2002-2003. At that time inflation was pushed up unusually high after electricity prices rose to record levels. The Riksbank’s view then was that it was a temporary effect; that electricity prices would fall back and that the inflation rate would therefore come down again during the year, which it did. As regards CPI and UND1X inflation, that meant that the twelve-month change – or the change in relation to the corresponding month a year earlier – fell steeply in early 2004. So the drop in inflation at the start of 2004 was partly an expected recoil of the temporary increase a year before. (Figure 1). The Riksbank had thus anticipated in early 2003 that CPI inflation would undershoot the target in 2004.  Inflation was also being depressed by low import prices. Imported producer prices have developed weakly for a couple of years, although they rose again in 2004 partly because hikes in commodity prices pushed up the prices of intermediate goods. As regards consumer prices, inflation on imported goods has turned out unexpectedly low for some time. The surprisingly low import prices could be a result of Swedish importers and producers buying from low-cost countries to a greater extent than before, something that is difficult to capture with the measure that we normally use to gauge developments in world market prices. The low outcome is most likely also attributable to conditions in Sweden, including increased competition in many sectors, not least the retail trade.  BIS Review 18/2005 1 
This brings me to a third factor that has contributed to the low inflation, namely productivity, which grew stronger than expected by the Riksbank and other forecasters. (Figure 2). This is the other side of the unexpectedly weak labour market conditions, which in turn have dampened domestic price and wage pressures.  Neither are the causes of the high productivity growth fully understood. One possible hypothesis is that the large-scale IT investment in many sectors at the end of the 1990s is now beginning to pay off. Another theory argues that Sweden is a highly open economy and thus strongly influenced by the currently rapid integration of low-cost countries into world trade. As regards the developments in both productivity and imported inflation there is considerable uncertainty over the strength and durability of the present tendencies.  The Riksbank and unemployment As I said earlier it is natural that a debate on monetary policy should arise when inflation deviates considerably from target. On this occasion the debate has been fuelled further by the rise in unemployment in 2003-2004. When I was here in the autumn I devoted a lot of attention to the issue of what the Riksbank could do about the unemployment situation. The discussion has continued since then.  It is important to remember that the Riksbank’s objective is price stability. We try to fulfil this objective by setting interest rates at a level that enables the general level of demand to grow in line with what the economy is able to sustain in the long run without giving rise to inflation, and that ensures that economic agents have confidence in the Bank to meet the inflation target. So we only have an indirect influence on the general level of demand and employment. And the poorer than expected employment conditions in the past two years have not been due to developments in demand. On the contrary, demand has proved surprisingly strong. Nonetheless it can of course be maintained that employment could have been somewhat higher if the Riksbank had kept interest rates lower, something that would have been possible given what we now know about inflation. It is difficult to object to this assertion, which of course is why the Riksbank’s critics keep coming back to it. But an assessment of what we could or could not have done must be based on what we knew when the decisions were made, not on what we know now. One way to try to approach this issue is to compare our assessments and actions with other players’ forecasts and opinions on policy at the time in question. The Inflation Report that we published today shows that the economic and inflation outlook on which the Riksbank based its monetary policy in 2002-2003 was in no way significantly different from that held by other leading forecasters of the Swedish economy during this period. (Figure 3). If anything it seems that the Riksbank was one of the most successful forecasters, or perhaps rather one of the least unsuccessful, although it also has to be remembered that our forecasts, unlike others’, had been based on the assumption of an unchanged repo rate. Part of the recent monetary policy debate has seen our forecasts compared with those of the National Institute of Economic Research (NIER). It turns out, however, that the NIER’s view of the appropriate repo rate path has not differed more than marginally from the Riksbank’s. (Figure 4). On average the NIER recommended a repo rate that was barely 0.2 percentage points lower. Given the effects that one generally expects from monetary policy, inflation in 2004 would only have been marginally closer to the target if we had followed the NIER’s recommendations. Nor would we have had more than a very slight impact on employment. The point is that the differences in opinion regarding future inflation and the stance of monetary policy have been small in relation to the drop in inflation and the rise in unemployment.  To sum up, we can conclude that the low inflation outcome in 2004 cannot be attributed to a monetary policy that was contrary to the consensus view at the time. Instead, it was essentially a result of developments that practically nobody managed to foresee. Another possible conclusion is that we would have had to conduct a dramatically different monetary policy if inflation was to have turned out much closer to the target in 2004. For example, the Riksbank would probably have had to cut the repo rate rapidly and sharply at the beginning of 2002. Such a stance would most likely have caused something of a stir. Inflation was high at that time and nobody predicted the kind of dramatic decline that would have justified a substantial rate cut. To give you an idea of the sentiment at the time, one of the country’s leading trade union representatives warned us not to take the inflation target lightly. 2 BIS Review 18/2005 
Has policy been asymmetrical? One recurrent feature of the recent discussion is claims that the Riksbank is more concerned about high inflation than low inflation. It has been said that inflation since the introduction of the Bank’s target – from 1995 onwards – has turned out somewhat below target on average.  Personally, I can understand fears that central banks could be ”overly zealous” in their fight against inflation, especially if a country has experience of a high-inflation regime, as is the case in Sweden. Such risks have also been one of the arguments in favour of opening the Riksbank to scrutiny and of promoting a policy that is as clear as possible. An open debate and good opportunities to scrutinise the Bank appear to me to be the best antidote against an introverted and exaggerated inflation-fighting perspective. Having said that, though, I think that there is every reason to object to the recurrent interpretation that the low inflation is an expression of an excessively hawkish stance on the part of the Riksbank. Firstly, for a large part of the period in question monetary policy has been guided by a measure of underlying inflation UND1X, and so policy should first and foremost be evaluated in terms of this measure, in accordance with the Bank’s clarification in 1999. UND1X inflation has averaged 1.9 per cent since 1995, which is undeniably quite close to the target. (Figure 5). The fact that CPI inflation during this period has been lower – 1.4 per cent – is mainly due to the sharp decline seen in the general level of interest rates, partly because a low-inflation environment has been secured. Furthermore, ten years may be too short a period over which to assess policy, at least when a number of those years have involved an adjustment from one regime to another, as in Sweden’s case.  Another way to approach this issue is to study the episodes when inflation has undershot the Riksbank’s target. That has mainly happened on three occasions. On the first of these, 1996-1997, a high level of interest rates in the previous years had without doubt contributed to both a drop in the general level of demand and to low inflation. The period was also characterised by an occasionally heated debate on monetary policy. The reason the Riksbank decided to keep policy tight at the time was that credibility for inflation-targeting had not yet been established.  The two subsequent periods, 1998-1999 and 2004, were completely different. On both these occasions the repo rate had been relatively low the years before at the same time as the general level of demand was growing fast. The main factors generating the low inflation were changes on the supply side of the economy: deregulation, lower import prices and surprisingly rapid productivity growth. The Bank’s policy had hardly been called into question at all when it was conducted in 1996-1997; it was only in retrospect that the criticism came, and this has largely been the pattern in recent times, as I mentioned earlier. If one wants to argue that the Riksbank has systematically conducted excessively tight policy one should reasonably be able to show that other forecasters called the Bank’s policy strongly into question when it was formulated.  So, in my opinion, there are on the whole fairly natural explanations for why inflation on average has been somewhat below target over the past ten-year period. It is not because the Riksbank has considered deviations below target to be less serious than deviations above target; instead, it is partly because we have undergone an adjustment from a high-inflation to a low-inflation regime, which affected policy in large measure during the first of those three episodes, and partly because inflation on different occasions has been depressed by supply factors that neither we nor others have been able to predict.  Allow me to conclude the retrospective part of this speech by underlining that I value an open, lively debate on monetary policy. I have previously pointed out before the Committee that we would be happy to come here more often and that we are open to other forms of discussion than this one. If the Committee’s members have ideas to improve the material that we present, we would be interested in hearing them. The Riksbank is also considering initiating an annual forum for monetary policy debate, where our assessments and policy can be discussed against the background of regular independent evaluations of the forecasts that we – and other participants in the general debate – have produced. The current assessment Cyclical upswing continuing With that I shall now look forward and briefly discuss the assessment of economic and inflation prospects in our latest Inflation Report and the decision we took yesterday regarding the repo rate. BIS Review 18/2005 3 
As usual I shall begin with a brief look at the international situation. Economic growth abroad has remained high. There are many indications that international economic activity will continue to strengthen in the period ahead and that resource utilisation will gradually pick up. High productivity growth and weak resource utilisation have kept down cost developments in a number of industrialised countries. Coupled with the increased integration of low-cost countries into world trade this has contributed to low global inflationary pressures. In the period ahead, price pressures are expected to remain modest even though they will increase as economic conditions improve and there is a reduction in spare production capacity. That means that market interest rates are also anticipated to rise from today’s unusually low levels. There are positive signals emanating from the US economy while the euro area, and notably Germany, has seen somewhat weaker growth than expected. (Figure 6.) Overall, growth in Sweden’s export markets is forecast to be largely the same as in the previous Inflation Report.  The Swedish economic recovery began in 2003 and it is predicted to continue during the forecast period. In 2004 robust international demand for Swedish exports contributed to the high economic growth. Manufacturing activity now appears to be entering a slightly slower phase. Indicators and data point to a continuation of firm, healthy growth, albeit at a somewhat lower rate than in early 2004. Growth in domestic demand is assumed to increase while the contribution to aggregate demand from net exports will diminish. (Table 1). In 2005 business investment and private consumption are anticipated to account for the majority of the pick-up in demand. Compared with the December Inflation Report the forecast for GDP growth in 2005 has been revised up marginally to 3.2 per cent, mainly due to higher investment and increased services trade. Towards the end of last year investment in the economy grew more than expected and there is much to suggest that the fast increase will continue in early 2005.  Despite last year’s robust productivity growth the number of employed fell for the second consecutive year. The fact that firms were able to boost output so sharply without hiring new staff was due to a rise in both productivity and average working time. It is reasonable to believe, though, that a continuation of strong GDP growth will result in higher employment during the forecast period. Different indicators from the labour market also suggest that a turnaround is on the way. For example, the number of temporary employees has risen since summer 2004 and the number of new job vacancies reported to Swedish employment offices rose in annual terms in the period November-January after having dropped for almost two years in a row.  There is reason to expect average productivity growth in the economy to decrease somewhat as the economic upswing continues. Nevertheless, the Riksbank’s assessment remains that there has been a lasting increase in the rate of productivity growth, and the Bank’s forecasts for the coming years are therefore relatively high in a longer historical perspective. The forecast for domestic cost pressures this year has been revised down somewhat all the same compared with the assessment in December on the basis of new data for 2004.  Resource utilisation in the Swedish economy was low last year. In particular, the demand for labour is still limited even though some indicators of labour shortages show an upward tendency. Indicators from manufacturing also suggest that capacity utilisation has picked up recently. The Riksbank’s overall assessment is that resource utilisation has risen – albeit from a low level – and will continue to increase as more and more spare resources are put to use.  The inflation outlook As I mentioned, both domestic and imported inflation were low in the past year. Domestic inflation was expected to be low at this point in time and the rate of price increases for domestically produced goods in recent months has also been broadly in line with the Bank’s previous forecast. In spite of this, the forecasts for domestic inflation this year and next year have been revised down. One reason is that the downward pressure on prices in the retail food trade is anticipated to be greater than previously assumed. How big the effects will be is difficult to say, though, as is their significance for the general inflation rate in the longer term. Over a longer horizon, domestic inflation is expected as before to rise gradually as the cyclical upswing continues and resource utilisation picks up. Imported inflation has recently turned out lower than we anticipated in the previous Inflation Report. There are several reasons for this, which I touched upon earlier. For instance, increased imports from low-wage countries appear to have led to greater downward price pressure than previously forecast even though these projections were optimistic about price developments for imported goods. The 4 BIS Review 18/2005 
price-dampening factors are also estimated to affect imported inflation in the period ahead, and the forecast has therefore been revised down both for this year and next.  The effects of the factors that have resulted in falling prices of imported goods in the past year are expected to gradually subside, however. It is reasonable to believe that rising global resource utilisation will lead to higher international price pressures. In addition, a gradual pick-up in domestic resource utilisation and mounting cost pressures are forecast to contribute to larger price increases for imported goods and services as well.  All in all, the forecasts for domestic and imported inflation mean that the forecast for UND1X inflation has been revised down compared with the Inflation Report in December. (Figure 7.) Both imported inflation and domestic price pressures are expected to be lower mainly in the near term but also during the latter part of the forecast period. The downward revision for the coming year is not due to any change in the assessment of economic prospects, but rather to a number of specific factors that have resulted in higher competition in the world market and in Sweden. But as the cyclical upswing continues and firms’ costs increase, there is still assumed to be a gradual rise in inflation. In the main scenario, which is based on an unchanged repo rate in the coming two years, both CPI and UND1X inflation is expected to be on target two years ahead. The annual averages for inflation will be low throughout the forecast period, however.  Allow me in this context to briefly say something about the fact that the weak price developments in the recent period have caused the word ”deflation” to reappear in the media, often in the form of an eye-catching headline. There is always reason to keep the risk of deflation in mind, since falls in the general price level are sometimes associated with considerable problems in the economy. It is important, however, to ascertain whether the subdued price developments are a result of weak demand or due to positive changes on the supply side of the economy. At the moment there is no doubt that the latter is the dominant factor. If a pair of jeans becomes cheaper because the dollar has fallen, or the price of plasma TVs has been halved because their production has increased in China, or the price of food goes down because the competition in the retail food trade has toughened, it is something that we essentially should be happy about. But should there be a sharp fall in demand then the situation would be completely different of course.  So what risks do we see that could cause inflation to deviate from the path in the main scenario? There are a number of risks in the inflation assessment that have been in focus for some time, e.g. the twin deficits in the US economy, the developments in the Swedish krona, and productivity growth. In addition, new risks have emerged in connection to specific factors, such as the developments in food prices, and these are creating great uncertainty over how inflation will be affected in the period ahead – not least in the short run. Compared with the previous Inflation Report the main scenario on this occasion has taken account of the downside risks to inflation to a greater extent; e.g. increased international, as well as domestic, competition is now forecast to have a somewhat bigger impact on Swedish prices than previously assumed. There are arguments, however, that this could nevertheless entail an underestimation of inflation as much as an overestimation. That was shown, for instance, by the latest price data released last Friday, where the inflation outcome for February was actually a little higher than the forecast in the Inflation Report that we published today. Individual monthly figures for inflation are difficult to forecast, however, and next month the forecast could just as easily overshoot the outcome.  In the main scenario productivity is also assumed to follow the normal cyclical pattern, but just like the effects of the international competition there are arguments to suggest that this pattern may imply an underestimation or overestimation of the future trend. The overall assessment of the different risk factors is that the risk outlook is balanced, i.e. that the risks of inflation turning out higher than in the main scenario are as large as the risks of inflation turning out lower. Thus, the balance of risks does not change our assessment. Inflation in the coming two years will be low, coming into line with the target at the end of the forecast period. Some considerations The point of departure for our discussion about the future path of the repo rate is the assessment of inflation prospects in the coming years that I just presented. Allow me in this context to point out that the Riksbank does not conduct monetary policy according to a mechanical rule, even though that sometimes seems to be the perception. There are also other aspects than inflation one to two years ahead that must be taken into account when setting the repo rate. BIS Review 18/2005 5 
Last year we encountered a similar situation to that today, when the Bank's forecasts suggested that inflation would undershoot the target for almost the entire two-year period ahead, even though it was estimated to be on target in two years’ time. One reason we decided not to cut rates then – a reason that is still valid today – was that we saw that demand was growing strongly already. So, monetary policy appeared to have had the desired effect. This development has been reinforced now that business investment seems to have begun to pick up in earnest and that private consumption is also stronger. In other words, economic activity is already firm and GDP growth is above what is judged to be sustainable in the long term. Given that, a rate cut now would probably mean in practice that we would have to tighten policy more quickly in the future. So it is a question of trying to avoid excessive fluctuations in the real economy and interest rates. Another, partly related aspect that we also have reason to consider when making decisions about the repo rate is that the low inflation is due in large measure to markedly weak price developments for certain products as a result of increased competition, e.g. in the retail food trade and textile industry. It is probably not always prudent to fully counter this through highly loose policy that would drive up domestic demand. Should that price outlook change, we may find that excessively high price pressures have been established, which may then prove difficult to break. It remains to be seen how long the effects on inflation of the price cuts for certain products will last. This argument, too, can essentially be said to involve an ambition to avoid excessive swings in interest rates and the real economy.  Yet another factor that has been discussed for some time by the Executive Board is the rapid growth in household debt and the increases in house prices. A number of commentators have begun to highlight risks in this area. We have previously concluded that the developments are not a cause for great concern. Even though that largely remains our assessment, it has gradually become clearer that the developments in credit and house prices are one argument against looser monetary policy. A rate cut followed by a faster hike could bring about problems through their effects on household indebtedness and consumption. The inflation assessment I presented earlier indicates that inflation will be in line with the target at the end of the two-year period on which we normally focus. At the same time the issues that I have just discussed give cause for a certain amount of caution in interest rate policy in line with the Bank’s clarification of monetary policy in 1999. All in all, the arguments I have put forward advocate leaving the repo rate unchanged, which was also the decision we took yesterday.   As usual there is reason to underline that even though this is our assessment today conditions can of course change in the period ahead. A lot can happen: the imbalances in the United States could result in financial unease that sharply curtails the international economic upswing, or the credit and debt developments in Sweden may prove considerably more worrisome than foreseen today. We may also find that we have overestimated or underestimated the impact on inflation of changes in competitive pressures. So, claims in the media that the Riksbank has closed the door on a particular course of action in the future are misleading as usual. Concluding remarks Allow me to conclude with a few general reflections on the conditions under which monetary policy operates and regarding the expectations one can have on it. Even though developments since the shift in policy regime in the early 1990s have been remarkably good this has, as we now know, neither stopped inflation from occasionally deviating sharply from target nor prevented output and employment from fluctuating somewhat.  What is important to realise is that there are always going to be fast changes in the economy and inflation that cannot be foreseen nor fully offset in the short run. No central bank can therefore have full control over inflation and economic activity over time. What monetary policy should normally be able to achieve is to ensure that inflation over a number of years is fairly well in line with the inflation target. This should also improve the chances of ensuring stable developments in demand in the economy. That in turn should help smooth the fluctuations in the cyclical component of unemployment, even though the relationship between demand and unemployment does not always have to be especially strong, as demonstrated in particular by recent developments. It is just as important to realise that monetary policy, and for that matter stabilisation policy in general, cannot be used to permanently raise growth and reduce unemployment. If the aim is to achieve a permanently higher employment rate and lower unemployment, it is essentially a question instead of 6 BIS Review 18/2005 
trying to influence the structural component of unemployment, i.e. the component that does not depend on fluctuations in demand for goods and services in the economy. And that requires completely different measures than those of monetary policy. Examples include how to improve the business climate and how to make the labour market as efficient as possible.  It is vital to discuss and evaluate monetary policy, but it is also important that the discussion of economic policy and developments on the whole be based on a realistic view of what monetary policy can accomplish. If so, the discussion is more likely to help us in our efforts to conduct monetary policy in the best way possible. Thank you. 1. Forecasts of UND1X at different times and actual outcome Annual percentage changeSources: StatisticsSweden and the Riksbank01234200020012002200320042005200601234UND1X, outcomeInflation Report 2004:4Inflation Report 2003:1Inflation Report 2002:1  2. Productivity growth in the business sector since 1980 and HP trendAnnualpercentagechangeSources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank-4-3-2-1012345678198119841987199019931996199920022005-4-3-2-1012345678Business sectorForecastHP-trend1981-1990:1.7%1991-1994:2.8%1995-2000:3.2%2001-2004:3.0% BIS Review 18/2005 7 
3. Forecasts of CPI inflation in 2004 at various times: the Riksbank and an average of other forecastersAnnual averageSources: Consensus Inc., Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Dec-02Jun-03Dec-03Jun-04Dec-040.00.51.01.52.02.53.0RiksbankAverage of other forecastersOutcome (0.5)Lowest forecastHighest forecast   4. The reporate according to the NIER’sforecasts in 2002-2003 and the actual reporate Per centSources: NIER and the Riksbank1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0Jan-02Jul-02Jan-03Jul-03Jan-04Jul-041.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0March 2002August 2002March 2003August 2003NIER's repo rateRepo rate   8 BIS Review 18/2005 
5. UND1X and CPIAnnual percentage changeSources: StatisticsSweden and the Riksbank-2-1012345693949596979899000102030405-2-10123456UND1XCPI   6. GDP for the United States and euro areaAnnual percentage changeSources. Eurostat, the US Department of Commerce and the Riksbank-3-2-10123456990001020304050607-3-2-10123456GDP, United StatesForecast United StatesGDP, euro areaForecast euro area   BIS Review 18/2005 9 
7.UND1X: outcome and forecast in the main scenarioAnnual percentage changeSources: StatisticsSweden and the Riksbank-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.09798990001020304050607-1.0-0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0UND1XInflation Report 2005:1Inflation Report 2004:4   Table 1. GDP by expenditureAnnual percentage changeSources: Statistics Sweden and the RiksbankGDP by expenditure 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Private consumption 1.5 1.8 2.7 3.0 3.3 Government consumption 0.8 0.3 1.2 1.4 0.6 Gross fixed capital formation -1.5 5.1 8.0 5.8 4.5 Change in inventories 0.2 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 Exports 5 10.2 6.6 6.1 6.0 Imports 4.9 6.7 7.5 6.6 6.7 GDP at market prices 1.5 3.5 3.2 3.2 2.8   10 BIS Review 18/2005 
Alan Greenspan: Empowering communities, attracting development capital and creating opportunities  Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the 2005 National Community Reinvestment Coalition Conference, Washington DC, 18 March 2005. *      *      * It is a pleasure to join this group that is dedicated to developing strategies for ensuring that opportunities for economic advancement are available to all Americans, including members of lower-income families and communities. In a couple of years, we will celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). To date, this act has brought many successes, but much remains to be accomplished. Before passage of the CRA, lending to underserved populations was often considered an act of goodwill, not good business. I do not disparage benevolence, but I believe that one of the most enduring achievements of the CRA has been that lenders, often to their surprise, have found low-income community lending to be a normal extension of their outreach for profitable business.  Mortgage and consumer lending is driven by credit analysis, and for small-business lending, also by a belief in the potential success of the business venture. Because it is critical that low- and moderate-income lending be, and be perceived as, an extension of regular business practice, we have been building a substantial database on low-income credit experience and business opportunities. This information has been critical to the successes in low-income lending. But information collection and analysis must reach further. If communities are going to be empowered, they need hard evidence of their successes and, yes, hard evidence of their failures, which, as you know, can point the way toward success. Accordingly, I would like to emphasize the important role of program assessment in the community development process. Success of these programs can be understood only through measurement and critical analysis. To date, systematic research on community economic development programs has been limited. One of your challenges then is to expand the information about the impact of your activities so that you can demonstrate the viability of your efforts and replicate local models of success for the benefit of other communities and families.  Measuring the impact of community economic development programs The overarching objective of community economic development and empowerment is to help underserved populations accumulate assets and improve their economic well-being. Measuring the results of programs dedicated to this objective is essential to effectively managing scarce resources and maximizing the impact of these programs. Achieving the objective, particularly in areas and among populations where biases and negative perceptions may have contributed to market failures, helps people improve their financial standing, regardless of their current economic status.  For nearly four decades, numerous policies and programs have been implemented with the intent of increasing economic opportunity. A variety of management and funding strategies have been implemented, ranging from federal government appropriations to debt and equity financing from private sources. Despite the broad spectrum of programs, the length of time they have been in place, and the array of funding participants, empirical research quantifying their impact is rare, regardless of whether government agencies, nonprofit organizations, or private entities sponsor the programs.  The lack of empirical data is particularly regrettable in the case of government-sponsored programs, because quantifying the impact of these programs is crucial to the legislative process. When a bill is proposed in Congress, the nature of the problem and the factors presumed to be contributing to that problem typically are explicitly stated. And generally included is a projection of the outcomes that would indicate success. This process of problem diagnosis, program justification, and projection of results, if fully embraced, provides a framework for assessing a program's value. The program can be judged worthwhile when the data demonstrate that the benefits exceed the costs, including the opportunity costs of any investment.  Even with such a framework, conducting research on community development and economic empowerment programs can be challenging, in part because the effects these programs intend to achieve are often quite difficult to measure and may not become apparent for relatively long periods of BIS Review 18/2005 1 
time. Initiatives aimed at addressing complex economic and social problems that were decades in the making most likely require many years to achieve their goals. Also, virtually no specifically defined standards exist for monitoring the value of social and economic improvement programs.  For community development researchers, the challenge is to develop parameters for objectively assessing the value of their programs. For example, the measures that affordable-housing organizations use could illustrate the extent to which their programs have, or have not, increased homeownership rates and property values, reduced crime, improved school performance, or spurred new private-sector investment in a disadvantaged neighborhood.  Research must isolate the variables that best convey the impact of a program, define the specific data that must be collected, and develop a system for maintaining and retrieving the data over time. In other words, the challenge is to quantify the marginal effect of a program. The value of such a system is clear. So too, however, is the complexity of creating it. Consider, for example, the difficulty of measuring the marginal impact of a financial education program. It requires unique data collection techniques and unconventional tracking systems to gauge the benefit that an individual derives from making informed financial decisions that resulted from that educational program.  Socioeconomic trends for underserved populations and communities The relative paucity of data and research on community development programs has limited the ability to fully demonstrate the programs' impact and to credibly differentiate those that are effective from those that are not. Undeniably, impressive local community development initiatives have been undertaken, and individual testimonials reveal advances in the economic well-being of many of the beneficiaries. However, the absence of formal data collection and research for the numerous neighborhood revitalization efforts over the past several decades has resulted in a reliance on mostly anecdotal reporting at a neighborhood or individual level. Anecdotal information is not without value. It offers clues to the construction of a more-formal statistical analysis. But, as I am sure all of you know from experience, anecdotes are selective and can convey a false message about the success or failure of a program.  Given the lack of data that can be used to measure the success of new initiatives, the inclination is to examine the data that does exist to identify trends in areas where community development organizations have been a consistent presence for some time. When broad positive trends cannot be completely attributed to conventional market forces, perhaps community development is at least a partial explanation. Since community development initiatives focus on traditionally underserved populations - lower-income families and communities - economic indicators relating to these markets may offer some insight into the influence of local economic and social programs. For example, according to a 2003 study by the Brookings Institution, the number of people living in high-poverty neighborhoods decreased 24 percent between 1990 and 2000. Much more dramatic improvements occurred in some cities, such as Detroit, where the decrease was 75 percent. In addition, the report found that concentrated poverty decreased among all racial and ethnic groups, with the percentage of African-Americans living in high-poverty neighborhoods declining from 30 percent in 1990 to 19 percent in 2000. These data present an encouraging picture of improvement in the economic condition of very low-income families and communities.  The data also reveal gains in homeownership among low-income and minority populations. The Federal Reserve Board's 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) concluded that, between 1998 and 2001, families in the lowest quintile of the income distribution increased their rate of homeownership nearly 5 percent. Although results from the 2004 SCF are not available, data reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act indicate that home-purchase lending to lower-income families increased 11 percent between 2001 and 2003. These data also reveal a 17 percent increase in home mortgage loans to African-Americans and a 30 percent increase in home mortgage loans to Hispanics. Further, HMDA data for the same period show a 45 percent increase in home mortgage loans in low-income tracts, while lending in higher-income tracts rose by only 19 percent.  In weighing the implications of the trends reflected by the data, it is important to consider the presence of changes in external market influences. For example, advances in mortgage underwriting and delivery systems have resulted in increased availability of funding for homeownership, which has resulted in increased efficiencies in extending credit in harder-to-reach markets. However, despite the difficulty of distinguishing between outcomes attributable to macroeconomic conditions and those attributable to localized community interventions, we must attempt to make this differentiation. Indeed, 2 BIS Review 18/2005 
understanding the effects of the multiple influences on the economic conditions of a market is the only means of achieving the highest possible use of public funding and establishing appropriate expectations for private-sector participation in redevelopment activities.  Information gains in community development Despite the lack of empirical data about the effectiveness of specific community development programs, many community development corporations (CDCs) have modified their strategies and their structures to enhance their efficiency and impact. Most notably, CDCs have realized the necessity of diversifying their funding sources and reducing their reliance on government support, which is vulnerable to the vagaries of shifting political priorities. In expanding the range of financing for their programs, community development leaders have gained a better understanding of the risk tolerance and return requirements of their various capital providers.  In addition to diversifying sources of funding, community developers have sought to broaden the types of financing they use. They once viewed debt as the primary, if not the sole, vehicle available for capitalizing community development efforts, but now they recognize the vital role of equity investment in helping communities withstand economic downturns. New sources of equity - community development venture capital funds and secondary markets that securitize community development loan pools - have become available to energize market forces in economically distressed neighborhoods.  Technological advances have significantly improved the development of new financing strategies. With increased information-processing capacity, loan portfolio managers can better assess risk and monitor credit performance. Additionally, the ever-increasing availability of data facilitates the development of neighborhood profiles that can be useful in understanding and tracking community socioeconomic trends. For example, cross-referencing data sets on mortgage lending patterns, business start-ups, and employment against crime statistics and property values can provide a valuable perspective.  Community developers have made important strides in establishing performance parameters and developing information systems to promote rigorous evaluation of programs and organizations. Data collection programs have produced insights into the markets that community economic development lenders serve and the characteristics and financial performance of the institutions providing these services. For example, the Department of Treasury's Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund launched its Community Investment Impact System in mid-2004, with the goal of establishing a comprehensive repository of data on community development finance institutions and activities. The systematic collection and standardization of information on these institutions' customers, transactions, and markets holds promise for increasing understanding of the institutions' impact on the communities and populations they serve.  Other information collection systems have been launched within the community development field in an attempt to assess organizations' effectiveness in fulfilling their expressed mission. These data collection programs underscore the importance of identifying the organizational structures and policies characteristic of effective enterprises. For example, the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation has adopted a data system that defines and tracks success measures of its member organizations. The Success Measures Data System is a participatory evaluation model designed to document the outcomes and measure the impact of community development programs, using parameters defined by the leaders and stakeholders in the field. Another program, the CDFI Assessment and Rating System, was developed by the National Community Capital Association to help investors and donors assess the social impact and financial strength of community development finance organizations. While these systems are in the early stages, they are a critical step in advancing understanding of the community economic development finance field and in designing policies and practices that can improve economic opportunity for low-income families and neighborhoods.  Benefits of research Undoubtedly, we have learned many valuable lessons over the years, and it is essential to disseminate and apply these lessons to improve program effectiveness. Only through a comprehensive understanding of the outcomes of a program can success be emulated and failures reduced.  BIS Review 18/2005 3 
By consistently and reliably measuring outcomes, and thus helping current and prospective investors better assess their risks and predict their returns, community development organizations can attract more funding. Such accountability is crucial for any organization, regardless of its size.  In addition to increasing funding options, research can also increase the scope and scale of programs. As effective strategies are identified, they can be replicated and incorporated into efforts in other communities, as well as by organizations seeking to develop programs to address related issues.  In conclusion, I want to emphasize the importance of the role of those who interpret the research. Analysts must be scrupulous in characterizing research results, or their work becomes advocacy rather than research. Objectivity is paramount because research findings from previous efforts become the basis for subsequent efforts to target scarce resources as effectively as possible. Objectivity requires great discipline and integrity; it requires that researchers resist any innate desire to characterize results in the most- or least-favorable light possible. The failure of a program is not a research failure; it is a source of information. And acknowledgment of the research findings, regardless of how disappointing, contributes to a foundation of knowledge upon which future successes can be built.  In the quest to do good for our society's most-vulnerable populations and communities - the objective compelling the work of this group - analysts must embrace the challenge to develop objective and quantifiable standards for assessing community development programs. Ultimately, research is the only means for determining whether we are making advances in distressed neighborhoods by improving access to economic opportunities for traditionally underserved populations. I applaud your efforts and look forward to learning of your future progress.  4 BIS Review 18/2005 
V Leeladhar: Contemporary and future issues in Indian banking Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to Kanara Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Mangalore, 11 March 2005. *      *      * Banking scenario has changed rapidly since 1990s. The decade of 90s has witnessed a sea change in the way banking is done in India. Technology has made tremendous impact in banking. ‘Anywhere banking’ and ‘Anytime banking’ have become a reality. The financial sector now operates in a more competitive environment than before and intermediates relatively large volume of international financial flows. In the wake of greater financial deregulation and global financial integration, the biggest challenge before the regulators is of avoiding instability in the financial system. Economic outlook and banking sector’s performance Keeping in mind the impact of real sector shocks on financial stability, any assessment of the banking sector needs to be done in the backdrop of national as well as international economic outlook. During the last couple of years, global growth has been above the forecast in almost every region stimulated by strong monetary and fiscal measures. The domestic economic outlook is also bright with the real GDP growth rate surpassing 8% last year and estimated to be around 7% in the current year. Industrial performance also improved considerably with a strong manufacturing growth for the second consecutive year. Inflation rate has been under control, barring some hiccup for a short period. Aided by a good macro economic environment, banks’ bottom line has improved significantly over the last two years. However, let us not forget that a major contributor to the windfall gains has been treasury profits fuelled by a secular decline in interest rates during the three years period from 2001 to 2004 and consequent profit booking on sale of government securities. From the current year, with the hardening of interest rates, this trading component of profits is no longer going to shore up banks’ profitability. On the contrary, most banks have been required to provide for the decline in the market value of their investments portfolio. Thankfully, one offsetting factor has been the strong pick up in the credit off-take due to buoyant demand in the economy and revival of industrial activity, which have resulted in substantial increase in banks’ core interest income. High capital inflows: an opportunity as well as a challenge As you all know, liquidity position in the financial sector has been quite comfortable in the recent times. The buoyant capital market coupled with an appreciating rupee vis-à-vis US dollar has been attracting large foreign institutional inflows during the last two years. While we have an all time high foreign exchange reserves of more than $130 billion, high capital inflows pose a big challenge to monetary and exchange rate management. In this context, operationalisation of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) has given an additional instrument for liquidity and monetary management. To sum up the challenge, I would like to quote a statement of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, which he made at the annual meeting of Bank for International Settlement (BIS) on June 28, 2004. And I quote, “…..Special defences need to be put in place for ensuring financial stability in the case of countries like India that are faced with the prospect of volatile capital flows. The issues relating to cross-border supervision of financial intermediaries in the context of greater capital flows are just emerging and need to be addressed.” Technology is the key As I mentioned in the beginning of my speech, technology has thrown new challenges in the banking sector and new issues have started cropping up which is going to pose certain problems in the near future. The new entrants in the banking are with computer background. However, over a period of time they would acquire banking experience. Whereas the middle and senior level people have rich banking experience but their computer literacy is at a low level. Therefore, they feel the handicap in this regard since technology has become an indispensable tool in banking. BIS Review 17/2005 1 
Foreign banks and the new private sector banks have embraced technology right from the inception of their operations and therefore, they have adapted themselves to the changes in the technology easily. Whereas the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and the old private sector banks (barring a very few of them) have not been able to keep pace with these developments. In this regard, one can cite historical, political and other factors like work culture and working relations (which are mainly governed by bipartite settlements between the managements and the staff members) as the main constraints. Added to these woes, the PSBs were also saddled with some non-viable and loss making branches, thanks to the social banking concept thrust upon them by the regulatory authorities in 1960s. Globalisation of financial services Growing integration of economies and the markets around the world is making global banking a reality. The surge in globalization of finance has also gained momentum with the technological advancements which have effectively overcome the national borders in the financial services business. Widespread use of internet banking has widened frontiers of global banking, and it is now possible to market financial products and services on a global basis. In the coming years globalization would spread further on account of the likely opening up of financial services under WTO. India, as you know, is one of the 104 signatories of Financial Services Agreement (FSA) of 1997. This gives India’s financial sector including banks an opportunity to expand their business on a quid pro quo basis.  Indian Banks at the global stage: A Reality check As per Indian Banks' Association report ‘Banking Industry Vision 2010’, there would be greater presence of international players in Indian financial system and some of the Indian banks would become global players in the coming years. So, the new mantra for Indian banks is to go global in search of new markets, customers and profits. Let us not forget that the competition is not only on foreign turf but also in the domestic field as well from foreign banks operating in India. Now against these lofty objectives of Indian banks going global, let us see where we stand. Although, Indian banks have also made their presence overseas, yet it is limited. Only twenty Indian banks including private sector banks appear in the list of “Top 1000 World Banks” as listed by the London based magazine “The Banker”. What is even more revealing is that State Bank of India, India’s largest bank, ranks 82nd amongst the top global banks. Size is increasingly becoming important for the global banks as it is crucial to improved efficiency. However, India’s largest bank, SBI is not even  a 10th in size of the 9th largest bank, Sumitomo Mitsui, which has assets of $950 billion as against SBI’s assets of $91 billion. Therefore, the notion that SBI or ICICI Bank can compete in the international arena seems far fetched at the moment. Is size the only constraint for Indian banks? The problem is not just one of lacking the necessary size; few Indian banks have the necessary products or human resource capabilities. If anything, the implementation of Basel II norms has raised the bar for Indian banks seeking an international presence. The top international banks can lower their capital requirements through the use of sophisticated risk management techniques and thus compete more aggressively than before. What is being done to prepare Indian banks to meet global challenge? Indian banking sector has already implemented internationally followed prudential accounting norms for classification of assets, income recognition and loan loss provisioning. The scope of disclosure and transparency has also been raised in accordance with international practices. India has complied with almost all the Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee. Some of the Indian banks are also presenting their accounts as per the U.S. GAAP. The roadmap for adoption of Basel II is also under formulation. All these factors give Indian banks much needed confidence for overseas operations. But as I said earlier overseas operations is one thing and competing against the global players in the international market is quite another. And Indian banks have a lot of catching up to do before they can emerge as truly global players. 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
Supporting Regulatory Framework Supporting institutional and regulatory framework at home is vital for domestic banks aspiring for global operations. RBI has suitably changed the country’s regulatory framework from time to time to support Indian financial institutions to withstand the competitive pressures placed on them by increasing globalization.  Proper steps have been taken to guide the banking sector to see that the banks pass through this transition phase by and large successfully. The reforms initiated in the banking sector have now reached a crucial stage. Government’s stake in some PSBs is reduced and as a consequence public equity in these PSBs is enlarged. This led to greater responsibility on the bank managements since the level of accountability has increased. Pressures of performance and profitability will keep them on their toes all the time as the public shareholders expect good performance along with good returns on their equity. Many PSBs have already started the exercise of cleaning up of their balance sheets by shedding the excess baggage. The VRS scheme in the recent past in some of the banks was aimed not only at downsizing the manpower but also at cutting down the staff costs and increasing the performance levels of the staff in the long run. Some of these banks are able to run the show to certain extent by low cost funds that are available thanks to the branch network spread over the length and breadth of the country. Consolidation and move towards Universal Banking    We are slowly but surely moving from a regime of “large number of small banks” to “small number of large banks.” The new era is going to be one of consolidation around identified core competencies.  Mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector are going to be the order of the day.  Successful merger of HDFC Bank and Times Bank earlier and Stanchart and ANZ Grindlays three years ago has demonstrated that trend towards consolidation is almost an accepted fact.  We are also looking for such signs in respect of a number of old private sector banks, many of which are not able to cushion their NPAs, expand their business and induct technology due to limited capital base. Coming times may usher in large banking institutions, if the development financial institutions opt for conversion into commercial banking in line with the recommendation of Narasimhan (II).  In India, one of the largest financial institutions, ICICI, took the lead towards universal banking with its reverse merger with ICICI Bank coming through a couple of years ago.  Another mega financial institution, IDBI has also adopted the same strategy, and has already transformed itself into a universal bank. Now the process of its progeny IDBI Bank merging itself with the parent IDBI is underway, and is likely to be completed soon. This trend may lead logically to promoting the concept of financial super market chain, making available all types of credit and non-fund facilities under one roof or specialised subsidiaries under one umbrella organisation.  Consolidated accounting and supervisory techniques would have to evolve and appropriate fire walls built to address the risks underlying such large organisations and banking conglomerates. Will the stable conditions continue for the banks? The big question we have to ponder is whether these stable conditions marked by all round improvement in banks’ performance can continue into 2005 onward in the light of potentially dramatic changes that include, among others, a sliding dollar, rising interest rates, introduction of Basel II accord and international accounting standards, and the possible flattening of consumer lending boom. Hopefully, the banking industry in tandem with the regulatory authorities will rise to the occasion, and collectively face the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. Thank you. BIS Review 17/2005 3 
Rachel Lomax: Inflation targeting in practice - models, forecasts and hunches Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the 59th International Atlantic Economic Conference, London, 12 March 2005. I am most grateful to Jens Larsen, James Bell, Fabrizio Zampolli and Robin Windle for research support; and to Charlie Bean, Peter Andrews, Spencer Dale, Phil Evans, Laura Piscitelli and other colleagues at the Bank of England for helpful comments. *      *      * Introduction Five and a half years ago in his Monnet lecture Charles Goodhart1 was able to talk with some confidence of the features that particularly distinguished the UK’s approach to inflation targeting. Today with over 20 countries, in every habitable continent, formally operating some variant of inflation targeting and many more adopting some parts of the framework, all actively sharing experience and best practice, I suspect that most aspects of our approach would find a counterpart somewhere else in the world. But Charles’s focus on the Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) personal engagement in producing a published inflation forecast still seems to me to capture the essence of the UK’s approach. Today I want to talk about the role that forecasting has come to play in helping the MPC to take and communicate its decisions. In what sense does the Committee really ‘own’ the published forecasts that go out under its name? How much use do we make of models, and what models do we use? How far do our forecasts appear to drive interest rate decisions? And is there any evidence that this has helped to make policy more or less predictable? Finally I want to end by commenting on some of the issues raised by forecasts as a means of communication. Why the MPC has always been involved in forecasting The MPC’s early involvement in the forecast process is firmly rooted in the kind of committee it is, as well as the nature of the remit it has been given. The objectives of UK monetary policy have been expressed in terms of an annual inflation target since 1992, but responsibility for achieving the target initially lay with the Treasury, acting on the Bank’s advice. In 1997, as part of a wide ranging restructuring of the Bank of England’s role, decisions about interest rates were delegated to the Bank’s new MPC. Its nine members – five internal Bank officials and four external members chosen for their relevant knowledge and experience – are individually, and publicly, accountable for meeting the inflation target.   The Government remains responsible for setting the annual inflation target, within the context of legislation that requires the Bank of England to achieve ‘price stability and subject to that to support the government’s objectives for output and employment’. Under its current remit, the MPC is required to achieve 2% consumer price inflation ‘at all times’. If inflation deviates from target by more than 1 percentage point, the MPC has to write a public letter to the Chancellor to explain why, and what it is doing to bring it back.   These arrangements remain relatively novel and unusual in UK constitutional terms. Prior to 1997, a longstanding objection to Bank of England independence was concern that such arrangements would be inconsistent with Ministerial duty to answer to the House of Commons on major matters of policy. A high level of transparency and openness about MPC decisions has been a critical aspect of meeting expectations of parliamentary and public accountability as well as an effective way of enhancing the credibility of monetary policy.  In fact greater openness about monetary policy was part of the package of changes that were made to restore credibility after the UK’s exit from the ERM in 1992. The Bank played its part by introducing a new quarterly Inflation Report, which by 1997 had won widespread respect for its objectivity and                                                       1  Goodhart, C (1999) ‘Recent developments in central banking: some special features of the Monetary Policy Committee and of the European system of central Banks’ Jean Monnet Lecture, Dublin European Institute, 1999. BIS Review 17/2005 1 
professionalism. Against this background, the 1998 Bank of England Act required the new Monetary Policy Committee to sign off the Bank’s Inflation Report. In practice, the MPC’s sign off has been far from a formality, though the Inflation Report formally remains the Bank’s report. It is not that surprising that a committee of experts whose external members are based in the Bank and who devote at least 60% of their time to monetary policy should get deeply involved in preparing and debating the forecasts that they sign off. It may be more remarkable that nine economists, labouring under the burden of individual accountability, have so far succeeded in signing off 31 editions of the Inflation Report, and found ways of dealing with the inevitable range of views.  The nature and role of the forecast Nowadays the forecast has two related roles in the monetary policy process.  First, it helps the Committee to set monetary policy by organising, informing and focusing its discussions.  And second, it provides transparency about the Committee’s thinking and plays a key part of its public communication strategy.2 Helping the MPC make decisions Monetary policy needs to be forward looking, because interest rates act with a lag.  No monetary policymaker can avoid taking a view on the future.  That view needs to be coherent and disciplined, and informed by the best information available. But it also needs to reflect a realistic appreciation of the massive uncertainties inherent in any forecast.  The MPC spends many hours discussing the projections that go into the Inflation Report and the text that accompanies them. Although the process has been somewhat streamlined since Charles’s day (when the committee spent a gruelling ten meetings a quarter on the forecast on top of the usual monthly decision meetings) the forecast round is probably still the largest single commitment of the Committee’s time.  Why? An important reason is that the forecast is not just an occasion for agreeing a set of projections for the inflation outlook. It has come to provide an organising framework for assessing all the relevant information, and an opportunity for a deeper discussion of economic developments. Since I have been on the Committee, we have spent at least half our allotted forecasting time debating longer term issues, such as the effect of structural change in the labour market and the relationship between house price inflation and consumption. Sometimes the outcome of those discussions has had a material influence on our thinking about risks, even when the direct impact on the central projections has been relatively minor.  What role do formal economic models play in the forecast? No set of economic projections – least of all one owned by a committee of nine experts – can ever be the outcome of a purely model-based operation. Judgement always plays a large role – although different people frame their judgements in more or less model-based ways. But it is difficult to make a forecast without using models: they provide an organising framework for ensuring intellectual and accounting consistency in generating baseline projections, and for considering alternative scenarios and risks.  What sorts of models does the Committee find useful? In his peer review of the Bank’s use of economic models3, Adrian Pagan suggested that economic modelling may involve a trade off between theoretical consistency (good economics) and data coherence (a good fit); our goal should be to ensure that we are positioned on the efficient frontier between the two.  Any model we use should in principle be on this frontier – but we want to be able to move along the frontier and use different sorts of models for different purposes.                                                       2  Charles gives five arguments for having an IR that is the responsibility of the MPC itself: transparency, discipline, a better informed MPC, better forecasts and accountability (in that order). I think they fit within my taxonomy. 3  Pagan, A (2003) ‘Modelling and forecasting at the Bank of England’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Spring 2003.   Adrian Pagan has been commissioned to produce a postscript, following the introduction of the new Bank of England Quarterly Model.   This will be published later this year. 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
For example, if, as I have suggested, we want to use models to facilitate discussions about fundamental economic issues, we clearly need models with rich economic structures – structures that reflect the Committee’s views on the way the economy works.  The Bank’s new Quarterly Model (BEQM)4 has been developed with this function very much in mind. But we also use other and smaller models with rich economic structures to look at specific issues as part of our suite of models. We also want to quantify the likely impacts on inflation and output of a range of pieces of data news as accurately as possible.  The numbers matter, so empirical performance is important, too. We have worked hard at ensuring that BEQM does well in this dimension, but we have also, within our suite, been developing more statistically based models.  We may use these models on their own – as stand alone forecasting tools – or to inform the judgements that we make in using BEQM. Let me say a few words about both the main model and the suite.  The motivation for the BEQM project was to help with the ‘intellectual framework’ role of the forecast.  Without losing empirical performance, we wanted to improve upon the previous main model’s articulation of the underlying structure of the economy, to make it more explicitly consistent with the Committee’s beliefs.5  This was made possible in the light of recent advances both in economic understanding – particularly the emphasis on providing coherent micro foundations in macroeconomic models – and in sheer computational power (both in terms of computing power and the techniques applied).  BEQM is a large scale model by the standards of most academic research, but it is small scale compared with traditional macro-econometric models. Compared with the latter, it is also more of a general equilibrium model with an emphasis on internal consistency.  Households and firms optimise – they are forward-looking and they use   available information efficiently. Unlike our previous model, things add up: flows add to stocks, profits are allocated, and so on.  There is a high degree of simultaneity in the way the model is solved. It no longer makes sense, nor is it at all easy, to consider the model equation by equation.   This provides a greater degree of discipline on Committee members and staff, who are now forced to confront the full implications of their judgements more explicitly.  If someone wants to change one of the economic relationships, they need to say why, and acknowledge the possible implications for other behavioural relationships.  If, for example, we want to assume that the trend rate of labour productivity growth has changed, the model requires us to recognise that there are implications for both demand and supply.  Faster productivity growth will increase productive capacity, but income will also grow faster. So what might that mean for demand now?  This is a definite advance – providing the general equilibrium mechanisms in the new model do in fact reflect our ideas about how the world works.  But it also makes for a more demanding discussion. There are no easy fixes, and it can be difficult to accommodate views that differ from the model’s paradigm.  As an example, the model is firmly rooted in the rational expectations tradition.  And we have assumed that monetary policy is credible.  Both are perfectly reasonable, arguably essential, modelling assumptions.  The fact that the new model makes them explicit can be intellectually helpful. But it doesn’t make it any easier to provide answers to questions about expectations and credibility.  What if some agents base their decisions on simple rules of thumb?  BEQM has features that allow us to accommodate such questions when we are forecasting – but in a more ad-hoc way that requires a substantial degree of judgement.  We are still learning how to exploit all BEQM’s possibilities. But it clearly represents a move towards the ‘Pagan frontier’, offering a higher degree of theoretical coherence without losing empirical performance.  A number of other central banks are working on similar models – the ECB, Bank of Canada, FRB, Norges Bank and Bank of Finland – as well as the IMF.  The international modelling community is an exemplary forum for the exchange of ideas and experiences, and we have learnt – and will continue to learn – a lot from the experience of others.  No model can do everything. All models oversimplify drastically. The trick is to identify an appropriate degree of simplification for the task in hand. So the Committee has never been prepared to rely on one model. This has led to attempts to develop a suite of models.                                                       4  Harrison, R, Nikolov, K, Quinn, M, Ramsay, G, Scott, A and Thomas, R (2005) The Bank of England Quarterly Model. 5  For a description of the previous model, see Economic Models at the Bank of England (1999). BIS Review 17/2005 3 
The suite takes two forms. One is a range of models that are complementary to the core forecasting model.  These hold up a magnifying glass to particular parts of the economy, and allow us to take account of the influence of a wider range of factors in more detail than could be accommodated in the main model.  These (sub-) models might be geared towards analysing particular policy issues (e.g., supply chain pricing models, the future development of household and corporate gearing, productivity growth in the distribution sector).  Or they might also provide the interface between our very short-term conjunctural analysis, and the 2-3 year forecast.   Second, we have a set of statistical models. The MPC attempts to process a huge amount of information before each monthly decision. The Committee already uses some data-driven forecasts (for example, forecasts that uses many variables to forecast in an a-theoretic way, statistical models to produce near term forecasts for key data such as CPI, and small models that filter ONS first releases, to handle the inevitable data uncertainty associated with early releases6).  But it is a herculean task to absorb and analyse all the data. So, responding to the needs of the MPC, but also to suggestions by Pagan, the staff is in the process of developing and evaluating more models geared towards empirical forecasting accuracy and finding ways of combining these forecasts in a statistically efficient way.  This is very much work in progress, with the aim of helping the MPC to form judgements both about the most likely outturns and the uncertainty surrounding them.  Handling uncertainty and disagreement Even armed with a range of economic models to aid structured discussion and enforce a degree of intellectual discipline, how is it possible for a group of nine individually accountable economists to reach sufficient agreement to publish a forecast which is described as reflecting their best collective judgement? An important part of the answer lies in the use of formal techniques to capture uncertainty and risk. These antedate the MPC.  The Bank of England started publishing fan charts for its inflation projections in February 1996, following an early experiment with what might be called ‘trumpet charts’.7 The motivation was purely to illustrate the uncertainty inherent in all economic projections. While trumpets consisted of a single shaded area around a central projection, corresponding to average absolute forecast errors (see Chart 1), fan charts (see Chart 2) were graduated to show the full distribution of possible outcomes.8   Chart 1.  November 1995 RPIX inflation projection – symmetric error bands Chart 2. February 1996 RPIX inflation projection – fan chart                                                       6  Ashley, J, Driver, R, Hayes S and Jeffrey, C (2005) ‘Dealing with data uncertainty’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Winter 2005, published on 14 March 2005. 7  I am indebted to Mark Allan and James Bell for this nice descriptor. 8  For a further description of the fan chart methodology, see Inflation Report May 2002 p 48-49 and Britton, E, Fisher, P and Whitley, J (1998) ‘The Inflation Report projections: understanding the fan chart’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin February 1998. 4 BIS Review 17/2005 
Nowadays, each Inflation Report includes fan charts for inflation and output which reflect the Committee’s views on the full distribution of possible outcomes.  While the width of the fan bears some relation to the size of forecast errors over the past decade (the distribution of past forecast errors provide a benchmark calibration), its main features – the moments of the underlying distribution – change with each forecast to reflect the Committee’s best judgement about the balance of risks around the outlook for inflation and output and the degree of uncertainty. While many other central banks now publish fan charts, the MPC is still relatively unusual in basing them on the policymakers’ subjective view about the distribution of risks, rather than staff views or historical/statistical measures of past errors. The MPC’s approach to constructing fan charts can help the members come to an agreement on the substantive issues, while retaining their individual views. This is because the risks are often where the major differences of opinion amongst members lie.  And while the members may be able to agree on a collective view of the overall outlook including the degree of uncertainty and balance of risks, it might be for slightly different reasons.  To be sure, there have been times when differences of view about the central projection have been too significant to be handled within the ambit of the fan chart and on those (few) occasions the Inflation Report has included material illustrating the minority view. But, as the MPC’s preface to the Inflation Report notes, the fan charts reflect the Committee’s best collective judgement about the most likely paths for output and inflation and the uncertainties surrounding the central projections, while recognising that members may have slightly different views about the underlying assumptions.  Forecasts and interest rate decisions How influential is the forecasting process when it comes to the actual business of taking decisions about interest rates?  One yardstick might be whether the MPC is more likely to change rates in Inflation Report months.  There is no necessary reason why this should be so: information accrues relatively evenly over the year, and the Committee goes through the same decision taking process every month. On the other hand, the MPC might be more likely to change rates after a systematic and full review of the inflation outlook, rather than in response to the news on the month.  On this argument, ready-reckoners may give a rough indication of what the impact of new data may be, but they are no substitute for a full analysis.  So in non-Inflation Report months the MPC may sometimes decide to ‘wait-and-see’ – to postpone a possible interest rate change until more evidence has accumulated.  As it happens, market economists have tended to think that interest rate changes were more likely in Inflation Report months. Since 1998, Reuters have asked a group of economists (initially around 20-30, now 40 or more) to attach probabilities to a range of different outcomes for interest rates, so we can calculate a mean and a mode expected interest rate change across individuals.  Panel B in Chart 3 split the months in which the mode is for a (25bp) change into Inflation Report and non-Inflation Report months.  According to this measure, markets have consistently thought that changes were more likely in Inflation Report months.  The data on interest rate changes provide mixed evidence. Over the period since 1997 as a whole, the Committee has displayed a preference for changing rates in Inflation Report months. But it showed no such tendency in its early years. The picture since 2001 is very different, with almost two thirds of rates changes taking place in Inflation Report months, compared with the one third that would be expected if rate changes were evenly spread over the year. And no fewer than six of the last eight rate changes have coincided with the publication of an Inflation Report. (See Chart 3 and Table 2 for details). BIS Review 17/2005 5 
 Chart 3.  Proportion of actual and expected interest rate changes occurring in Inflation Report months. (A) Actual changes (B) Expected changes 01020304050607080901001997-20002001-presentwhole periodIR monthsNot IR monthsPercentage of interest rate changesone-third 01020304050607080901001997-20002001-presentwhole periodIR monthsNot IR monthsPercentage of interest rate changesone-third What – if anything – should be read into the MPCs apparent change in behaviour? On the face of it, the evidence might suggest that the re-evaluation of the outlook undertaken during the quarterly forecast has become more influential. But there are a number of possible explanations.  Most obviously, it could be a reflection of the shocks that have come along in the last 4 years. These may have required fewer changes in the policy rate than in the pre-2001 period.  Alternatively, the required adjustments in rates might have been bigger in the early days, and if the MPC had an inclination to change rates in small steps, perhaps because it had good reasons for proceeding cautiously, then larger desired adjustments might have required more frequent changes: of the 16 changes in the first period, 7 were back-to-back, while in the second period, only 4 out of the 14 changes happened in consecutive meetings.  The turnover in the Committee’s membership since 2000 might provide a different kind of explanation. The present Committee contains only one member (the present Governor) who has been there from the outset, and some of the early members served short terms. Might the latter day tendency towards changing rates only after a forecast reflect a generally less activist approach to setting rates?  Table 1 provides an unscientific guide to Committee members’ degree of activism:  it is arranged with the most ‘activist members’ (identified as those voting proportionately most frequently for a rate change) at the top.9  If personal preferences played no role, we might expect to see a relationship between activism and ‘MPC vintage’ – if MPC members responded to the same shocks, or their behaviour was affected by some other common factor, there would be clusters.  Keen MPC watchers will no doubt find some support for the view that personality matters.  But, in general, the members who voted for the most rate changes are associated with the earlier years of the Committee, consistent with the idea that the MPC may have needed to respond more frequently during that period.10                                                         9  We have excluded the first 7 months of the MPC’s existence to allow for the possibility that the first rate changes were reflecting necessary adjustments to reach what the MPC thought was the right level of interest rates. 10  There are, of course, also other possible explanations, e.g. if a member has views which are consistently adrift of the rest of the Committee, leading them to believe that rates are significantly too low/high, then they may repeatedly – and unsuccessfully – vote for a change without being ‘activist’ in the sense of wanting to change rates frequently in response to news.    6 BIS Review 17/2005 
Table 1: MPC members’ voting statistics from January 1998 (current members in red)1   % of months voted for a rate change % of changes voted for that were in IR months Number of meetings attended since Jan 1998 Time of membership      Willem Buiter 79 36 29 1997-2000 Sir Alan Budd 65 30 17 1997-1999 John Vickers 61 29 28 1998-2000 Charles Goodhart 52 36 29 1997-2000 Sushil Wadhwani 51 37 37 1999-2002 Christopher Allsopp 49 44 37 2000-2003 DeAnne Julius 46 47 41 1997-2001 Stephen Nickell 41 50 58 2000-date Mervyn King 39 41 87 1997-date David Clementi 37 43 57 1997-2002 Ian Plenderleith 33 44 54 1997-2002 Sir Andrew Large 34 40 29 2002-date Kate Barker 33 53 46 2001-date Sir Edward George 30 45 67 1997-2003 Richard Lambert 29 67 21 2003-date Marian Bell 28 56 32 2002-date Charles Bean 28 60 54 2000-date Rachel Lomax 25 80 20 2003-date Paul Tucker 24 63 33 2002-date 1 Up to and including the February 2005 MPC meeting.  Has the publication of regular forecasts, which are seen to bear a close relationship to the decision taking process, helped to make the policy decisions themselves more predictable? The test is whether markets are less likely to be surprised by interest rate changes, given full knowledge of all the relevant economic news.   We ran some simple statistical tests on two measures of ‘market surprises’.  One is based on the Reuters poll of economists.  The surprise measure is the difference between the actual repo rate change and the mean expected repo rate change.  The other surprise measure is a bit further out along the yield curve: changes in the implied three-month forward LIBOR rate.11    Both measures suggest that interest rate surprises have become significantly smaller in the post-2001 period than previously (Table 2 Panel C), consistent with improved policy predictability.   But, intriguingly, there is also some tentative evidence that surprises in Inflation Report months tend to be relatively large.12  What are we to make of that?                                                       11  More precisely, this is an implied 3-month Libor forward rate at a constant horizon of 3-months, where the constant horizon is calculated by linear interpolation of adjacent futures contracts.  The results are largely invariant to using six or twelve month horizons.  12  This could, of course, be entirely driven by the expectation that there would be no move in non-Inflation Report months: in the extreme, if the distribution of surprises in those months is degenerate (i.e. so that no one expected a change in rate and this was what actually happened) then the statement that surprises are bigger in Inflation Report months is no different from the statement that rates are only expected to change in these months.  The closer the distribution comes to being degenerate, the more weight should be attached to that interpretation.  But both the average surprise and its variance are significant.  BIS Review 17/2005 7 
On closer inspection, this finding seems to relate to the decision in Inflation Report months – not the publication of the Report itself a week later, or the minutes the week after that (Panel E shows that the market reaction to the policy decision is, on average, significantly bigger than the reaction to the Report and the minutes).  This might imply that it is the rethink during the preparation of the Inflation Report that counts. But, once announced, the decision itself (and the accompanying press notice, if rates have changed) provides most of the information the market needs to understand the Committee’s approach.  This would be consistent with a fairly high degree of policy predictability. It is worth emphasising that the observed tendency for interest rate changes to coincide with the publication of an Inflation Report does not imply that interest rate changes are tied in any mechanical way to the central projection for inflation.  The assessment of risks is always a material factor in determining policy, as well as an important aspect of the presentation of the forecast. For example in our latest Inflation Report we published a central projection which showed inflation rising gently but steadily above the 2% target, assuming a nearly flat profile of interest rates out to three years. But the Report noted that the balance of risks was to the downside and singled out some key near term risk areas, such as the household sector.  This provided a nuanced background to the MPC’s February decision to hold rates unchanged.  Forecasts and public communication All inflation targeting central banks use their forecasts as a communication tool.  They provide a coherent statement of policymakers’ thinking about the economic outlook and the policy stance. Together with the minutes of the policy meetings (in our case published with individual votes after two weeks), this helps to discharge the Committee’s democratic duty to explain itself, as well as supporting its credibility and helping to anchor inflation expectations.13 The Inflation Report plays a central role in the Committee’s communication.  Since August 2003 the Governor has fronted the regular Inflation Report press conference, and the MPC’s appearances in front of the Treasury Select Committee has been (loosely) linked to the Inflation Report cycle.  This brings me to a much debated question: how much information should a central bank provide?  Academics have tended to press the case for more transparency, while practicing central bankers have been more cautious, (though much more predisposed to openness than they would have been twenty years ago). Don Kohn14 argues that “more is not necessarily always better, and at each step of the way central banks have needed to take account of the potential costs as well as the benefits of greater transparency”.  In particular it is argued that the publication of some kinds of information could make it more difficult for policymakers to do their job, with discussions of the possible path of future interest rates being seen as particularly hazardous, if they appear “as a firmer pre commitment than they were intended to be”.15   Arguably these should not be a first order issues for central banks with a transparent inflation targeting framework. The objectives of policy are clear, and outside commentators should have access to enough information to work out the future direction of rates for themselves. Nevertheless there has been a closely related debate about how transparent an inflation targeting central bank should be about the interest rates on which its forecasts are based.  An obvious reason for wanting more direct information about the ‘preferred’ path is to get direct evidence on the interest rate strategy. (How quickly will rates rise? What are the advantages of a ‘wait-and-see’ approach?)                                                       13  As Mishkin puts it ‘.[H]aving secretive central banks is inherently undemocratic…[B]asic democratic principles require that the central bank be accountable for its actions: this requires that the public understands what the central bank is doing. In addition, democratic principles indicate that the preferences of policymakers need to be aligned with those of the society at large.’ Mishkin, F (2004) ‘Can central bank transparency go too far?’ in Kent, C and Guttman, S (eds.) The future of inflation targeting Reserve Bank of Australia.  14  Kohn, D (2005) ‘Central Bank Communication’.  Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association January 2005. 15  Mishkin has sympathy for this view, noting that “[w]hen new information comes in and the central bank changes the policy rate from its projected path, the public may see this as reneging on its announced policy or an indication that the central bank's previous policy settings were a mistake.  Thus, even when the central bank is conducting its policy in an optimal manner, deviations from its projected path may be viewed as a central bank failure and could hurt the central bank's credibility.”  8 BIS Review 17/2005 
The MPC has long published forecasts on two different interest rate assumptions.  On one – the constant rate assumption – interest rates are held constant over the entire forecast horizon.  On the other, interest rates evolve in line with rates expected by financial markets.  Until August 2004, the presentation emphasised the forecast based on constant rates. Since last August we have reversed the presentation, to emphasise the market rate assumption.16   The constant interest rate path is obviously a stylised assumption, which conveys limited information about future policy intentions.  The message is that the MPC makes interest rate decisions one at a time, and that it has not made up its mind about what future path of rates will be consistent with the inflation target. The market interest rate path too is a conditioning assumption, not the MPC’s prediction about future rates.  The difference is that, to the extent that the market rate curve embodies the market’s guess about where the MPC will take rates, forecasts predicated on the market rate are more easily interpreted as a comment on that view. So how much significance should be read into our change of conditioning assumption? Did the switch to market rates represent a tentative step towards providing more guidance on the future direction of policy? The fact that interest rates were historically very low in 2003 and early 2004 has some bearing on the matter. Many academics, notably Lars Svensson, have argued persuasively that the use of an unrealistic conditioning assumption makes it more difficult for the public to interpret the MPC’s reading of the economic outlook.  As Charlie Bean has pointed out,17 this is certainly true if interest rates are some way off ‘normal’ levels or if for other reasons, they are expected to increase or decrease substantially over the forecast horizon – and the longer the time horizon of the forecast, the more force this argument has.  Our decision to shift the focus of the presentation to market rates was coupled with a decision to publish forecasts for three years, rather than two, as was previously the case. This did not reflect a change in policy horizon – we are required to meet our 2% target ‘at all times’. But it did provide useful context for interpreting the gradient of inflation forecasts at the two year horizon, and hence a clearer indication of future policy, if the economy evolves in line with the central projection.  The shift to using a market rate assumption was a very modest step towards greater transparency. At a technical level, it is a non trivial task to translate any market rate yield curve into a conventional forecasting assumption which is a genuine reflection of market expectations of future official interest rates.18  And markets are themselves uncertain about the path of future rates so we publish a fan chart for market interest rate to help quantify that uncertainty, based on options prices. There is a big difference between a conditioning assumption and a commitment, not least because there is a big gap between anyone’s current guess at where rates might need to go to meet the inflation target, conditional on the data available at any point in time, and where the MPC will actually take rates given the information it may have in the future. But the MPC was conscious of the risk of misinterpretation, so the transition was made gradually – with the Governor reflecting on the market curve in his remarks at the February and May Inflation Report press conferences, and the MPC referring to the market curve in the minutes during the spring.  By the time the switch was introduced in the August Inflation Report, MPC and markets understood the nature of the conditioning assumption, and the change itself was seen as the marginal improvement that it is.                                                         16  See Inflation Report August 2004 pp 42-43. 17  Bean, C (2004) ‘Some current issues in UK Monetary Policy’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Autumn 2004. 18  For further details on this issue see Brooke, M, Cooper, N and Scholtes, C (2000) ‘Inferring market interest rates from money market rates’ Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin November 2000. For further information and data, please see the Bank of England website www.bankofengland.co.uk.  BIS Review 17/2005 9 
 Chart 4.  Market beliefs about future interest rates – Inflation Report February 2005     Different inflation targeting central banks have evolved their own ways of communicating.  At one extreme, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand publishes his own forecast of future interest rates – though he is the sole decision taker in that regime. And at the Norges Bank, staff produce material that explicitly sets out possible strategies for interest rate decisions in the form of a range of interest rates for the next 3-4 months, and invite the interest rate setting committee to endorse them, and provide a commentary on market expectations of future interest rates. As Charles Goodhart has argued, it is difficult, as a practical matter, to imagine a committee of nine individually accountable experts doing that.  Institutional and political arrangements matter. What works in one environment may not work elsewhere. And central banks need to employ consistent modes of communication and language if they are to be well understood. Abrupt changes in what is communicated, and how, always carry risks of confusion. But even the best designed system needs to evolve. Greater transparency involves learning both by policymakers and by those who seek to interpret their actions. The degree of monetary policy transparency in the UK now would have been regarded as quite unthinkable fifteen years ago. I see no reason to suppose that we have reached the end of the road yet. Conclusions Published forecasts have come to play a key role in formulating and communicating interest rate decisions within the UK approach to inflation targeting. The strength of this approach is that – flawed and inadequate as all projections inevitably are – a good forecast paints a picture that is worth a thousand words. And that counts, both when it comes to organising the debate between nine experts, and when it comes to explaining the basis of policy to a non expert public. But forecasts are highly fallible, so our forecast centred approach to inflation targeting has gone hand in hand with a determined effort to illustrate the wide range of uncertainties around any central projection and a systematic attempt to factor the Committee’s own judgements about the risks into decision taking. That, for me, is a key reason for resisting recent calls by the IMF and others for the Bank to ‘publish numerical projections for a broader range of key variables’. Detail is seductive – but it can also be highly misleading, and a committee that spent its time debating the details of the forecast rather than using it as a tool to address big picture issues would be at risk of losing its way. Forecasts are indispensable – but they should be handled with care. 10 BIS Review 17/2005 
Table 2.  Interest rate surprisesA. Are rates changes evenly spread over the months of the year?χ2 statisticχ2 statisticIR monthsnon-IR monthsIR monthsnon-IR monthsWhole period15144.41**Whole period1489.09***1997-20006100.131997-2000652.232001-present947.54***2001-present837.68***C. Are interest rate surprises getting smaller?D. Are interest rate surprises larger in Inflation Report months?ObservationsAverage magnitude of rate 'surprise' (bp)IR monthsOther monthsDifferenceReuters measure:1998-20003011Reuters measure2001-present507.6Whole period10.67.9+2.7*Difference-3.3**1998-200012.610.0+2.62001-present9.56.6+2.8LIBOR measure:1997-2000435.4LIBOR measure 2001-present503.6Whole period5.93.7+2.3**Difference-1.8*1997-20005.55.3+0.22001-present6.32.2+4.0**E. Market reactions in Inflation Report monthsDifference between reaction to policy decision and IR publicationDifference between reaction to policy decision and MPC minutes publicationObservationsPolicy decisionInflation Report publicationMPC minutes publicationLIBOR measure:Whole period5.93.02.8+2.9**+3.1**311997-20005.53.42.4+2.1+3.1**142001-present6.32.73.1+3.6**+3.2**17Difference0.7-0.80.7Notes:Tests are for significance based on t-test for difference between two sample means, except for Panel (A) and (B), which is a test for whetherrate changes are distributed 1/3 in IR months and 2/3 in other months.  The critical values for Panel (A) and (B) are derived from on Monte Carlo simulations.Excludes the special MPC meeting following 11 September 2001.*** significantly higher/lower than zero at 1% level, ** 5% level, * 10% level (one-tailed tests)Libor measure: based on the change in implied 3-month Libor forward rate derived by linear interpolation of adjecent short sterling futures contracts.Changes in implied forward rates normally taken from: 11:30am to 12:30pm for interest rate announcements; 10:00am to 12:00pm for IR publication; and 9:00am to 10:30am for minutes publication.Reuters measure: difference between the actual repo rate change and the mean expectation of the economistsB. Are rates changes expected to be spread      evenly over the months of the year?Average magnitude of 'surprise' / market reaction (bp)Average of 'surprise' variable (bp)Rate changesExpected rate changes BIS Review 17/2005 11 
Y V Reddy: The roadmap for fixed income and derivatives markets Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Fixed Income and Money Market & Derivatives Association of Indian and Primary Dealers Association of India, Mumbai, 11 March 2005. *      *      * Friends,  I am thankful to the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI), the organisers, for inviting me to deliver the keynote address today.  I have had the pleasure of being closely associated with FIMMDA and PDAI since their inception. Reserve Bank of India has been taking active interest in the development of fixed income markets and the role of FIMMDA is becoming increasingly important in this regard. It has played a pivotal role in the design of documentation of repos, Commercial Paper and Certificate of Deposits, finalising the daily/annual valuation methodology for fixed income securities. RBI consistently seeks its views on various G-Sec market related issues.  It is also involved in standardisation of market practices for fixed income securities/money market instruments/fixed income derivatives. It has been emphasising the importance of best practices in the OTC interest rate derivatives market and has circulated a Guidance Note for Best Practices to its members in this regard. We, in the RBI, understand the need for continued collaborative relationship with FIMMDA and PDAI. It is in this spirit that I look forward to the deliberations today in the sixth Annual Conference being organised jointly by FIMMDA and PDAI.    I am somewhat reluctant to elaborate on the subject of the day, namely, the road map of fixed income and derivatives market, in my keynote address for several reasons. My views in this regard were articulated in a seminar and then published in a BIS paper titled “Issues and challenges in the development of the debt market in India”.  The subject was subsequently updated, elaborated and improved upon comprehensively by my friend and former colleague Dr.Rakesh Mohan, when he addressed this gathering last year in Dubai.  Dr. Mohan has already indicated the “Road Ahead”, which I fully endorse.  Moreover, one should wait for free and frank discussion on the subject in this conference, in which distinguished persons with several perspectives are participating.   Let me assure you that we in RBI do look forward to the deliberations of this conference and  the suggestions made will be, to the  extent  possible, examined by the various Technical Groups in the RBI that have been set up recently.  It is our intention to place the reports of the Groups on Money Market, Government Securities Market and Forex Market in the public domain soon.  Hence, the subject of the Sixth Annual Conference is both well-timed and significant for us. To justify my presence here, let me take this opportunity to mention some of the recent developments which should be kept in view in the deliberations of the conference.  First, under the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003, the Reserve Bank will not be participating, in the normal circumstances, in the primary market for the government securities from the start of 2006-07.   The Technical Group that I referred to is currently working on the operational, technological and institutional aspects of this.  Hence, the market perspectives on the implications of this development can best be articulated in the conference today.    Second, the Twelfth Finance Commission has made certain recommendations which would mean that the State Governments would approach the market instead of obtaining loans from the Government of India.   Several operational and other issues will have to be addressed in the management of the borrowing programme of the State Governments, in future.  We are convening a Conference of the State Finance Secretaries on 8th April 2005, which will be addressed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister and the former Chairman, Twelfth Finance Commission, to discuss these issues. The road map that this Conference would indicate in this regard will be helpful for our discussions and further policy formulation in regard to debt-papers of the State Governments.  Third, the Central Government budget has proposed a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for raising resources for investment in infrastructure.  The issuance of debt-paper with relatively longer maturity, outside the Government of India’s normal borrowing programme, is yet another recent dimension added to the debt-market developments in the country.       BIS Review 17/2005 1 
Finally, several legislative changes on the anvil provide new opportunities for further development of fixed income markets. For example, the long awaited Government Securities Bill is at an advanced stage of processing. The Finance Minister, in his budget speech, announced the intention of the Government to bring about amendments to the RBI Act and the Banking Regulation Act and the amendments relating to statutory pre-emptions could have implications for fixed income markets. In this context, it is useful to recognise that the stake of the RBI in the fixed income and derivatives market arises on account of several reasons. First, RBI as a monetary authority is most concerned with the transmission of monetary policy. Second, it must be recognised that in the Indian conditions, we are neither a closed economy nor an open economy. In reality, we are an opening economy and a careful management of the process of opening is critical for growth and stability. Third, for the Reserve Bank of India, as the central bank, financial stability is one of the increasingly important considerations and an important subset of the financial stability is determined by the stability in the external sector. Fourth, government securities market, which is currently the dominant segment of the fixed income markets, is also a legitimate concern for the Central Bank, since it provides the benchmark interest rates. The government securities market, in our setting, has policy signalling although the rates are largely market determined. Fifth, the Reserve Bank of India is a regulator of the banks and also of the primary dealers, which together constitute large holders of Government papers. Hence, there is a significant linkage between RBI’s prudential regulations and the fixed income markets. Finally, in an economy like ours which is attempting structural transformation, RBI has to have a developmental role also, apart from being a regulator of money markets, Government securities markets and forex markets. It is in this context that the Reserve Bank of India goes into close interactive mode with organisations like FIMMDA and PDAI. RBI’s developmental role in the context of Self Regulatory Organisations (SROs), is perhaps worth exploring at some length. A good beginning may be the Report of the Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation, 2001 (Chairman: Shri Deepak Parekh) which made certain observations on self regulation by the SROs and the RBI. The relevant extract from Section 2.4 reads as follows:  “Further, the slow evolution of the Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI) as a SRO has meant continuation of substantial regulatory burden on SEBI. In this regard, the Group suggests that SEBI assist the AMFI to develop into a full-fledged SRO. Similarly, in money and government securities markets, Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI) are operating as industry level associations, who are gradually taking on the role of SROs. There is as yet no regulatory oversight of the RBI over these emerging SROs. However, to facilitate these associations to emerge as full-fledged SROs, the RBI is engaging them in a consultative process, which needs to be further intensified. On their part, to promote integrity of the markets, FIMMDA and PDAI need to establish a comprehensive code of conduct and best practices in securities transactions and also have a mechanism to enforce such codes. The RBI can play a supportive role here”.  There has been a recent review (December 2004) of the recommendations of the Advisory Groups constituted by the Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes published in January 2005 RBI Bulletin. An extract from this “Report on the Progress and Agenda Ahead” is useful, though, as the disclaimer says, it is an assessment by the professional staff of the RBI and not necessarily the view of the Reserve Bank:  “The proposal to accord legal status as an SRO to FIMMDA has been examined in detail by RBI and was not found feasible at present. However, FIMMDA has established a code of conduct and undertaken related responsibilities appropriate to an industrial body. According self-regulatory status to PDAI is a non-issue since all PDAI members are also members of FIMMDA”.  There are several concepts which are addressed in the Reports cited, in particular, `industry body’; `Self Regulatory Organisation’ and `legal status as SRO’. There is considerable merit in debating these concepts and their relevance to FIMMDA, keeping in view the way forward that is being contemplated in the conference today.  Self-regulation has a long history of working effectively. Some of the earliest signs of self-regulation were evident in the utterance of the Hippocratic oath by the medical professionals at the time of their graduation. Almost a thousand years ago, Maghribi traders had probably one of the first self-regulatory schemes based on market incentives for regulating their trade. The Maghribi were Jewish traders who lived in the Abbasasid caliphate (centered in Baghdad) until the first half of the tenth century, when they emigrated to North Africa. They operated through business associates to handle some of their business dealings abroad. Merchants could never be sure that agents actually handed over the entire 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
proceeds of business done abroad on their behalf. Courts were generally unable to verify agents’ claims and actions or track down an agent who absconded with the merchant’s money. The Maghribi traders solved the problem by organizing themselves into a coalition that served as a grapevine for information on honest and dishonest agents. Any agents who treated a member unfairly could never hope to do business again with other members. In Europe, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, as more and more rural folk moved to towns and cities, a new class of merchants emerged to meet the demands of the growing urban population. It was during this period that the basic concepts and institutions of modern Western mercantile law (lex mercatoria) were formed.  The self-regulation has evolved significantly since then and linkages with regulatory authorities, often on a sound legal basis, were established mainly in the financial sector. Self-regulation generally imposes lower cost than official regulation whenever a shift is feasible. SROs possess the flexibility to adapt to regulatory requirements of rapidly changing business environment. They provide an intimate knowledge of the markets and products. Self-regulation, typically involving a unique combination of private interests with government or regulatory oversight over them, is an effective and efficient form of regulation for the complex, dynamic and ever-changing financial services industry. The role of self-regulation and, indeed, its very existence, differs from country to country, across market sectors and across the developed and emerging markets. In its most complete form, self-regulation encompasses the authority to create, amend, implement and enforce rules of conduct with respect to the entities subject to the SRO’s jurisdiction, and to resolve disputes through arbitration or other means.  The advantages of self-regulation are very clear, especially in terms of minimising the cost of regulation as well as cost of compliance of regulation in the financial sector, while improving the quality of regulation. However, there are a number of issues particularly in the financial sector which are often cited. For instance, there is a well-known observation about the “regulatory capture”, that is, the regulated entities, in the organised form, have a tendency to capture the regulator to protect their own interests. It is also argued that the SROs protect the interests of the members if they are in conflict with interests of the system. In this regard, I find that the model for effective regulation, brought out in the Report of the SRO Consultative Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions in May 2000, is useful. Perhaps these issues will also be addressed in this Conference as part of the way forward. Let me again thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity and wish the Conference all success.  BIS Review 17/2005 3 
Alan Greenspan: Future of the social security programme and economics of retirement Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Special Committee on Aging, US Senate, Washington DC, 15 March 2005.  *      *      * Mr. Chairman, Senator Kohl, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss the issues of population aging and retirement. In so doing, I would like to emphasize that the views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. The economics of retirement are straightforward: Enough resources must be set aside over a lifetime of work to fund consumption during retirement. At the most rudimentary level, one could envision households actually storing goods purchased during their working years for use during retirement. Even better, the resources that would have otherwise gone into producing the stored goods could be diverted to the production of new capital assets, which would produce an even greater quantity of goods and services for later use. In the latter case, we would be raising output per worker hour, our traditional measure of productivity. The bottom line in the success of all retirement programs is the availability of real resources at retirement. The financial systems associated with retirement plans facilitate the allocation of resources that supply retirement consumption of goods and services; they do not produce goods and services. A useful test of a retirement system for a society is whether it sets up realistic expectations as to the future availability of real resources and, hence, the capacity to deliver postwork consumption without overly burdening the standard of living of the working-age population. In 2008, the leading edge of what must surely be the largest shift from work to retirement in our nation's history will become evident as some baby boomers become eligible for Social Security. According to the intermediate projections of the Social Security trustees, the population 65 years of age and older will be approximately 26 percent of the adult population in 2030, compared with 17 percent today. This huge change in the structure of our population will expose all our financial retirement systems to severe stress and will require adjustments for which there are no historical precedents. Indeed, retirement, generally, is a relatively new phenomenon in human history. Average American life expectancy a century ago, for example, was only 47 years. Relatively few of our citizens were able to enjoy many postwork years. One consequence of the sizable baby boom cohort moving from the workforce to retirement is an inevitable slowing in the growth of gross domestic product per capita relative to the growth of output per worker. As the ratio of workers to population declines, so too must the ratio of output to population, assuming no change in the growth of productivity. That result is simply a matter of arithmetic. The important economic implication of that arithmetic is that, with fewer workers relative to dependents, each worker's output will have to support a greater number of people. Under the intermediate population projections of the Social Security trustees, for example, the ratio of workers to total population will shrink about 7 percent by 2030. This shrinkage means that, by 2030, total output per person will be 7 percent lower than it would be if the current population structure were to persist. The fact that a greater share of the dependents will be elderly rather than children will put an additional burden on society's resources, as the elderly consume a relatively large share of per capita resources, whereas children consume relatively little. This inevitable drop in the growth rate of per capita GDP relative to the growth of productivity could be cushioned by an increase in labor force participation, which would boost the ratio of workers to population. Increasing labor force participation seems a natural response to population aging, as Americans not only are living longer but are also generally living healthier. Rates of disability for the elderly have been declining, reflecting both improvements in health and changes in technology that accommodate the physical impairments that are associated with aging. In addition, work is becoming less physically strenuous and more demanding intellectually, continuing a century-long trend toward a more conceptual and a less physical economic output. Despite the improving feasibility of work at older ages, Americans have been retiring at younger and younger ages. For example, in 1940, the median age of retirement for men was 69; today, the median age is about 62. In recent years, labor force participation among older Americans has picked up BIS Review 17/2005 1 
somewhat, but it is far too early to determine the underlying causes of this increase. Rising pressures on retirement incomes and a growing scarcity of experienced labor could induce further increases in the labor force participation of the elderly and near-elderly in the future. In addition, policies that specifically encourage greater labor force participation would also lessen the necessary adjustments to consumption. Workers nearing retirement have accumulated many years of valuable experience, so extending labor force participation by just a few years could have a sizable impact on economic output. Another way to boost future standards of living is to increase saving.1 We need the additional saving in the decades ahead if we are to finance the construction of a capital stock that will produce the additional real resources needed to redeem the retirement claims of the baby boomers without having to severely raise claims on tomorrow's workers. However, by almost any measure, the required amount of saving that would be necessary is sufficiently large to raise serious questions about whether we will be able to meet the retirement commitments already made. Much has been made of shortfalls in our private defined-benefit plans, but the gross underfunding currently at $450 billion, although significant as a percentage of the $1.8 trillion in assets of private defined-benefit plans, is modest compared with the underfunding of our publically administered pensions. At present, the Social Security trustees estimate the unfunded liability over the indefinite future to be $10.4 trillion. The shortfall in Medicare is calculated at several multiples of the one in Social Security. These numbers suggest that either very large tax increases will be required to meet the shortfalls or benefits will have to be pared back. Because benefit cuts will almost surely be at least part of the resolution, it is incumbent on government to convey to future retirees that the real resources currently promised to be available on retirement will not be fully forthcoming. We owe future retirees as much time as possible to adjust their plans for work, saving, and retirement spending. They need to ensure that their personal resources, along with what they expect to receive from government, will be sufficient to meet their retirement goals. Conventional advice from personal-finance professionals is that one should aim to accumulate sufficient resources to provide an overall replacement rate of about 70 percent to 80 percent in retirement. Under current law, Social Security promises a replacement rate of about 42 percent for workers who earn the economywide-average wage each and every year through their careers and about 56 percent for low-wage workers who earn 45 percent of the economywide-average wage.2 Assuming that taxes are capped at the current 12.4 percent of payroll, revenues will be sufficient to pay only about 70 percent of current-law benefits by the middle of this century. Thus, for the average worker, a replacement rate of only about 30 percent would be payable out of contemporaneous revenues, assuming that benefit reductions are applied proportionately across the board. For a low-wage worker, the payable replacement rate would be about 40 percent. Assuming that the goal is still to replace 70 percent to 80 percent of pre-retirement income, average workers by the middle of this century should be aiming to replace about 45 percent of their pre-retirement income, rather than today's 33 percent, out of some combination of private employer pension benefits and personal saving. The required increases in private saving would be less to the extent that Social Security tax increases are part of the solution. However, to avoid any changes in replacement rates, the Social Security tax rate would have to be increased from the current 12.4 percent to about 18 percent at the middle of the century. *** Once we have determined the level of benefits that we can reasonably promise, we must ensure that we will have the real resources in the future to fulfill those promises. When we evaluate our ability to meet those promises, focusing solely on the solvency of the financial plan is, in my judgment, a mistake. Focusing on solvency within the Social Security system, without regard to the broader macroeconomic picture, does not ensure that the real resources to fulfill our commitments will be                                                       1  Additionally, we could borrow from abroad, which would build up the capital stock. In so doing, however, we would also build up a liability to foreigners that we would have to finance in the future. 2  The replacement rate is the ratio of Social Security benefits to wages in the year preceding retirement. 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
there. For example, if we build up the assets in the Social Security trust fund, thereby achieving solvency, but offset those efforts by reducing saving elsewhere, then the real resources required to meet future benefits will not be forthcoming from our economy. In the end, we will have accomplished little in preparing the economy to meet future demands. Thus, in addressing Social Security's imbalances, we need to ensure that measures taken now to finance future benefit commitments represent real additions to national saving. We need, in effect, to make the phantom "lock-boxes" around the trust fund real. For a brief period in the late 1990s, a common commitment emerged to do just that. But, regrettably, that commitment collapsed when it became apparent that, in light of a less favorable economic environment, maintaining balance in the budget excluding Social Security would require lower spending or higher taxes. Last year, Social Security tax revenues plus interest exceeded benefits by about $150 billion. If those funds had been removed from the unified budget and "locked up" and Congress had not made any adjustments in the rest of the budget, the unified budget deficit would have been $564 billion. A reasonable hypothesis is that the Congress would, in fact, have responded by taking actions to pare the deficit. In that case, the end result would have been lowered government dissaving and correspondingly higher national saving. A simple reshuffling from the unified accounts to the lock-boxes would not have, in itself, added to government savings; but higher taxes or lower spending would have accomplished that important objective. The major attraction of personal or private accounts is that they can be constructed to be truly segregated from the unified budget and, therefore, are more likely to induce the federal government to take those actions that would reduce public dissaving and raise national saving. But it is important to recognize that many varieties of private accounts exist, with significantly different economic consequences. Some types of accounts are virtually indistinguishable from the current Social Security system, and the Congress would be unlikely to view them as truly off-budget. Other types of accounts actually do transfer funds into the private sector as unencumbered private assets. The Congress is much more likely to view the transfer of funds to these latter types of accounts as raising the deficit and would then react by taking measures to lower it. *** Failure to address the imbalances between our promises to future retirees and our ability to meet those promises would have severe consequences for the economy. The most recent projections by the Office of Management and Budget show that spending on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid will rise from about 8 percent of GDP today to about 13 percent by 2030.3 Under existing tax rates and reasonable assumptions about other spending, these projections make clear that the federal budget is on an unsustainable path, in which large deficits result in rising interest rates and ever-growing interest payments that augment deficits in future years. But most important, deficits as a percentage of GDP in these simulations rise without limit. Unless the trend is reversed, at some point these deficits would cause the economy to stagnate or worse. Closing the gap solely with rising tax rates would be problematic; higher tax rates rarely achieve a comparable rise in tax receipts, and the level of required taxation could in itself severely inhibit economic growth. In light of these sobering projections, I believe that a thorough review of our commitments - and at least some adjustment in those commitments - is urgently needed. The necessary adjustments will become ever more difficult and larger the longer we delay. No changes will be easy. All programs in                                                       3  The projections for Medicare and Medicaid should be viewed as highly uncertain. Health spending has been growing faster than the economy for many years, the growth fueled, in large part, by significant increases in technology. How long this trend will continue is extremely difficult to predict. We know very little about how rapidly medical technology will continue to advance and how those innovations will translate into future spending. Technological innovations can greatly improve the quality of medical care and can, in some instances, reduce the costs of existing treatments. But because technology expands the set of treatment possibilities, it also has the potential to add to overall spending - in some cases, a great deal.   In implementing policy, we need to be cognizant that the uncertainties - especially our inability to identify the upper bound of future demands for medical care - counsel significant prudence in policymaking. The critical reason to proceed cautiously is that new programs quickly develop constituencies willing to fiercely resist any curtailment of spending or tax benefits. As a consequence, our ability to rein in deficit-expanding initiatives, should they later prove to have been excessive or misguided, is quite limited. Thus, policymakers need to err on the side of prudence when considering new budget initiatives. Programs can always be expanded in the future should the resources for them become available, but they cannot be easily curtailed if resources later fall short of commitments. BIS Review 17/2005 3 
our budget exist because a majority of the Congress and the President considered them of value to our society. Adjustments will thus involve making tradeoffs among valued alternatives. The Congress must choose which alternatives are the most valued in the context of limited resources. In doing so, you will need to consider not only the distributional effects of policy changes but also the broader economic effects on labor supply, retirement behavior, and national saving. The benefits to taking sound, timely action could extend many decades into the future. 4 BIS Review 17/2005 
Ben S Bernanke: The global saving glut and the US current account deficit Remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March 2005. The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. *      *      * On most dimensions the U.S. economy appears to be performing well. Output growth has returned to healthy levels, the labor market is firming, and inflation appears to be well controlled. However, one aspect of U.S. economic performance still evokes concern among economists and policymakers: the nation's large and growing current account deficit. In the first three quarters of 2004, the U.S. external deficit stood at $635 billion at an annual rate, or about 5-1/2 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). Corresponding to that deficit, U.S. citizens, businesses, and governments on net had to raise $635 billion on international capital markets.1 The current account deficit has been on a steep upward trajectory in recent years, rising from a relatively modest $120 billion (1.5 percent of GDP) in 1996 to $414 billion (4.2 percent of GDP) in 2000 on its way to its current level. Most forecasters expect the nation's current account imbalance to decline slowly at best, implying a continued need for foreign credit and a concomitant decline in the U.S. net foreign asset position. Why is the United States, with the world's largest economy, borrowing heavily on international capital markets - rather than lending, as would seem more natural? What implications do the U.S. current account deficit and our consequent reliance on foreign credit have for economic performance in the United States and in our trading partners? What policies, if any, should be used to address this situation? In my remarks today I will offer some tentative answers to these questions. My answers will be somewhat unconventional in that I will take issue with the common view that the recent deterioration in the U.S. current account primarily reflects economic policies and other economic developments within the United States itself. Although domestic developments have certainly played a role, I will argue that a satisfying explanation of the recent upward climb of the U.S. current account deficit requires a global perspective that more fully takes into account events outside the United States. To be more specific, I will argue that over the past decade a combination of diverse forces has created a significant increase in the global supply of saving - a global saving glut - which helps to explain both the increase in the U.S. current account deficit and the relatively low level of long-term real interest rates in the world today. The prospect of dramatic increases in the ratio of retirees to workers in a number of major industrial economies is one important reason for the high level of global saving. However, as I will discuss, a particularly interesting aspect of the global saving glut has been a remarkable reversal in the flows of credit to developing and emerging-market economies, a shift that has transformed those economies from borrowers on international capital markets to large net lenders. To be clear, in locating the principal causes of the U.S. current account deficit outside the country's borders, I am not making a value judgment about the behavior of either U.S. or foreign residents or their governments. Rather, I believe that understanding the influence of global factors on the U.S. current account deficit is essential for understanding the effects of the deficit and for devising policies to address it. Of course, as always, the views I express today are not necessarily shared by my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.2 The U.S. Current Account Deficit: Two Perspectives We will find it helpful to consider, as background for the analysis of the U.S. current account deficit, two alternative ways of thinking about the phenomenon - one that relates the deficit to the patterns of U.S. trade and a second that focuses on saving, investment, and international financial flows.                                                       1  As U.S. capital outflows in those three quarters totaled $728 billion at an annual rate, gross financing needs exceeded $1.3 trillion. 2 I thank David Bowman, Joseph Gagnon, Linda Kole, and Maria Perozek of the Board staff for excellent assistance. BIS Review 16/2005 1 
Although these two ways of viewing the current account derive from accounting identities and thus are ultimately two sides of the same coin, each provides a useful lens for examining the issue. The first perspective on the current account focuses on patterns of international trade. You are probably aware that the United States has been experiencing a substantial trade imbalance in recent years, with U.S. imports of goods and services from abroad outstripping U.S. exports to other countries by a wide margin. According to preliminary data, in 2004 the United States imported $1.76 trillion worth of goods and services while exporting goods and services valued at only $1.15 trillion. Reflecting this imbalance in trade, current payments from U.S. residents to foreigners (consisting primarily of our spending on imports, but also including certain other types of payments, such as remittances, interest, and dividends) greatly exceed the analogous payments that U.S. residents receive from abroad. By definition, this excess of U.S. payments to foreigners over payments received in a given period equals the U.S. current account deficit, which, as I have already noted, was on track to equal $635 billion in 2004 - close to the $618 billion by which the value of U.S. imports exceeded that of exports. When U.S. receipts from its sales of exports and other current payments are insufficient to cover the cost of U.S. imports and other payments to foreigners, U.S. households, firms, and governments on net must borrow the difference on international capital markets.3 Thus, essentially by definition, in each period U.S. net foreign borrowing equals the U.S. current account deficit, which in turn is closely linked to the imbalance in U.S. international trade. That the nation's imports currently far exceed its exports is both widely understood and of concern to many Americans, particularly those whose livelihoods depend on the viability of exporting and import-competing industries. The extensive attention paid to the trade imbalance in the media and elsewhere has tempted some observers to ascribe the growing current account deficit to factors such as changes in the quality or composition of U.S. and foreign-made products, changes in trade policy, or unfair foreign competition. However, I believe - and I suspect that most economists would agree - that specific trade-related factors cannot explain either the magnitude of the U.S. current account imbalance or its recent sharp rise. Rather, the U.S. trade balance is the tail of the dog; for the most part, it has been passively determined by foreign and domestic incomes, asset prices, interest rates, and exchange rates, which are themselves the products of more fundamental driving forces. Instead, an alternative perspective on the current account appears likely to be more useful for explaining recent developments. This second perspective focuses on international financial flows and the basic fact that, within each country, saving and investment need not be equal in each period. In the United States, as in all countries, economic growth requires investment in new capital goods and the upgrading and replacement of older capital. Examples of capital investment include the construction of factories and office buildings and firms' acquisition of new equipment, ranging from drill presses to computers to airplanes. Residential construction - the building of new homes and apartment buildings - is also counted as part of capital investment.4 All investment in new capital goods must be financed in some manner. In a closed economy without trade or international capital flows, the funding for investment would be provided entirely by the country's national saving. By definition, national saving is the sum of saving done by households (for example, through contributions to employer-sponsored 401k accounts) and saving done by businesses (in the form of retained earnings) less any budget deficit run by the government (which is a use rather than a source of saving)5.                                                        3  For simplicity, I will use the term "net foreign borrowing" to refer to the financing of the current account deficit, though strictly speaking this financing involves the sale of foreign and domestic assets as well as the issuance of debt securities to foreigners. As illustrated by the data in footnote 1, U.S. gross foreign borrowing is much larger than net foreign borrowing, as gross borrowing must be sufficient to offset not only the deficit in current payments but also U.S. capital outflows. 4  This definition of capital investment ignores many less tangible forms of investment, such as research and development expenditures. It also ignores investment in human capital, such as educational expenses. Using a more inclusive definition of investment could well change our perceptions of U.S. saving and investment trends quite substantially. I will leave that topic for another day. 5  The Bureau of Economic Analysis treats government investment - in roads or schools, for instance - as part of national saving in the national income accounts. Thus, strictly speaking, national saving is reduced by the government deficit net of government investment, not by the entire government deficit. The difference between domestic investment and 2 BIS Review 16/2005 
As I say, in a closed economy investment would equal national saving in each period; but, in fact, virtually all economies today are open economies, and well-developed international capital markets allow savers to lend to those who wish to make capital investments in any country, not just their own. Because saving can cross international borders, a country's domestic investment in new capital and its domestic saving need not be equal in each period. If a country's saving exceeds its investment during a particular year, the difference represents excess saving that can be lent on international capital markets. By the same token, if a country's saving is less than the amount required to finance domestic investment, the country can close the gap by borrowing from abroad. In the United States, national saving is currently quite low and falls considerably short of U.S. capital investment. Of necessity, this shortfall is made up by net foreign borrowing - essentially, by making use of foreigners' saving to finance part of domestic investment. We saw earlier that the current account deficit equals the net amount that the United States borrows abroad in each period, and I have just shown that U.S. net foreign borrowing equals the excess of U.S. capital investment over U.S. national saving. It follows that the country's current account deficit equals the excess of its investment over its saving. To summarize, I have described two equivalent ways of interpreting the current account deficit, one in terms of trade flows and related payments and one in terms of investment and national saving. In general, the perspective one takes depends on the particular analysis at hand. As I have already suggested, most economists who have offered explanations of the high and rising level of the U.S. current account deficit and the country's foreign borrowing have emphasized investment-saving behavior rather than trade-related factors (and I will do the same today). Along these lines, one commonly hears that the U.S. current account deficit is the product of a precipitous decline in the U.S. national saving rate, which in recent years has fallen to a level that is far from adequate to fund domestic investment. For example, in 1985 U.S. gross national saving was 18 percent of GDP, and in 1995 it was 16 percent of GDP; in 2004, by contrast, U.S. national saving was less than 14 percent of GDP. Those who emphasize the role of low U.S. saving often go on to conclude that, for the most part, the U.S. current account deficit is "made in the U.S.A." and is independent (to a first approximation) of developments in other parts of the globe. That inadequate U.S. national saving is the source of the current account deficit must be true at some level; indeed, the statement is almost a tautology. However, linking current-account developments to the decline in saving begs the question of why U.S. saving has declined. In particular, although the decline in U.S. saving may reflect changes in household behavior or economic policy in the United States, it may also be in some part a reaction to events external to the United States - a hypothesis that I will propose and defend momentarily. One popular argument for the "made in the U.S.A." explanation of declining national saving and the rising current account deficit focuses on the burgeoning U.S. federal budget deficit, which in 2004 drained more than $400 billion from the national saving pool. I will discuss the link between the budget deficit and the current account deficit in more detail later. Here I simply note that the so-called twin-deficits hypothesis, that government budget deficits cause current account deficits, does not account for the fact that the U.S. external deficit expanded by about $300 billion between 1996 and 2000, a period during which the federal budget was in surplus and projected to remain so. Nor, for that matter, does the twin-deficits hypothesis shed any light on why a number of major countries, including Germany and Japan, continue to run large current account surpluses despite government budget deficits that are similar in size (as a share of GDP) to that of the United States. It seems unlikely, therefore, that changes in the U.S. government budget position can entirely explain the behavior of the U.S. current account over the past decade. The Changing Pattern of International Capital Flows and the Global Saving Glut What then accounts for the rapid increase in the U.S. current account deficit? My own preferred explanation focuses on what I see as the emergence of a global saving glut in the past eight to ten years. This saving glut is the result of a number of developments. As I will discuss in more detail later, one well-understood source of the saving glut is the strong saving motive of rich countries with aging populations, which must make provision for an impending sharp increase in the number of retirees relative to the number of workers. With slowly growing or declining workforces, as well as high capital-labor ratios, many advanced economies outside the United States also face an apparent dearth of                                                                                                                                                                       national saving is not affected by this qualification, however, as government investment and the implied adjustment to national saving cancel each other out. BIS Review 16/2005 3 
domestic investment opportunities. As a consequence of high desired saving and the low prospective returns to domestic investment, the mature industrial economies as a group seek to run current account surpluses and thus to lend abroad.6 Table 1. Global Current Account Balances, 1996 and 2003 (Billions of U.S. dollars)   Countries 1996 2003 Industrial  46.2 -342.3United States -120.2 -530.7Japan 65.4 138.2      Euro Area 88.5 24.9France 20.8 4.5Germany -13.4 55.1Italy 39.6 -20.7Spain 0.4 -23.6      Other 12.5 25.3Australia -15.8 -30.4Canada 3.4 17.1Switzerland 21.3 42.2United Kingdom -10.9 -30.5      Developing  -87.5 205Asia -40.8 148.3China 7.2 45.9Hong Kong -2.6 17Korea -23.1 11.9Taiwan 10.9 29.3Thailand -14.4 8     Latin America -39.1 3.8Argentina -6.8 7.4Brazil -23.2 4Mexico -2.5 -8.7      Middle East and Africa 5.9 47.8E. Europe and the former Soviet Union -13.5 5.1      Statistical discrepancy  41.3 137.2                                                      6  By "high desired saving" I mean a supply schedule for saving that is shifted far to the right. Actual or realized saving depends on the equilibrium values of the real interest rate and other economic variables. 4 BIS Review 16/2005 
 Although strong saving motives on the part of many industrial economies contribute to the global saving glut, the saving behavior of these countries does not explain much of the increase in desired global saving in the past decade. Indeed, in a number of these countries - Japan is one example - household saving has declined recently. As we will see, a possibly more important source of the rise in the global supply of saving is the recent metamorphosis of the developing world from a net user to a net supplier of funds to international capital markets. Table 1 provides a basis for a discussion of recent changes in global saving and financial flows by showing current account balances for different countries and regions, in billions of U.S. dollars, for the years 1996 (just before the U.S. current account deficit began to balloon) and 2003 (the most recent year for which complete data are available). I should note that these current account balances of necessity reflect realized patterns of investment and saving rather than changes in the rates of investment and saving desired from an ex ante perspective. Nevertheless, changes in the pattern of current account balances together with knowledge of changes in real interest rates should provide useful clues about shifts in the global supply of and demand for saving. The table confirms the sharp increase in the U.S. current account deficit, about $410 billion between 1996 and 2003. (Data from the first three quarters of 2004 imply that the current account deficit rose last year by an additional $140 billion at an annual rate.) In principle, the current account positions of the world's nations should sum to zero (although, in practice, data collection problems lead to a large statistical discrepancy, shown in the last row of table 1). The $410 billion increase in the U.S. current account deficit between 1996 and 2003 must therefore have been matched by a shift toward surplus of equal magnitude in other countries. Which countries experienced this change? As we can infer from table 1, most of the swing toward surplus did not occur in the other industrial countries as a whole (although some individual industrial countries did experience large moves toward surplus, as we will see). The collective current account of the industrial countries declined more than $388 billion between 1996 and 2003, implying that, of the $410 billion increase in the U.S. current account deficit, only about $22 billion was offset by increased surpluses in other industrial countries. As table 1 shows, the bulk of the increase in the U.S. current account deficit was balanced by changes in the current account positions of developing countries, which moved from a collective deficit of $88 billion to a surplus of $205 billion - a net change of $293 billion -  between 1996 and 2003.7 The available data suggest that the current accounts of developing and emerging-market economies swung a further $60 billion into surplus in 2004. This remarkable change in the current account balances of developing countries raises at least three questions. First, what events or factors induced this change? Second, what causal relationship (if any) exists between this change and current-account developments in the United States and in other industrial countries? Third, to the extent that the movement toward surplus in developing-country current accounts has had a differential impact on the United States relative to other industrial countries, what accounts for the difference? In my view, a key reason for the change in the current account positions of developing countries is the series of financial crises those countries experienced in the past decade or so. In the mid-1990s, most developing countries were net importers of capital; as table 1 shows, in 1996 emerging Asia and Latin America borrowed about $80 billion on net on world capital markets. These capital inflows were not always productively used. In some cases, for example, developing-country governments borrowed to avoid necessary fiscal consolidation; in other cases, opaque and poorly governed banking systems failed to allocate those funds to the projects promising the highest returns. Loss of lender confidence, together with other factors such as overvalued fixed exchange rates and debt that was both short-term and denominated in foreign currencies, ultimately culminated in painful financial crises, including those in Mexico in 1994, in a number of East Asian countries in 1997-98, in Russia in 1998, in Brazil in 1999, and in Argentina in 2002. The effects of these crises included rapid capital outflows, currency depreciation, sharp declines in domestic asset prices, weakened banking systems, and recession.                                                       7  The statistical discrepancy also increased substantially, by $96 billion on net. As asset accumulation in developing countries may be less completely measured than in industrial countries, a significant part of the change in the discrepancy may represent an additional movement toward surplus in developing-country current accounts. BIS Review 16/2005 5 
In response to these crises, emerging-market nations either chose or were forced into new strategies for managing international capital flows. In general, these strategies involved shifting from being net importers of financial capital to being net exporters, in some cases very large net exporters. For example, in response to instability of capital flows and the exchange rate, some East Asian countries, such as Korea and Thailand, began to build up large quantities of foreign-exchange reserves and continued to do so even after the constraints imposed by the halt to capital inflows from global financial markets were relaxed. Increases in foreign-exchange reserves necessarily involve a shift toward surplus in the country's current account, increases in gross capital inflows, reductions in gross private capital outflows, or some combination of these elements. As table 1 shows, current account surpluses have been an important source of reserve accumulation in East Asia. Countries in the region that had escaped the worst effects of the crisis but remained concerned about future crises, notably China, also built up reserves. These "war chests" of foreign reserves have been used as a buffer against potential capital outflows. Additionally, reserves were accumulated in the context of foreign exchange interventions intended to promote export-led growth by preventing exchange-rate appreciation. Countries typically pursue export-led growth because domestic demand is thought to be insufficient to employ fully domestic resources. Following the 1997-98 financial crisis, many of the East Asian countries seeking to stimulate their exports had high domestic rates of saving and, relative to historical norms, depressed levels of domestic capital investment - also consistent, of course, with strengthened current accounts. In practice, these countries increased reserves through the expedient of issuing debt to their citizens, thereby mobilizing domestic saving, and then using the proceeds to buy U.S. Treasury securities and other assets. Effectively, governments have acted as financial intermediaries, channeling domestic saving away from local uses and into international capital markets. A related strategy has focused on reducing the burden of external debt by attempting to pay down those obligations, with the funds coming from a combination of reduced fiscal deficits and increased domestic debt issuance. Of necessity, this strategy also pushed emerging-market economies toward current account surpluses. Again, the shifts in current accounts in East Asia and Latin America are evident in the data for the regions and for individual countries shown in table 1. Another factor that has contributed to the swing toward current-account surplus among the non-industrialized nations in the past few years is the sharp rise in oil prices. The current account surpluses of oil exporters, notably in the Middle East but also in countries such as Russia, Nigeria, and Venezuela, have risen as oil revenues have surged. For example, as table 1 shows, the collective current account surplus of the Middle East and Africa rose more than $40 billion between 1996 and 2003; it continued to swell in 2004 as oil prices increased yet further. In short, events since the mid-1990s have led to a large change in the collective current account position of the developing world, implying that many developing and emerging-market countries are now large net lenders rather than net borrowers on international financial markets. Of course, developing countries as a group can increase their current account surpluses only if the industrial countries reduce their current accounts accordingly. How did this occur? Little evidence supports the view that the motivation to save has declined substantially in the industrial countries in recent years; indeed, as I have noted already, demographic factors should lead the industrial countries to try to save more, not less. Instead, the requisite shift in the collective external position of the industrial countries was facilitated by adjustments in asset prices and exchange rates, although the pattern of asset-price changes was somewhat different before and after 2000. From about 1996 to early 2000, equity prices played a key equilibrating role in international financial markets. The development and adoption of new technologies and rising productivity in the United States - together with the country's long-standing advantages such as low political risk, strong property rights, and a good regulatory environment - made the U.S. economy exceptionally attractive to international investors during that period. Consequently, capital flowed rapidly into the United States, helping to fuel large appreciations in stock prices and in the value of the dollar. Stock indexes rose in other industrial countries as well, although stock-market capitalization per capita is significantly lower in those countries than in the United States. The current account positions of the industrial countries adjusted endogenously to these changes in financial market conditions. I will focus here on the case of the United States, which bore the bulk of the adjustment. From the trade perspective, higher stock-market wealth increased the willingness of U.S. consumers to spend on goods and services, including large quantities of imports, while the strong dollar made U.S. imports cheap (in terms of dollars) and exports expensive (in terms of foreign 6 BIS Review 16/2005 
currencies), creating a rising trade imbalance. From the saving-investment perspective, the U.S. current account deficit rose as capital investment increased (spurred by perceived profit opportunities) at the same time that the rapid increase in household wealth and expectations of future income gains reduced U.S. residents' perceived need to save. Thus the rapid increase in the U.S. current account deficit between 1996 and 2000 was fueled to a significant extent both by increased global saving and the greater interest on the part of foreigners in investing in the United States. After the stock-market decline that began in March 2000, new capital investment and thus the demand for financing waned around the world. Yet desired global saving remained strong. The textbook analysis suggests that, with desired saving outstripping desired investment, the real rate of interest should fall to equilibrate the market for global saving. Indeed, real interest rates have been relatively low in recent years, not only in the United States but also abroad. From a narrow U.S. perspective, these low long-term rates are puzzling; from a global perspective, they may be less so.8 The weakening of new capital investment after the drop in equity prices did not much change the net effect of the global saving glut on the U.S. current account. The transmission mechanism changed, however, as low real interest rates rather than high stock prices became a principal cause of lower U.S. saving. In particular, during the past few years, the key asset-price effects of the global saving glut appear to have occurred in the market for residential investment, as low mortgage rates have supported record levels of home construction and strong gains in housing prices. Indeed, increases in home values, together with a stock-market recovery that began in 2003, have recently returned the wealth-to-income ratio of U.S. households to 5.4, not far from its peak value of 6.2 in 1999 and above its long-run (1960-2003) average of 4.8. The expansion of U.S. housing wealth, much of it easily accessible to households through cash-out refinancing and home equity lines of credit, has kept the U.S. national saving rate low - and indeed, together with the significant worsening of the federal budget outlook, helped to drive it lower. As U.S. business investment has recently begun a cyclical recovery while residential investment has remained strong, the domestic saving shortfall has continued to widen, implying a rise in the current account deficit and increasing dependence of the United States on capital inflows.9 According to the story I have sketched thus far, events outside U.S. borders - such as the financial crises that induced emerging-market countries to switch from being international borrowers to international lenders - have played an important role in the evolution of the U.S. current account deficit, with transmission occurring primarily through endogenous changes in equity values, house prices, real interest rates, and the exchange value of the dollar. One might ask why the current-account effects of the increase in desired global saving were felt disproportionately in the United States relative to other industrial countries. The attractiveness of the United States as an investment destination during the technology boom of the 1990s and the depth and sophistication of the country's financial markets (which, among other things, have allowed households easy access to housing wealth) have certainly been important. Another factor is the special international status of the U.S. dollar. Because the dollar is the leading international reserve currency, and because some emerging-market countries use the dollar as a reference point when managing the values of their own currencies, the saving flowing out of the developing world has been directed relatively more into dollar-denominated assets, such as U.S. Treasury securities. The effects of the saving outflow may thus have been felt disproportionately on U.S. interest rates and the dollar. For example, the dollar probably strengthened more in the latter 1990s than it would have if it had not been the principal reserve currency, enhancing the effect on the U.S. current account. Most interesting, however, is that the experience of the United States in recent years is not so nearly unique among industrial countries as one might think initially. As shown in table 1, a number of key industrial countries other than the United States have seen their current accounts move substantially toward deficit since 1996, including France, Italy, Spain, Australia, and the United Kingdom. The principal exceptions to this trend among the major industrial countries are Germany and Japan, both of which saw substantial increases in their current account balances between 1996 and 2003 (and significant further increases in 2004). A key difference between the two groups of countries is that the                                                       8  In pointing out the possible effects of strong global saving on real interest rates, I do not mean to rule out other factors. For example, a lowering of risk premiums resulting from increased macroeconomic and monetary stability has likely played some role. 9 Greenspan (2005) notes a strong correlation between U.S. mortgage debt and the U.S. current account deficit. BIS Review 16/2005 7 
countries whose current accounts have moved toward deficit have generally experienced substantial housing appreciation and increases in household wealth, while Germany and Japan - whose economies have been growing slowly despite very low interest rates - have not. For example, wealth-to-income ratios have risen since 1996 by 14 percent in France, 12 percent in Italy, and 27 percent in the United Kingdom; each of these countries has seen their current account move toward deficit, as already noted. By contrast, wealth-to-income ratios in Germany and Japan have remained flat.10 The evident link between rising household wealth and a tendency for the current account to shift toward deficit is consistent with the mechanism that I have described today. Economic and Policy Implications I have presented today a somewhat unconventional explanation of the high and rising U.S. current account deficit. That explanation holds that one of the factors driving recent developments in the U.S. current account has been the very substantial shift in the current accounts of developing and emerging-market nations, a shift that has transformed these countries from net borrowers on international capital markets to large net lenders. This shift by developing nations, together with the high saving propensities of Germany, Japan, and some other major industrial nations, has resulted in a global saving glut. This increased supply of saving boosted U.S. equity values during the period of the stock market boom and helped to increase U.S. home values during the more recent period, as a consequence lowering U.S. national saving and contributing to the nation's rising current account deficit. From a global perspective, are these developments economically beneficial or harmful? Certainly they have had some benefits. Most obviously, the developing and emerging-market countries that brought their current accounts into surplus did so to reduce their foreign debts, stabilize their currencies, and reduce the risk of financial crisis. Most countries have been largely successful in meeting each of these objectives. Thus, the shift of these economies from borrower to lender status has provided at least a short-term palliative for some of the problems they faced in the 1990s. In the longer term, however, the current pattern of international capital flows - should it persist - could prove counterproductive. Most important, for the developing world to be lending large sums on net to the mature industrial economies is quite undesirable as a long-run proposition. Relative to their counterparts in the developing world, workers in industrial countries have large quantities of high-quality capital with which to work. Moreover, as I have already noted, the populations of most of these countries are both growing slowly and aging rapidly, implying that ratios of retirees to workers will rise sharply in coming decades. For example, in the United States, for every 100 people between the ages of 20 and 64, there are currently about 21 people aged 65 or older. According to United Nations projections, by 2030 the population of the United States will include about 34 people aged 65 or over for each 100 people in the 20-64 age range; for the Euro area and Japan, the analogous numbers in 2030 will be 46 and 57, respectively. Over the remainder of the century, the populations of other major industrial countries will age much more quickly than that of the United States. In 2050, for example, the number of retirees for each 100 working-age people in the United States should be about the same as in 2030, about 34, but the number of retirees per 100 working-age people is projected to increase to about 60 in the Euro area and about 78 in Japan. We see that many of the major industrial countries - particularly Japan and some countries in Western Europe - have both strong reasons to save (to help support future retirees) and increasingly limited investment opportunities at home (because workforces are shrinking and capital-labor ratios are already high). In contrast, most developing countries have younger and more-rapidly growing workforces, as well as relatively low ratios of capital to labor, conditions that imply that the returns to capital in those countries may potentially be quite high.11 Basic economic logic thus suggests that, in the longer term, the industrial countries as a group should be running current account surpluses and lending on net to the developing world, not the other way around. If financial capital were to flow in this "natural" direction, savers in the industrial countries would potentially earn higher returns and enjoy increased diversification, and borrowers in the developing world would have the funds to make the                                                       10  These data are from Annex Table 58, OECD Economic Outlook, vol. 76, 2004, p. 226. The latest year for which data are available is 2003 for Germany and the United Kingdom, 2002 for France, Italy, and Japan. 11  China is an important exception to the generalization that developing countries have young populations. The country's fertility rate has declined since the 1970s, and its elderly dependency ratio is expected to exceed that of the United States by midcentury. 8 BIS Review 16/2005 
capital investments needed to promote growth and higher living standards. Of course, to ensure that capital flows to developing countries yield these benefits, the developing countries would need to make further progress toward improving conditions for investment, as I will discuss further in a bit. A second issue concerns the uses of international credit in the United States and other industrial countries with external deficits. Because investment by businesses in equipment and structures has been relatively low in recent years (for cyclical and other reasons) and because the tax and financial systems in the United States and many other countries are designed to promote homeownership, much of the recent capital inflow into the developed world has shown up in higher rates of home construction and in higher home prices. Higher home prices in turn have encouraged households to increase their consumption. Of course, increased rates of homeownership and household consumption are both good things. However, in the long run, productivity gains are more likely to be driven by nonresidential investment, such as business purchases of new machines. The greater the extent to which capital inflows act to augment residential construction and especially current consumption spending, the greater the future economic burden of repaying the foreign debt is likely to be. A third concern with the pattern of capital flows arises from the indirect effects of those flows on the sectoral composition of the economies that receive them. In the United States, for example, the growth in export-oriented sectors such as manufacturing has been restrained by the U.S. trade imbalance (although the recent decline in the dollar has alleviated that pressure somewhat), while sectors producing nontraded goods and services, such as home construction, have grown rapidly. To repay foreign creditors, as it must someday, the United States will need large and healthy export industries. The relative shrinkage in those industries in the presence of current account deficits - a shrinkage that may well have to be reversed in the future - imposes real costs of adjustment on firms and workers in those industries. Finally, the large current account deficit of the United States, in particular, requires substantial flows of foreign financing. As I have discussed today, the underlying sources of the U.S. current account deficit appear to be medium-term or even long-term in nature, suggesting that the situation will eventually begin to improve, although a return to approximate balance may take some time. Fundamentally, I see no reason why the whole process should not proceed smoothly. However, the risk of a disorderly adjustment in financial markets always exists, and the appropriately conservative approach for policymakers is to be on guard for any such developments. What policy options exist to deal with the U.S. current account deficit? I have downplayed the role of the U.S. federal budget deficit today, and I disagree with the view, sometimes heard, that balancing the federal budget by itself would largely defuse the current account issue. In particular, to the extent that a reduction in the federal budget resulted in lower interest rates, the principal effects might be increased consumption and investment spending at home rather than a lower current account deficit. Indeed, a recent study suggests that a one-dollar reduction in the federal budget deficit would cause the current account deficit to decline less than 20 cents (Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust, 2005). These results imply that even if we could balance the federal budget tomorrow, the medium-term effect would likely be to reduce the current account deficit by less than one percentage point of GDP. Although I do not believe that plausible near-term changes in the federal budget would eliminate the current account deficit, I should stress that reducing the federal budget deficit is still a good idea. Although the effects on the current account of reining in the budget deficit would likely be relatively modest, at least the direction is right. Moreover, there are other good reasons to bring down the federal budget deficit, including the reduction of the debt obligations that will have to be serviced by taxpayers in the future. Similar observations apply to policy recommendations to increase household saving in the United States, for example by creating tax-favored saving vehicles. Although the effect of saving-friendly policies on the U.S. current account deficit might not be dramatic, again the direction would be right. Moreover, increasing U.S. national saving from its current low level would support productivity and wealth creation and help our society make better provision for the future. However, as I have argued today, some of the key reasons for the large U.S. current account deficit are external to the United States, implying that purely inward-looking policies are unlikely to resolve this issue. Thus a more direct approach is to help and encourage developing countries to re-enter international capital markets in their more natural role as borrowers, rather than as lenders. For example, developing countries could improve their investment climates by continuing to increase macroeconomic stability, strengthen property rights, reduce corruption, and remove barriers to the free flow of financial capital. Providing assistance to developing countries in strengthening their financial BIS Review 16/2005 9 
institutions - for example, by improving bank regulation and supervision and by increasing financial transparency - could lessen the risk of financial crises and thus increase both the willingness of those countries to accept capital inflows and the willingness of foreigners to invest there. Financial liberalization is a particularly attractive option, as it would help both to permit capital inflows to find the highest-return uses and, by easing borrowing constraints, to spur domestic consumption. Other changes will occur naturally over time. For example, the pace at which emerging-market countries are accumulating international reserves should slow as they increasingly perceive their reserves to be adequate and as they move toward more flexible exchange rates. The factors underlying the U.S. current account deficit are likely to unwind only gradually, however. Thus, we probably have little choice except to be patient as we work to create the conditions in which a greater share of global saving can be redirected away from the United States and toward the rest of the world - particularly the developing nations. 10 BIS Review 16/2005 
Alan Greenspan: Globalization Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York, 10 March 2005. *      *      * The U.S. economy appears to have been pressing a number of historic limits in recent years without experiencing the types of financial disruption that almost surely would have arisen in decades past. This observation raises some key questions about the longer-term stability of the U.S. and global economies that bear significantly on future economic developments. Among the limits that we have been pressing against are those in our external and budget balances. In the United States, we have been incurring ever-larger trade deficits, with the broader current account measure moving into the neighborhood of 6 percent of our gross domestic product. Yet the dollar's real exchange value, despite its recent decline, remains above its 1995 low. Meanwhile, we have moved from a budget surplus in 2000 to a deficit that is projected by the Congressional Budget Office to be around 3-1/4 percent of GDP this year. In addition, we have enacted commitments to our senior citizens that, given the impending retirement of our huge baby-boom generation, will create significant fiscal challenges in the years ahead. Yet the yields on Treasury notes maturing a decade from now remain at low levels. Nor are households experiencing inordinate financial pressures as a consequence of record-high levels of household debt relative to income. *      *      * Has something fundamental happened to the U.S. economy that enables us to disregard all the time-tested criteria for assessing when economic imbalances become worrisome? Regrettably, the answer is no; the free lunch has still to be invented. We do, however, seem to be undergoing what is likely, in the end, to be a one-time shift in the degree of globalization and innovation that has temporarily altered the specific calibrations of those criteria. Globalization has altered the economic frameworks of both advanced and developing nations in ways that are difficult to fully comprehend. Nonetheless, the largely unregulated global markets, with some notable exceptions, appear to move smoothly from one state of equilibrium to another. Adam Smith's "invisible hand" remains at work on a global scale. Because of deregulation, increased innovation, and lower barriers to trade and investment, cross-border trade in recent decades has been expanding at a far faster pace than GDP. As a result, many economies are increasingly exposed to the rigors of international competition and comparative advantage. In the process, lower prices for some goods and services produced by our trading partners have competitively suppressed domestic price pressures. Production of traded goods and services has expanded rapidly in economies with large, low-wage labor forces. Most prominent are China and India, which over the past decade have partly opened up to market forces, and the economies of central and eastern Europe, which were freed from central planning by the fall of the Soviet empire. The consequent significant additions to world production and trade have clearly put downward pressure on prices in the United States and in the economies of our trading partners. Over the past two decades, inflation has fallen notably, virtually worldwide, as has economic volatility. Although a complete understanding of the reasons remains elusive, globalization and innovation would appear to be essential elements of any paradigm capable of explaining the events of the past ten years. If this is indeed the case, because the extent of globalization and the speed of innovation are limited, the current apparent rapid pace of structural shift cannot continue indefinitely. While the outlook for the next year or two seems reasonably bright, the outlook for the latter part of this decade remains opaque because it is uncertain whether this transitional paradigm, if that is what it is, is already far advanced and about to slow, or whether it remains in an early, still-vibrant stage of evolution. BIS Review 16/2005 1 
*      *      * Globalization--the extension of the division of labor and specialization beyond national borders--is patently a key to understanding much of our recent economic history. With a deepening of specialization and a growing capacity to conduct transactions and take risks throughout the world, production has become increasingly international.1The pronounced structural shift over the past decade to a far more vigorous and competitive world economy than that which existed in earlier post-World War II decades apparently has been adding significant stimulus to world economic activity. This stimulus, like that which resulted from similar structural changes in the past, is likely a function of the rate of increase of globalization and not its level. If so, such impetus would tend to peter out as we approach the practical limits of globalization. Full globalization, in which production, trade, and finance are driven solely by risk-adjusted rates of return and in which risk is indifferent to distance and national borders, will likely never be achieved. The inherent risk aversion of people, and the home bias that is one manifestation of that aversion, will limit how far globalization can proceed. But because so much of our recent experience has little precedent, as I noted earlier, we cannot fully determine how long the current globalization dynamic will take to play out. And even then we have to be careful not to fall into the trap of equating the achievement of full globalization with the exhaustion of opportunities for new investment. The closing of our frontier at the end of the nineteenth century, for example, did not signal the onset of a new era of economic stagnation. *      *      * The increasing globalization of the post-World War II era was fostered at its beginnings by the judgment that burgeoning prewar protectionism was among the primary causes of the depth of the Great Depression of the 1930s. As a consequence, trade barriers began to fall after the war. Globalization was enhanced further when the inflation-ridden 1970s provoked a rethinking of the philosophy of economic policy, the roots of which were still planted in the Depression era. In the United States, that rethinking led to a wave of bipartisan deregulation of transportation, energy, and finance. With respect to macropolicies, there was a growing recognition that inflation impaired economic performance.2 Moreover, a tightening of monetary policy, and not increased regulation, came to be seen by the end of that decade as the only viable solution to taming inflation.3 Of course, the startling recovery of war-ravaged West Germany following Ludwig Erhard's postwar reforms, and Japan's embrace of global trade, were early examples of the policy reevaluation process. It has taken several decades of experience with markets and competition to achieve an unwinding of regulatory rigidities. Today, privatization and deregulation have become almost synonymous with "reform." *      *      * By any number of measures, globalization has expanded markedly in recent decades. Not only has the ratio of international trade in goods and services to world GDP risen steadily over the past half-                                                      1  Much of what is assembled in final salable form in the United States, for example, may consist of components from many continents. Companies seek out the lowest costs of inputs to effectively compete for their customers' dollars. This international competition, left unfettered, history suggests, would tend to direct output to the comparatively most efficient producers of specific products or services and, hence, maximize standards of living of all participants in trade. Given the skills and education of its workforce and a number of institutional factors, such as its legal structure, each economy will achieve its maximum possible average living standard.   2 Indeed, the Group of Seven leaders, at their 1977 economic summit, identified inflation as a cause of unemployment.  3  This had not always been the case. For example, wage and price controls were imposed in the United States in 1971 as a substitute for a tighter monetary policy and higher interest rates to address rising inflation. 2 BIS Review 16/2005 
century, but a related measure--the extent to which savers reach beyond their national borders to invest in foreign assets--has also risen. Through much of the post-World War II years, domestic saving for each country was invested predominantly in its domestic capital assets, even when there existed the potential for superior risk-adjusted returns from abroad. Because a country's domestic saving less its domestic investment is essentially equal to its current account balance, such balances, positive or negative, were therefore generally modest, with the exception of the mid-1980s. But in the early 1990s, "home bias" began to diminish appreciably, and, hence, the dispersion of current account balances among countries has increased markedly. The widening current account deficit in the United States has come to dominate the tail of the distribution of external balances across countries. Nonetheless, the worldwide dispersion of current account balances has risen since the early 1990s, even excluding the United States. 4Thus, the decline in home bias, or its equivalent, expanding globalization, has apparently enabled the United States to finance and, hence, incur so large a current account deficit. As a result of these capital inflows, the ratio of foreign net claims against U.S. residents to our annual GDP has risen to approximately one-fourth. While some other countries are far more in debt to foreigners, at least relative to their GDPs, they do not face the scale of international financing that we require. A U.S. current account deficit of 6 percent of GDP would probably not have been readily fundable a half-century ago or perhaps even a couple of decades ago.5 The ability to move that much of world saving to the United States in response to relative rates of return almost surely would have been hindered by the far-lesser degree of both globalization and international financial flexibility that existed at the time. Such large transfers would presumably have induced changes in the prices of assets that would have proved inhibiting. Nonetheless, we have little evidence that the economic forces that are fostering international specialization, and hence cross-border trade and increasing dispersion of current account balances, are as yet diminishing. To be sure, as I pointed out earlier this year, we may be approaching a point, if we are not already there, at which exporters to the United States, should the dollar decline further, would no longer choose to absorb a further reduction in profit margins. An acceleration of U.S. import prices, of course, would impede imports and give traction to the process of adjustment in our trade balance. Moreover, international investors, private and official, faced with an increasing concentration of dollar assets in their portfolios, will at some point choose greater balance in their asset accumulation. That shift, over time, would likely induce contractions in both the U.S. current account deficit and the corresponding current account surpluses of other nations. To date the proportional shift out of dollars from the total of official and private sector foreign currency accounts has been modest, when adjusted for exchange rate changes.6 Of course, the shift has been larger on an unadjusted dollar equivalent basis. However, the market has absorbed this change in an orderly manner. The more-rapid aging of European and Japanese populations relative to the aging of the U.S. population should slow the flow of foreign saving available to the United States. Although those population dynamics are already in train, little evidence as yet of slowed savings transfers has surfaced.                                                       4  The correlation coefficient between paired domestic saving and domestic investment, a conventional measure of the propensity to invest at home for OECD countries constituting four-fifths of world GDP, fell from 0.97 in 1990 to less than 0.8 in 2003. This correlation coefficient has been even lower recently when the United States is excluded from the sample. With rare exceptions, a decline in the correlation of countries' paired domestic saving and domestic investment implies an increased dispersion of current account balances. 5   It is true that estimates of the ratios of the current account to GDP for many countries in the nineteenth century are estimated to have been as large as, or larger, than we have experienced in recent years. However, the substantial net flows of capital financing for those earlier deficits were likely motivated in large part by specific major development projects (for example, railroads) bearing high expected rates of return. By contrast, diversification appears to be a more salient motivation for today's large net capital flows. Moreover, gross capital flows are believed to be considerably greater relative to GDP in recent years than in the nineteenth century. (See Alan M. Taylor (2002), "A Century of Current Account Dynamics," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 21 (November), pp. 725-48, and Maurice Obstfeld and Alan M. Taylor (2002),"Globalization and Capital Markets," NBER Working Paper 8846 (March).)   6  Based on data provided by the Bank for International Settlements for cross-border bank liabilities and international bonds outstanding.  BIS Review 16/2005 3 
*      *      * Can market forces incrementally defuse a buildup in a nation's current account deficit and net external debt before a crisis more abruptly does so? The answer seems to lie with the degree of market flexibility. In a world economy that is sufficiently flexible, as debt projections rise, product and equity prices, interest rates, and exchange rates presumably would change to reestablish global balance. We may not be able to usefully determine at what point foreign accumulation of net claims on the United States will slow or even reverse, but it is evident that the greater the degree of international flexibility, the less the risk of a crisis.7Should globalization continue unfettered and thereby create an ever-more flexible international financial system, history suggests that current account imbalances will be defused with modest risk of disruption. Two Federal Reserve studies of large current account adjustments in developed countries, the results of which are presumably applicable to the United States, suggest that market forces are likely to restore a more long-term sustainable current account balance here without substantial disruption.8 Indeed, this was the case in the second half of the 1980s. I say this with one major caveat. Protectionism, some signs of which have emerged in recent years, could significantly erode global flexibility and, hence, undermine the global adjustment process. We are already experiencing pressure to slow down the expansion of trade. The current Doha Round of trade negotiations has faced difficulties largely because the low-hanging fruit available through negotiation has already been picked in the trade liberalizations that have occurred since the Kennedy Round. On a more encouraging note, some recent indications of progress may be pointing to a heightened probability of completion of the Doha Round. *      *      * The remarkable technological advances of recent decades have doubtless augmented and fostered the dramatic effect of increased globalization on economic growth. In particular, information and communication technologies have propelled the processing and transmission of data and ideas to a level far beyond our capabilities a decade or two ago. The advent of real-time information systems has enabled managers to organize a workforce without the redundancy required in earlier decades to ensure against the type of human error that technology has now made far less prevalent. Real-time information, by eliminating much human intervention, has markedly reduced scrappage rates on production lines, lead times on purchases, and errors in many forms of recordkeeping. Much data transfer is now electronic and far more accurate than possible in earlier times. The long-term path of technology and growth is difficult to discern. Indeed, innovation, by definition, is not forecastable. In the United States, we have always employed technologies at, or close to, the cutting edge, and we have created many innovative technologies ourselves. The opportunities of many developing economies to borrow innovation is not readily available to us. Thus, even though the longer-term prospects for innovation and respectable U.S. productivity growth are encouraging, our productivity growth has rarely exceeded an average rate of 3 percent annually for any protracted period.                                                       7  Although increased flexibility apparently promotes resolution of current account imbalances without significant disruption, it may also allow larger deficits to emerge before markets are required to address them. Moreover, the apparent ability of the U.S. economy to withstand the stock market plunge of 2000, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, corporate governance scandals, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq indicates a greater degree of economic flexibility than was apparent in the 1970s and earlier. 8  Caroline Freund (2000), "Current Account Adjustment in Industrialized Countries," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper 692 (December); Hilary Croke, Steven B. Kamin, and Sylvain Leduc (2005), "Financial Market Developments and Economic Activity during Current Account Adjustments in Industrial Economies," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper 827 (February).  4 BIS Review 16/2005 
*      *      * We have, I believe, a reasonably good understanding of why Americans have been able to reach farther into global markets, incur significant increases in debt, and yet not suffer the disruptions so often observed as a consequence. However, a widely held alternative view of the past decade cannot readily be dismissed. That view holds that the postwar paradigm is still largely in place, and key financial ratios, rather than suggesting an evolving economic structure, reflect extreme values that have materialized within an unchanged structure and must eventually adjust, perhaps abruptly. To be sure, even with the increased flexibility implied in a paradigm of expanding globalization and innovation, the combination of exceptionally low saving rates and historically high ratios of household debt to income can be a concern if incomes unexpectedly fall. Indeed, virtually any debt burden doubtless will become oppressive if incomes fall significantly. But rising debt-to-income ratios can be somewhat misleading as an indicator of stress. Indeed the ratio of household debt to income has been rising sporadically for more than a half-century, a trend that partly reflects the increased capacity of ever-wealthier households to service debt. Moreover, a significant part of the recent rise in the debt-to-income ratio reflects the remarkable gain in homeownership. Over the past decade, for example, the share of households that own homes has risen from 64 percent to 69 percent. During the decade, a significant number of renters bought homes, thus increasing the asset side of their balance sheets as well as increasing their debt. It can scarcely be argued that the substitutions of debt service for rent materially impaired the financial state of the new homeowner. Yet the process over the past decade added more than 10 percent to outstanding mortgage debt and accounted for more than one-seventh of the increase in total household debt over that period.9Thus, short of a period of appreciable overall economic weakness, households, with the exception of some highly leveraged subprime borrowers, do not appear to be faced with significant financial strain. With interest rates low, debt service costs for households have been essentially stable for the past few years. Accounting for other fixed charges such as rent, utilities, and auto-leasing costs does not materially alter this assessment of stability. Even should interest rates rise materially further, the effect on household expenses will be stretched out because four-fifths of debt is at fixed rates and varying maturities, and it will take time for debt to mature and reflect the higher rates. Despite the almost 2-percentage-point rise in mortgage rates on new originations from mid-1999 to mid-2000, the average interest rate on outstanding mortgage debt rose only slightly, as did debt service. In a related concern, a number of analysts have conjectured that the extended period of low interest rates is spawning a bubble in housing prices in the United States that will, at some point, implode. Their concern is that, if this were to occur, highly leveraged homeowners would be forced to sharply curtail their spending. To be sure, indexes of house prices based on repeat sales of existing homes have significantly outstripped increases in rents, suggesting at least the possibility of price misalignment in some housing markets. But a destabilizing contraction in nationwide house prices does not seem the most probable outcome. To be sure, the recent marked increase in the investor share of home purchases suggests rising speculation in homes. (Owner occupants are rarely home speculators because to sell, they must move.)10 However, nominal house prices in the aggregate have rarely fallen and certainly not by very much. And even should more-than-average price weakness occur, the increase in home equity as a consequence of the recent sharp rise in prices should buffer the vast majority of homeowners.                                                       9  For statistical methodology see Karen Dynan, Kathleen Johnson, and Karen Pence (2003),"Recent Changes to a Measure of U.S. Household Debt Service," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 89 (October), pp. 417-26.   10  A new survey by the National Association of Realtors reports that purchases of vacation homes and homes for investment amounted to more than a third of total existing home purchases last year. Mortgage originations data reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) indicate that the share has been rising significantly since 1998.  BIS Review 16/2005 5 
House prices, however, like those of many other assets, are difficult to predict, and movements in those prices can be of macroeconomic significance. There appears, at the moment, to be little concern about corporate financial imbalances. Debt-to-equity ratios are well within historical ranges, and the recent prolonged period of low long-term interest rates has enabled corporations to refinance liabilities and stretch out bond maturities. *      *      * The resolution of our current account deficit and household debt burdens does not strike me as overly worrisome, but that is certainly not the case for our fiscal deficit, which, according to the Congressional Budget Office, will rise significantly as the baby boomers start to retire in 2008. Our fiscal prospects are, in my judgment, a significant obstacle to long-term stability because the budget deficit is not readily subject to correction by market forces that stabilize other imbalances. One issue that concerns most analysts, especially in the context of a widening structural federal deficit, is inadequate national saving. Fortunately, our meager domestic savings, and those attracted from abroad, are being very effectively invested in domestic capital assets. The efficiency of our capital stock thus has been an important offset to what, by any standard, has been an exceptionally low domestic saving rate in the United States. Although saving is a necessary condition for financing the capital investment required to engender productivity, it is not a sufficient condition. The very high saving rates of the Soviet Union, of China, and of India in earlier decades often did not foster significant productivity growth in those countries. Saving squandered in financing inefficient technologies does not advance living standards. In light of the uncertain link between saving and productivity growth, it is difficult to measure the exact extent to which our relatively low gross national saving rate will limit the future growth of an efficient capital stock. What we know for sure, however, is that the 30 million baby boomers who will reach 65 years of age over the next quarter-century are going to place enormous pressures on the ability of our economy to supply the real benefits promised to retirees under current law, and our success in attracting savings from abroad may be masking the full effect on investment of deficient domestic saving. *      *      * Our day-by-day experiences with the effectiveness of flexible markets as they adjust to, and correct, imbalances can readily lead us to the mistaken conclusion that once markets are purged of rigidities, macroeconomic disturbances will become a historical relic. However, the penchant of humans for quirky, often irrational behavior gets in the way of this conclusion. A discontinuity in valuation judgments, often the cause or consequence of the building and bursting of a bubble, can occasionally destabilize even the most liquid and flexible of markets. I do not have much to add on this issue except to reiterate our need to better understand it. *      *      * The last three decades have witnessed a significant coalescing of economic policy philosophies. Central planning has been judged as ineffective and is now generally avoided. Market flexibility has become the focus, albeit often hesitant focus, of reform in most countries. All policymakers are struggling to understand global and technological changes that appear to have profoundly altered world economic developments. For most economic participants, these changes appear to have had positive effects on their economic well-being. But a significant minority, trapped on the adverse side of the market's process of creative destruction, are suffering. This is an issue that needs to be more fully addressed if globalization is to sustain the public support it requires to make further progress. 6 BIS Review 16/2005 
Ben S Bernanke: The US economic outlook Remarks by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at a Finance Committee luncheon of the Executives’ Club of Chicago, Chicago, 8 March 2005.  *      *      * In my remarks today I will share my thoughts on the U.S. economic outlook for this year, focusing particularly on the prospects for economic growth and inflation. I will then turn to some implications of the outlook for current monetary policy. As always, my comments are my responsibility alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.1 The U.S. economy has certainly come a long way in the past two years. As of spring 2003, nearly a year and a half after the formal end of the 2001 recession, the expansion seemed at risk of petering out. During 2002 and the first half of 2003, although consumer spending and residential construction remained reasonably strong, businesses seemed exceptionally reluctant to make new capital investments or hire new workers. Capital investment and economic growth finally took off in the second half of 2003, responding to powerful injections of monetary and fiscal stimulus. But the recovery remained "jobless" throughout 2003, in large part because of remarkable gains in labor productivity, which allowed firms to meet the growing demands for their output without expanding their workforces. The economic recovery became more balanced in 2004. Real gross domestic product (GDP) continued to expand, growing at a vigorous 3-3/4 percent clip last year despite sharp increases in energy prices and a significant drag from net exports. But perhaps more importantly, the labor market finally began to show signs of life despite continuing gains in the efficiency of business operations and some remaining caution on the part of employers. The national unemployment rate, which stood at 6.3 percent in June 2003, had declined to 5.4 percent by December 2004, where it currently stands. In 2004, monetary and fiscal stimulus once again aided growth; but for the first time since the 2001 recession, the expansion began to take on a self-sustaining character last year, as increases in profits, employment, wage income, and household wealth became the principal drivers of rising spending. Headline inflation picked up noticeably in 2004 because of a continuing surge in energy prices, but core inflation (that is, inflation excluding the direct effects of food and energy prices) rose only modestly from the unusually low levels seen in 2003. Core inflation as measured by the chain price index for personal consumption expenditures (core PCE inflation) was a moderate 1.6 percent last year. Economic activity appears to be off to a solid start in 2005. The data surprises in recent months have tended toward the upside, and real GDP growth in the vicinity of 3-3/4 to 4 percent looks attainable this year despite the ongoing reduction in monetary and fiscal stimulus. In stark contrast to the situation of a couple of years ago, both business investment and hiring should support growth in 2005. Business investment, which finished 2004 on a high note, promises to remain strong, buoyed by favorable financing rates, sound corporate balance sheets, and rising business confidence in the durability of the recovery. Notably, the available data suggest that the expiration of partial expensing provisions at the end of 2004 has done little to reduce the momentum of investment. The pace of hiring also strengthened toward the end of last year, following a summertime lull, and I expect healthy employment gains in the coming quarters, albeit with possibly large month-to-month variations. Despite the growth in employment, however, the unemployment rate should decline relatively slowly, as a strengthening job market attracts people back into the labor force. Consumer spending has been well maintained both during and after the recession, as I mentioned earlier, and continued growth in household expenditure should complement expected increases in business spending in 2005. Some observers have expressed concern about rising levels of household debt, and we at the Federal Reserve follow these developments closely. However, concerns about debt growth should be allayed by the fact that household assets (particularly housing wealth) have risen even more quickly than household liabilities. Indeed, the ratio of household net worth to household income has been rising smartly and currently stands at 5.4, well above its long-run average                                                       1  I thank Board staff members William Wascher and Charles Fleischman for excellent assistance. BIS Review 15/2005 1 
of about 4.8. With real disposable income having risen over the past few quarters, most consumers are in good financial shape - a positive indication for household spending. One caveat for the future is that the recent rapid escalation in house prices - 11 percent in 2004, according to the repeat-transactions index constructed by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight - is unlikely to continue. A plausible scenario is that house prices will either move sideways or rise more slowly during the next few years, eventually bringing the rate of return on housing in line with the relatively low prospective rates of return that we currently observe on virtually all assets, both real and financial. If the increases in house prices begin to moderate as expected, the resulting slowdown in household wealth accumulation should lead ultimately to somewhat slower growth in consumer spending. That said, residential construction should remain reasonably strong in 2005, supported by a growing population, rising employment and incomes, and mortgage rates that remain historically low. However, homebuilders will be hard pressed to much exceed the record level of starts seen in 2004. Thus, residential investment seems likely to make a diminishing contribution to overall economic growth. Investment in nonresidential structures, such as office buildings and industrial and commercial space, appears poised to improve this year after several years in the doldrums, though a full recovery in this sector will have to await further declines in office vacancy rates and increases in factory utilization rates. You may have heard the story of the fellow who, when asked why he was hitting himself on the head with a hammer, replied that he did it because it felt so good when he stopped. A couple of hammers that pounded the U.S. economy in 2004 (not at our volition, of course) were the sharp increase in energy prices and the widening trade deficit, each of which subtracted a significant amount from growth last year. High energy prices and a large trade deficit will very likely remain with us in 2005, unfortunately. However, some small comfort may be taken from the likelihood that these problems will not worsen this year at the rate that they did last year. By the magic of output growth accounting, so long as the energy and trade situations do not deteriorate substantially further this year, as I do not expect they will, the net effect will be to provide a boost to this year's growth relative to last year's. On the energy front, increased non-OPEC production, a more moderate rate of increase in oil consumption in China, and (I say this with my fingers crossed) some possible reduction in geopolitical uncertainties may help to limit further increases in crude oil prices this year. Moreover, although natural gas prices have risen recently, inventories of natural gas appear plentiful, and major shortfalls do not appear imminent. With respect to trade, we may reasonably hope that cumulative past declines in the real exchange value of the dollar plus economic growth abroad will at least begin to stabilize the U.S. trade balance. The inflation forecast presents its own challenges. My own guess is that core PCE inflation in 2005 will be slightly higher than its 2004 rate of 1.6 percent, though likely remaining within what I think of as the "comfort zone" of 1 to 2 percent. I will briefly comment on some of the factors that bear on the inflation forecast. First, although core inflation excludes the direct effects of energy prices, energy prices exert some indirect effects on the core inflation rate by raising costs in non-energy industries, such as air travel and trucking. Rising commodity prices and increases in import prices (the result of a weaker dollar) likewise raise costs of production as well as some prices paid directly by consumers. These factors all contributed to the pickup in core inflation in 2004. I expect the net inflationary effect of these cost drivers to be less in 2005 than in 2004. Specifically, although energy and commodity prices will probably remain high, they are unlikely to continue rising at last year's pace, and they consequently should contribute less to core inflation this year than they did last year. (The principle here is the same as that illustrated by the man who stops hitting himself on the head with a hammer or, at least, hits himself more gently.) Another consideration is that producers' markups of prices over costs remain relatively high, leaving some scope for firms to absorb any further cost increases. The course of the dollar is likewise very challenging - probably impossible - to predict. However, despite the decline in the dollar of the past two years, core import prices excluding fuels rose only 2-1/2 percent in the second half of 2004 and increases could well continue to be moderate.2 The pass-through of the effects of the declining dollar on import prices has remained remarkably low, all things considered.                                                       2  As defined, core import prices exclude semiconductors and computers, whose prices tend to fall rapidly, as well as energy. 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
Although moderating rates of increase in nonwage costs should help on the inflation front in 2005, I acknowledge the considerable uncertainty that surrounds this prediction. The potential volatility of energy prices, commodity prices, and (to a lesser extent) import prices has been dramatically demonstrated in recent years and so unexpectedly rapid increases - or decreases, for that matter - in producers' nonwage costs can by no means be ruled out. Cost increases that are both large and sustained would, of course, create inflationary pressure. Lagged effects on inflation of the nonwage cost increases that occurred in 2004 are also possible, particularly if the firming of demand increases pricing power and the ability of producers to pass on their higher costs. I can assure you that the Federal Reserve will monitor closely any developments affecting producers' costs. The second principal factor affecting the inflation outlook is the degree of slack in the economy - the so-called output gap. Research at the Board and elsewhere suggests that measuring the output gap in real time can be quite a treacherous undertaking, particularly when the economy is near full employment. The natural rate of unemployment is probably better thought of as a zone rather than as a single number, however. In particular, inflation does not appear to rise sharply or discontinuously when the economy reaches a specific rate of unemployment or capacity utilization but instead responds more gradually to variations in the degree of resource utilization (in economics lingo, the Phillips curve is fairly flat). Thus, relatively modest errors in estimating the output gap may not prove too harmful. My own judgment is that some slack remains in the U.S. economy, although that slack is diminishing as growth continues above its long-run trend. Evidence that the labor market is not yet at its potential includes subdued wage growth, the failure thus far of labor participation rates to increase from cyclical lows, the relatively large number of people who say they are working part-time for economic reasons, and the impression gleaned from surveys and anecdotes that the supply of potential employees in most occupations remains plentiful. Measures of industrial capacity utilization below historical norms are also consistent with the presence of underutilized resources. As resource slack is progressively eliminated, however, and as labor productivity growth settles in near its longer-run trend of 2 to 2-1/2 percent, increases in unit labor costs may begin to put some upward pressure on prices, offsetting possible moderation in nonwage costs. A third factor determining inflation is long-term inflation expectations. If inflation expectations are well anchored, in the sense that the public has confidence that inflation will remain low in the long run, the central bank's task of actually keeping inflation low becomes easier. For example, presumably because of well-anchored inflation expectations, the increases in oil prices last year appear to have had few second-round effects - that is, firms and households apparently viewed the inflation bulge associated with the oil price increases as temporary and did not build a higher expected inflation rate into wages and prices. Likewise, stable inflation expectations probably help to explain the low observed rate of exchange-rate pass-through into domestic prices. Of course, the benefits that flow from well-anchored inflation expectations make keeping inflation low (and thus validating those expectations) all the more important. On the whole, inflation expectations do appear to be stable. For example, according to the University of Michigan's Surveys of Consumers, since 2003 median expected inflation for the next five to ten years has fluctuated in a narrow range. On the other hand, the spread between ten-year nominal and ten-year inflation-indexed bond yields, known as inflation compensation, has risen some 30 to 35 basis points since this time last year. I am inclined to believe that this rise in inflation compensation does signal some near-term increase in expectations of headline inflation, although part of the increase may also reflect changes in risk and liquidity premiums in the market for inflation-indexed debt. Worth noting also is that inflation compensation for the period five to ten years in the future - a measure of long-run inflation expectations - has remained essentially flat during the past year. In summary, with all the caveats mentioned today firmly in mind, I look for 2005 to be a good year for the U.S. economy: real growth at 3-3/4 percent or slightly better, core PCE inflation in the range of 1-1/2 to 2 percent, and a slowly declining unemployment rate. Private-sector forecasters are a bit more pessimistic than I am, but not by much. For example, the Blue Chip consensus forecast released yesterday looks for real growth of 3.6 percent this year, a bit below my projection, and for overall inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), of 2.2 percent. If we adjust for the distinction between overall and core inflation and for the fact that, for technical reasons, CPI-based inflation measures tend to be higher than those based on the PCE price index, the Blue Chip inflation forecast is only slightly higher than mine. Indeed, these differences in projections are hardly meaningful given the wide error bands on economic forecasts in general - which leads us naturally to the question of what could go wrong with the relatively sunny outlook I have described today. Unfortunately, unless we are prepared to extend the BIS Review 15/2005 3 
meeting for several more hours, I cannot give a detailed analysis of all the risks to this forecast. Many things could go wrong, of course, and as Murphy warned us, something almost certainly will. Some of the more obvious possibilities include oil supply disruptions that send the price of crude much higher, a slowdown in foreign economic growth that reduces the demand for U.S. exports, or the realization that less economic slack remains than I currently believe, which would increase the risk of higher inflation. Not all risks to the forecast are adverse, of course; for example, the growth rate of labor productivity has surprised us to the upside almost every year of the past decade and could do so again. The lesson here is that economic forecasts, and consequently policy plans, can be only provisional. New events and new data must trump preconceived notions about the future evolution of the economy and of policy. I will conclude with some comments about monetary policy, reminding you once again that I speak only for myself and not for other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. As I have discussed today, the baseline forecast for the U.S. economy in 2005 and indeed beyond this year appears quite favorable. In particular, in the past few quarters the evidence that the recovery is self-sustaining has become more persuasive, while inflation pressures appear contained. The labor market has not yet reached its potential, but the improvement on that front in the past year and a half has been substantial, and slack in resource utilization continues to be reduced, albeit slowly. For some time now, the Federal Open Market Committee has indicated that it expects to remove policy accommodation at a pace that is likely to be measured. The "measured pace" language was always intended to indicate the Committee's provisional view of how policy was likely to evolve, given the economic forecast made at each meeting and our understanding of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In short, this language was always meant to convey a policy forecast, not a policy commitment. However, in the event, the Committee's policy expectations have largely been realized, and in my view the results have been good. With the economy strengthening, with inflation stable, and with the federal funds rate still at a relatively low level, at this point my expectation is that the Committee will continue to remove policy accommodation in a measured way. Of course, in light of the imprecision of economic forecasts and the certainty that the economy will face new shocks, the pace at which the policy interest rate is normalized will of necessity be sensitive to unexpected events and data. Because well-anchored inflation expectations are critical to achieving both of the Federal Reserve's mandated goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, I think it particularly important that policy react as needed to maintain price stability. One may reasonably ask when this process of removing policy accommodation will stop. This question is not straightforward to answer. In particular, it is not helpful, in my view, to imagine the existence of some fixed target for the funds rate toward which policy should inexorably march. Instead, the correct procedure for setting policy requires the FOMC to continually update its forecast for the economy, conditional on all relevant information and on a provisional future path for monetary policy. The funds rate will have reached an appropriate and sustainable level when, first, the outlook is consistent with the Committee's economic goals and, second, the slope of the term structure of interest rates is approximately normal, as best as can be determined. With this definition in mind, one can search for indications of where the "neutral" funds rate is likely to be at a given point in time. For example, the fact that far future short-term interest rates have recently declined fairly significantly suggests that, in the view of the markets at least, the neutral funds rate may be somewhat lower today than it was in the past.3 The most important lesson, however, is that the neutral policy rate depends on both current and prospective economic conditions. Accordingly, the neutral rate is not a constant or a fixed objective but will change as the economy and economic forecasts evolve.                                                       3  The one-year nominal rate nine years ahead implied by the Treasury term structure has fallen about 1-1/4 percentage points since its recent peak in May 2004, to about 5-1/2 percent today. This rate may be thought of as the sum of the market's expectation of the short-term interest rate nine years from now plus a variable term premium. Disentangling the two components is difficult, and indeed some part of the downward trend in far future short rates plausibly reflects a decline in the term premium. Overall, however, it seems likely that the market expectation of the future short-term rate has declined during the past few years. 4 BIS Review 15/2005 
Ardian Fullani: Modernisation of the payment system in Albania Address by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, in the meeting with businesses and companies of utility services, Tirana, 25 February 2005. *      *      * Good day to everybody! Thanking you for your presence, allow me to regard today’s meeting as a working table, inviting you to stay away of standard conferences and slogans, orienting our discussions to concrete issues and solutions that relate to products in banking payments area. More concretely, I would like to have in this table the presence of a debate on advantages, benefits that each group of interest participating in this meeting would have from using modern payment instruments. I think that the object of today’s meeting is part of our new Vision: Modernization of the payment system which will give a real contribution in reducing cash and informal economy. The presence in this meeting of government members, of some business managers, whether public or private, who provide periodic services in small value and large number, and the presence of banking system directors, makes me be provocative right from the beginning, with a simple question to either the business or the banking system: how much longer are people going to stay in meaningless queues to pay their monthly bills? I emphasize that we are already making the first step in modern payments world, while an important step will be finalized by mid of this year, once the Automated Electronic Clearing House project is completed. In our ambition to ensure an up-dated payments infrastructure, it’s our pleasure to state that even banking system efforts have been numerous and significant progress has been made in this direction. However, I believe that we are still far away from some basic standards. I think that the reasons have to be found in the lack of tradition, old inheritance, presence of informal economy, and in other objective and subjective causes. Assessing the recent developments, I deem that there is room in the banking system for a greater understanding between it and the business represented today in this meeting. From the viewpoint of some infrastructural problems, I think that, in spite of specific aspects of each member bank of the system, they should cooperate more with each-other, creating a unique network, capable to face and use successfully the cash inflows at their windows. Proactive role of banks is a primary one. Banks should not wait for individuals to knock at their doors but they have themselves to submerge the public with their products and services. Banks should further refine their technology to offer as much as possible qualitative products and services to their clients.  On the other hand, allow me to attract the attention of the utility business about some banking payment products, already carried out, or expected to be carried out in a short period of time: Establishment of the Automated Electronic Clearing House, referred to as “clearing” system. The completion of this joint project of the Bank of Albania and the banking system will have a significant impact on increasing banking payments popularity. Upon the realization of investments in modern and up-to-date technology, the overall time of realizing these payments in the whole territory of the country and in all banking windows is planned to last no longer than two days, whereas the service cost is envisaged to decrease. The project will enable the provision of services with the same quality and safety as those of the European level, whereas the companies of “utility” service in the country and the public will be the main beneficiaries. Geographic extension of the system and banking services, I think, is another qualitative development of the banking system in the recent years. For the coming years, the banks have planned further extension, making the banking services be a tangible reality, even in small districts, why not even in outlying districts. Besides geographic extension, through investments in modern and up-to-date technology such as ATM and payment terminals in POSs, the banks are trying to increase their products virtually. Through this technology, they are trying to be present in any living centers, commercial centers or points of sale. BIS Review 15/2005 1 
A great number of banks are providing or are preparing to be present even in your houses or offices, through internet banking, within a short period of time. Albanian banks are already part of large international networks of cards and provide card payments inside the country and abroad, either for Albanian citizens or foreigners – and this has already become a tangible reality. Another initiative to be mentioned in this direction is the initiation of cooperation of banks in establishing joint networks of using plastic cards. I think that the creation of a joint settlement network for national interbank card payments, the extension of card penetration scale and the presence of payment terminals in points of sale – in other words the creation of a “unique card” for the whole system, I think, should be the other major challenge of the banking system following the completion of the clearing system. I dealt with these essential banking system developments, inter alia, to make clearer the advantages banks have in terms of payments services provision. They are the only institutions licensed in the country for providing payment service efficiently and safely. This advantage is based on the good knowledge of legislation, development level of infrastructure, capable human resources and modern technology. Any other organization outside the system should not be regarded as a long-term one.  However, I take advantage of the opportunity to stress that even the Government should render its contribution in this direction. A payment system will always remain sterile in case the authorities do not manage to impose the use of fiscal cases in invoicing the sales. To be open and sincere, no businessman will encourage his small clients to use modern forms of payments, if he is not obliged to use the fiscal recorder of his activity. Otherwise, it would be much more convenient for the same businessman to transfer the income on sales directly to his bank account, merely to minimize the risk of holding large quantities of cash. Therefore, I think that we should be more active, not only through propagandistic effects, but also by finding applicable formulas and by using efficient leverages to impose the implementation of fiscal legislation. The channeling of the public administration salaries through accounts opened in the banking system is a first successful step to be welcomed, followed as well by other movements in this direction.  Coming back to my idea stated at the beginning, I think that presently the invoice collection windows, pension kiosks, payments in envelopes or bags – have all become out-dated. These practices should be estimated as expressions of a mentality to be overcome, which poses the risk of keeping us away from European standards. My opinion is that, in a short period of time, we may make the detachment of the public from “queues to pay” completely a reality. Finally, leaving room for your discussions, I would like to present briefly even some of the benefits the overall economy, businesses present in this meeting, as well as beneficiaries or their clients will have: Benefits to Albanian economy: Reduction of cash and informal economy; Growth of deposits and volume of credit to economy; Further strengthening and consolidation of domestic banking system; Achievement of international standards and practices, improving the image of Albania and our domestic economy. Benefits to business: Growth of the planning process for collecting payments;  Cost reduction and improvement of control on invoice-collection process; Improvement of service to clients; Extension and strengthening of business - bank relations. 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
Benefits to the public: Increased payment possibilities, avoidance of queues and default interest; Reduced need for cash as payment means and increased personal security; Better management of households’ economy.  However, I hope that a proper understanding will be achieved today as well as our goal that in the coming days we may also be witnesses of a legal cooperation act between the banking system and public entities or private businesses present in this hall.  This is not a campaign against obscurantism but an effort to impose a new culture, education and tradition. Electronic cards will be the key to enter the modern payments world, that is the services world. I sincerely wish and I am confident that this will happen.  Thank you.  BIS Review 15/2005 3 
Goh Chok Tong: MAS’s working relationship with the finance industry in Singapore Welcome remarks Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the MAS Evening 2005, Singapore, 8 March 2005. *      *      * Welcome to the MAS Evening 2005. I was pleasantly surprised that MAS holds cocktails for its "clients", who are people from the finance industry. I thought that as a regulator, we should keep a certain distance from them and appear stern and correct even when we are warm people. Otherwise, we may not be listened to when we have to apply moral suasion. But I was reminded that MAS also has a promotional role. And to perform this role effectively, MAS has to be close to the very same people whom they supervise and regulate. So I was persuaded to host this evening's function and even give a little speech. Since my appointment as MAS Chairman, I have had the opportunity to meet some of you. I hope to have some time this evening to meet and speak with more of you. But this evening's function is also for you - the industry players - to interact and network amongst yourselves in an informal and relaxed setting. So make the most of it. It is not often that you get a free drink from the Government.  I just want to make a couple of points this evening. First, I am pleased that MAS' working relationship with the industry has been strengthening over the years. Global financial markets have changed rapidly over the past decade, and they will continue to evolve at a very fast pace. Such a dynamic environment calls for close interaction and understanding between regulators and industry. Second, our financial sector today is more vibrant than eight years ago when MAS embarked on a major review. MAS worked closely with the industry to open up the financial sector and identify growth areas. It also refined the regulatory framework and moved towards a risk-focused and consultative approach to supervision. Our partnership has been successful. Today, the financial sector employs 5% of our workforce but accounts for 12% of GDP. Our banking and insurance sectors are now among the most liberal in Asia, and are anchored by strong local and foreign players. The financial advisory industry has grown, with many firms catering to different market segments. The capital markets are also doing well. Third, we will continue to do what we can to enhance our position as the regional headquarters for corporate financial treasury activities. We will also implement measures to strengthen our position as Asia's premier wealth management centre and develop greater depth and breadth in our capital markets. Here, I think the Middle East offers great opportunities. I have been to several Middle Eastern countries in the past 12 months. Singapore has a good reputation amongst the Arabs. We should nurture our ties with them. The Middle East is evolving. So is the global economic landscape. MAS will continue to engage the private sector to reposition Singapore strategically. My last point is to seek your support for an important event which Singapore is hosting in September next year - the 2006 IMF and World Bank Group Board of Governors Annual Meetings. The Annual Meetings are a major event in the calendar of the international financial community. We expect 16,000 delegates from more than 180 countries to come to Singapore. They will include Heads of Government, Finance Ministers, Central Bankers, Chief Executives of leading companies and the international media. This will be the largest international conference Singapore has ever held. Complementing the Meetings will be a series of programmes including seminars, fora, social and cultural events and a Singapore Biennale. The Singapore Biennale, which we are organising for the first time, will be a major platform for showcasing contemporary culture and visual arts in Asia. There will also be dialogue and discussions between government and business leaders on developments and opportunities in the region. Global financial institutions and companies will find this a good occasion to meet with clients and potential business partners.  Collectively known as Singapore 2006, the series of events will highlight Singapore as a cosmopolitan society, and a dynamic, well-connected and entrepreneurial economy with tremendous opportunities. BIS Review 15/2005 1 
The tagline is "Global City. World of Opportunities." We will make Singapore 2006 an extraordinary and truly memorable experience, with your help. The success of Singapore 2006 cannot be achieved by the public sector alone. It requires the full support and partnership of the business community, and in fact, all Singaporeans who must charm the delegates with their warmth. BMW Asia has already stepped forward to partner Singapore. I hope more will do so. Certainly, we will approach some of you over the next few months. I hope that together we can make Singapore 2006 a success. I wish all of you an enjoyable evening. Now, you can have your free drinks. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
Alan Bollard: Bank regulation and supervision in New Zealand - recent and ongoing developments Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Australasian Institute of Banking and Finance, Sydney, 23 March 2005. *      *      * Vigilance and reinvigoration The New Zealand economy has experienced a very good period of growth over the last ten or so years, averaging 3.4 per cent GDP growth per annum. In the last five years, with growth averaging 3.8 per cent per annum, New Zealand has been one of the fastest growing economies in the OECD even ahead of Australia. New Zealand's unemployment rate is now at a multi year low of 3.6 per cent.  The banking sector has played a significant role in this economic growth, being the main intermediator of peoples' savings into investment and gateway for foreign investment funds. At around 74 per cent, banks account for the lion's share of financial system assets in New Zealand. In comparison, banks account for about 50 per cent of financial system assets in Australia.  Bank balance sheet growth has been exceptional for several years, dominated by lending to households. What is pleasing to date is that the soundness of the banking sector has also remained intact. Banks are experiencing a period of very low loan default and strong profitability.  However, it should never be forgotten that despite our impressive growth, New Zealand remains a small, open, and indebted economy. We have also been benefiting from a strong terms of trade upswing, and a structural rise in households' debt appetite, neither of which will be sustained forever.  The potential vulnerabilities of our economy are reflected in the banking sector. Over half of New Zealand's foreign borrowings are sitting on banks' balance sheets, with New Zealand's private sector relative indebtedness the highest in the OECD.1 What's more, our banking sector displays amongst the highest levels of foreign ownership in the world - foreign banks own 98 per cent of New Zealand banking system assets, with 85 per cent being Australian-owned.  Despite the benefits that foreign ownership and capital bring, these features mean that any banking crisis New Zealand faces is as likely to be caused by external influences as it is internal. The New Zealand financial system is vulnerable to shocks within the banking system (such as the mismanagement of a local bank), outside of the banking system (such as a wider economic threat), as well as shocks in other countries, especially Australia, that may be transmitted through our banking system. The serious mismanagement of an Australian bank, or a major shock to the Australian economy, could have serious negative repercussions for the New Zealand banking sector and financial system.  It is awareness of these potential vulnerabilities that motivates the RBNZ's vigilance, and that has led to a particular focus over the last couple of years in assessing and reinvigorating how we go about regulating and supervising banks, as well as driving trans-Tasman policy harmonisation.  The RBNZ's responsibility to supervise banks in New Zealand is prescribed in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act. This Act requires us to use the powers it gives to the Bank to promote the soundness and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system, and to avoid significant damage to the financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank. For some time now the RBNZ has taken a three pillars approach, based on a regulatory culture of self, market and regulatory discipline. This approach places risk management largely in the hands of those closest to it, and lays responsibility for outcomes with boards of directors, management, and creditors - that is, those who have the most to lose from a mismanaged bank.  The first pillar is self-regulation. This is all about the policies and structures that promote effective governance by banks' boards of directors, including effective oversight by local boards of the local banks' managements. We expect high standards of corporate governance from the boards of New Zealand banks, and this expectation is reinforced by some quite severe penalties that could apply                                                       1  According to IIP data as at September 2004. BIS Review 20/2005 1 
should a bank's directors fail to properly discharge their responsibilities. In the wake of the Enron-type corporate governance scandals and subsequent numerous reviews, the importance of good self-regulation has gained a lot more recognition recently with the passing of such legislation as the Sarbanes Oxley Act. In its Basel II recommendations, the Basel committee has also put a lot more weight on the importance of good self-regulation for ensuring bank stability than it did previously.  The second pillar is market discipline. For many years, banks in New Zealand have been subject to obligations to make quite comprehensive quarterly financial and prudential disclosures to the market-place. These disclosures, combined with a policy of not bailing out failed institutions, help to strengthen market scrutiny of banks, and the market disciplines that go with that. The third pillar consists of our regulatory and supervisory requirements. Although our regulatory framework is somewhat less intrusive than that of many countries, it nonetheless contains most of the standard features, the centre-piece of which is the requirement that banks in New Zealand be adequately capitalised.  In its Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) review of the New Zealand financial system last year, the IMF confirmed that we have a good model for host country supervision.  Fulfilling the second element of our statutory responsibilities - to avoid significant damage to the financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank - requires the Reserve Bank to have a crisis management strategy. That is, we must be ready with a range of tools and options that would enable us to step in should a bank get into serious difficulties.  What has reinvigoration involved? The Bank has been reassessing and testing each of the pillars described above, and at the same time putting a lot of effort into developing its crisis management capabilities. Maintaining and encouraging soundness and efficiency We strengthened the first pillar of self discipline, in the middle of last year, by implementing a policy of "fit and proper" review of appointees to positions as senior managers or directors of registered banks. Recruitment into these positions is still the sole responsibility of the banks' respective boards. The `fit and proper' policy simply means that the Reserve Bank seeks a "negative assurance" when appointments to senior management or boards are made. In no way does this relieve boards of their responsibilities.  Our outsourcing and local incorporation policies also reinforce that a bank's board must act in the interest of the New Zealand bank. The use of parent-bank systems, tools and techniques is of course permitted, but only with the full understanding and ownership of the local bank and board. The local bank board is responsible and accountable for all aspects of bank operations Some minor changes to the second pillar will take place at the end of March when several amendments to our disclosure requirements come into force. The amendments will facilitate banks' adoption of international financial reporting standards and make a number of other changes relating to earlier changes to banking supervision policy and the disclosure regime.  Basel II capital requirements have led to us reassessing aspects of the third pillar. We have decided to increase our emphasis on harmonisation with APRA when implementing the capital requirements of Basel II. Banks operating in New Zealand, and meeting certain criteria, will have the option to use the Internal Ratings Based and Advanced Measurement Approaches to calculating regulatory capital. The Reserve Bank is also developing a framework that will help it understand in more detail how banks are fulfilling their regulatory and supervisory requirements. Section 95 of the RBNZ Act gives the Reserve Bank the power to require a bank to provide us with a report by a Reserve Bank-approved, independent person. These reviews, the cost of which will be met by the banks themselves, are likely to investigate such issues as risk management, operational systems, and the nature of outsourcing. We have already exercised our section 95 powers in relation to one bank's outsourcing arrangements. 2 BIS Review 20/2005 
Crisis management It is very important that, when dealing with a troubled bank, the New Zealand authorities should have a range of options available that can prevent a wider systemic crisis. These can range from the power to give directions, through statutory management, through to liquidation or a full-blown rescue. To exercise any of these options, it is essential that the bank in question have the records, people and systems it needs to operate on a stand alone basis - that is, it must be a bank, not a shell of a bank.  We are putting a considerable amount of effort into securing our ability to manage a crisis, both by developing the Reserve Bank's crisis management capabilities, and by ensuring that there exists the legal and practical ability to continue to operate a failed bank via our local incorporation and outsourcing policies.  Simply stated, our local incorporation and outsourcing policies require that systemically-important banks in New Zealand be incorporated locally, and that they maintain the capacity to function on a stand-alone basis, if required. Without that capacity, there is a material risk of the banking system becoming dysfunctional in a banking crisis. The measures we are introducing to counter that risk have recently been affirmed by Standard and Poor's, who noted that they "could well enhance the strength of the New Zealand banking sector and its ability to withstand a period of financial stress".2 Outsourcing is a reality in today's world, where national borders are permeable and the business environment highly specialised. However, where systemically important banks are concerned, the Reserve Bank needs to be satisfied that any outsourcing undertaken does not compromise their legal, operational, or financial ability to meet their obligations. Although it has not been an issue to date, outsourcing could well become more of an issue for Australia over the next few years.  In November last year we released a paper for consultation, setting out the RBNZ's proposed outsourcing policy. We had already established principles for our proposed outsourcing policy and applied those to ANZ National Bank upon approval of its merger. The consultation paper formalised these principles and set out a policy framework for application to all systemic banks and some other categories of banks. Submissions on the discussion paper closed at the end of February and bank staff are currently working their way through those submissions. The outsourcing policy is very much outcomes-focussed, so individual banks can tailor a solution that best suits their situation and needs, while meeting our requirements. In this way costs can be minimised and a level playing field maintained. We intend to work closely with banks as they go about implementing the policy. There is no doubt that banks will incur some operational costs due to the outsourcing policy. However, we think these costs will be small and manageable, especially relative to Australian banks' annual gross revenue, profits, and the potential costs of a bank failure, despite the claims in the media to the contrary.  Much of the public debate around the outsourcing policy has focussed on direct operational costs and thus the relatively small loss in productive efficiency that may occur. However, there are other aspects to efficiency to consider also, including allocative and dynamic responses. For example, our outsourcing policy could lead to better capital allocation due to more local decision making capacity, as well as systems that are more flexible and responsive to local needs. These aspects are especially important for the growth of small to medium size enterprises that dominate the New Zealand business landscape. Such benefits could accrue to bank shareholders and customers, as well as the wider New Zealand economy. At the heart of the Reserve Bank's crisis management work is the development of a crisis management toolkit that will provide tools, policies and procedures to guide the high-stakes decisions supervisors would have to make under very tight time frames.  Crisis management can be thought of as having two phases. Phase one is the very short period, perhaps a day or two, immediately following the discovery that a bank is in severe distress. It involves decisions around whether and how to get the bank solvent and operating again. Phase two is the potentially lengthy subsequent period, during which it must be decided what to do with the bank over                                                       2  Standard and Poor's Ratings Direct, "Robust local operations and strong parents fortify credit quality of New Zealand banks, despite profit moderation", 28 July 2004. BIS Review 20/2005 3 
the long term. It involves decisions around the bank's value and long term ownership. It is important to have options for the initial phase that avoid destroying future economic value or squandering tax-payer money, or that ultimately reduce the options in phase two.  Perhaps the most original of the tools we have been exploring for phase one is Bank Creditor Recapitalisation or BCR, which could enable the Reserve Bank to respond to a bank failure in a way that avoided or minimised costs to the taxpayer, while still maintaining systemic stability. Essentially, it involves applying a "haircut" to depositors and other creditors to recapitalise the bank, and then quickly making available to depositors the non-haircut portion of their deposits.  BCR addresses some of the same issues as deposit insurance, which is currently receiving attention in Australia, in that it quickly restores liquidity for depositors. However, with BCR the costs of imprudent risk management and monitoring are borne by depositors, management and shareholders, thus reinforcing the market and self-discipline that underpins our regulatory culture. Much has been done to advance this project, including pilot testing of some IT prepositioning at one of the major banks. We are confident that, from an IT technical perspective, a BCR approach is likely to be feasible. However, substantial work remains to be done and no decision has yet been taken to formally adopt it as a crisis management tool.  Regarding the bank `work out' phase, we are developing our thinking on other failure management options, such as good bank/bad bank split, partial sale of failed banks' assets and liabilities, government bail-out, and industry support. Although these are well known, almost garden variety, options for dealing with a bank failure, putting in place the decision-making frameworks, policies and procedures that will facilitate effective, low cost management of a bank crisis is a big job.  The trans-Tasman dimension As I made mention of at the beginning, New Zealand is very dependent on foreign capital, and the bulk of this foreign capital is intermediated through a predominantly Australian-owned banking sector. This industry and geographic concentration of foreign ownership in one country makes the New Zealand banking sector quite unique.  As you will be aware, home and host countries undertake their banking supervision roles and responsibilities within the framework of home-host supervision set out in the Basel Concordat. The Concordat emphasises the general responsibility of home country authorities to supervise banks' worldwide consolidated activities, as well as the host country responsibility to supervise foreign bank establishments in their territories as individual institutions.  Our emphasis on market and self discipline and our less prescriptive regulation has led to New Zealand's supervisory and regulatory activity neatly complementing that of APRA and the other home supervisors with whom we share banks. In fact, we feel that New Zealand leads the world in home/host dovetailing from the host viewpoint within the very general framework provided by the Basel concordat.  When it is done well, both home and host supervisors can benefit in obvious ways from each other's supervision. In New Zealand, we openly acknowledge the benefit that our financial system derives from the role played by APRA, and the other home-country regulators. However, we are also keenly aware that the interests of home and host supervisors can and do diverge, and that these divergences lead to differences in the style and substance of supervision and regulation. Moreover, these differences are likely to manifest themselves most sharply in the very pressured circumstances that a distressed bank brings. Such differences include: • Different statutory objectives. For example some supervisors have depositor protection as their main objective, while others have soundness and stability.  • How capital should be allocated. Each supervisory authority would like to see as much capital reside within its own jurisdiction as possible.  • How risk should be allocated. Each supervisory authority would prefer that the risk resides outside its own system.  • Each supervisory authority is only responsible for financial stability in its own system. The effects on the financial systems of other jurisdictions of any actions taken to manage a bank failure in one's own jurisdiction are likely to be considered second order.  4 BIS Review 20/2005 
• Different views on appropriate techniques for responding to bank stress.  • Different perceptions of when a crisis is systemic - a particular risk when the subsidiary plays a much larger role in the host system than the parent plays in the home system.  • Each system may also be subject to different destabilising influences. These differences are not straightforward to resolve when there is a largely bilateral relationship between home and host countries, of the kind faced by New Zealand. For these reasons, and in the absence of any fair and formalised, operationally and legally robust, international framework, a host authority would not purely rely on the home authority to protect the host financial system. All supervisors' actions are ultimately bounded by the legislation under which they operate. And in the midst of a crisis situation there is no room to negotiate legal boundaries. That said, we also recognise that the most effective response to a cross-border crisis would desirably involve very close cooperation and coordination between the home and host authorities. To this end the RBNZ has been active in pursuing closer cooperation with APRA. We have had for some time Memoranda of Understanding with APRA and the Financial Services Authority in the UK that allow for the sharing of supervisory information. However, a number of other cooperative measures have been undertaken recently: • We have initiated a secondment strategy of senior staff members between APRA and the Bank. We believe that we can learn from one another.  • We have established a terms of engagement with APRA so that we can dovetail our Basel II implementation initiatives.  • We are assessing all of our requirements of banks under the Basel Core Principles (BCP) so as to best ensure we have a single set of regulatory `rules' where possible and sensible.  • We have agreed to share visits to Australian-owned banks on either side of the Tasman with APRA staff. The RBNZ has agreed with APRA a Terms of Engagement for Basel II implementation. The Terms of Engagement sets out the RBNZ's and APRA's intent to implement Basel II in a such a way that each supervisor's right to set its own minimum levels of capital is maintained, while at the same time seeking to reduce compliance costs where possible. It also requires that the RBNZ and APRA will conduct supervisory reviews of banks operating in both jurisdictions in a way that makes use of each supervisor's comparative advantage. This will involve joint sharing of information on, and recognition of, supervisory tools used and reviews undertaken.  In February, New Zealand's Minister of Finance and the Australian Treasurer announced the formation of a Trans-Tasman Council on Banking Supervision to consist of the respective Reserve Banks and Treasuries, and APRA. This council will be represented at the highest level within the member institutions. Its main role will be the monitoring and coordinating of trans-Tasman home-host regulatory issues.  The council is not based on statute. Rather its role is that of monitoring and advice, with reporting duties to the relevant Ministers. A key goal for the Council is to promote the maximum coordination, cooperation and harmonisation of trans-Tasman bank regulation where sensible, so as to best minimise compliance costs. Preliminary work is underway at the moment for the first meeting of the council, which is scheduled to happen soon. The first key output of the Council is to report to Ministers in late May on any legislative changes that may be required to ensure APRA and RBNZ can support each other in the performance of their current regulatory responsibilities at least regulatory cost.  There are other significant early gains that could be made for the Council over the coming year. For example, we anticipate good progress on the home-host coordinated implementation of Basel II that I outlined in the Terms of Engagement earlier. We also think good progress can be made on gaining a clearer understanding of trans-Tasman bank failure management strategies and coordination. We look forward to building the trans-Tasman regulatory community based on the principles of cooperation and harmonisation. But, we will also work diligently to continue developing the capacity to preserve New Zealand's systemic financial interests.  BIS Review 20/2005 5 
Conclusion Overall, the strong presence of foreign banks has brought many benefits to New Zealand in terms of soundness and efficiency. It has enhanced risk management capacity within the banking system, facilitated the entry of new banking products and services, and reduced the financial system's vulnerability to domestic economic shocks. However, along with the many benefits it brings, having an open, foreign-owned banking system also increases the chances of our financial system being adversely impacted by off-shore developments.  The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is developing and maintaining the ability to deal with troubled banks in a way that is fiscally responsible, and that causes minimal disruption to real activity.  We are also actively engaging with our trans-Tasman counterparts, and are optimistic about the opportunities the trans-Tasman Council and further harmonisation might offer.  6 BIS Review 20/2005 
I J Macfarlane: Gresham’s Law of Payments Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the AIBF Industry Forum 2005, Sydney, 23 March 2005. *      *      * I suppose I should start by explaining why I have chosen this title for my talk today.  Gresham's Law is usually stated simply as 'the bad currency drives out the good' and it refers to a time when all transactions used coins. If you had to buy one pound's worth of merchandise and you had two coins – one which you knew contained one pound's worth of gold and another where some of the gold had been shaved off – you would pass the second coin and keep the first one. In that way, most of the transactions would take place using the inferior transaction medium and the superior one would play a minor role. Note that this can occur only if both the inferior and superior transaction medium were accepted at the same price, or in modern parlance, the price signals were not getting through to the users.  Having introduced this quaint historical economic law, I would now like to put it aside for a moment and move on to the main subject of my talk today, which is the regulation of the retail payments system. As you are probably aware, the Payments System Board of the Reserve Bank, of which I am the Chairman, is charged by an act of Parliament with responsibility for the efficiency, competition and safety of the payments system. This is quite a daunting task, and has involved us in an enormous amount of research and consultation on payments system issues, some controversy with payments system providers and, to a lesser extent, with some payments system users.  Most of us at the Reserve Bank come from a background in economics and hence have a predisposition in favour of free markets and a sceptical attitude towards intervention in those markets unless there is a clearly defined economic rationale for it. After much analysis and discussion, we came to the view some time ago that there was, in fact, an overwhelming case for regulation of some parts of this market, and that competition, such as it was, would not lead to an optimal outcome in terms of the public benefit. In my remarks this afternoon I would like to set out why this is so and, in the process, I hope it will become clear why I introduced this talk by referring to Sir Thomas Gresham and his famous law.  There are five basic ways of making a payment in the Australian retail payments system: with cash, cheque, credit card, debit card (EFTPOS) and electronic transfer. When we looked at how these methods of payment were evolving, we saw that credit cards were growing faster than the other means of payment. This was initially somewhat surprising as credit card transactions are more expensive than most other means of payment – that is, they involve a larger payment from the users of the payments system to the providers of the payments system. In effect, what was happening was that the most expensive way of paying was driving out the cheaper ways and, in the process, raising the average cost of the Australian retail payments system. Why was this possible?  We concluded this was because there was an asymmetry between the price signals (and the capacity to act on them) faced by the two classes of payments system users – the cardholders and the merchants. For cardholders, the price signal they received was that credit card transactions were free, or could even result in receiving a payment in the form of 'points'. Furthermore, cardholders were able to act on this signal as they were the party that chose the method of payment at the point of sale. Merchants, on the other hand, received a signal that the credit card was the most expensive way of making a payment (via the merchant service fee that was paid to their bank). But merchants had no power to influence the method of payment for the transaction – for that was in the hands of the cardholder. Thus, the incentives in the system were designed to encourage the decision-maker to choose the form of payment that was the most expensive from the perspective of society as a whole.  Now it could be argued that merchants could have refused to accept credit cards in the first place. But that would have been a big decision, and the fact is that most merchants felt that they would forgo too many sales if they had taken that path (particularly if their competitors did not). They did not feel that they had much bargaining power vis-à-vis the credit card schemes and the banks. And until our recent reforms, they did not have the power to 'pass on' the merchant service fee to the customer, that is, BIS Review 20/2005 1 
employ the 'user pays' principle by insisting that if customers use an expensive means of payment they should pay more than if they use a cheaper one. Merchants now have that power as a result of our reforms, but in most cases they are reluctant to use it as the public have become accustomed to the old system and thus often resist the transition to 'user pays'.  In short, the asymmetry in price signals is still there despite our efforts to redress the imbalance by 'empowering the merchants'. It is this asymmetry which is at the heart of the process whereby the more expensive means of payment expands at the expense of the less expensive.  The mechanism that allows the asymmetry to be exploited is the system of fees that banks in the payments system pay one another – commonly known as interchange fees. In the case of credit cards, the fee is paid from the merchant's bank to the cardholder's bank on each transaction. These fees play an important role in determining the prices charged to both merchants and cardholders for payment services, yet they are not subject to the normal competitive forces that operate in most other markets. To the extent that competitive forces work at all, they perversely have had two effects: • they have encouraged the high-interchange-fee means of payment to grow at the expense of the low-interchange-fee one;  • they have tended to push interchange fees up for the competing systems, not down.  In this respect, the Australian experience is not unique. There are many examples around the world where these two effects are evident.  I would like to illustrate this process by drawing on three examples, two of which are from the United States and the third from Australia. I am using US examples, not because examples do not exist elsewhere, but simply because legal cases in the United States have shone the spotlight on interchange fees more intensely than has been the case elsewhere, and because in many other countries interchange fees remain closely guarded secrets.  Competition Between Credit Card Schemes  The first example relates to the interchange fees in the MasterCard and Visa credit card systems in the United States, where over the past decade there have been a series of competitive increases in these fees (Graph 1). There is an incentive for each scheme to raise its interchange fee in order to encourage banks to issue its cards because the higher fee provides the issuing bank with more revenue. The issuing banks in turn use the revenue to attract cardholders away from the scheme with the lower fee by offering cardholders more attractive pricing or more 'reward points'. Once one of the schemes raised interchange fees to give itself an advantage in attracting issuers and cardholders, the other responded in the same way. The result has been that competition amongst the schemes has seen fees increase from under 1.3 per cent in 1994 to 1.65 per cent today – a perverse outcome to anyone with an economics background who expects competition to lower prices. I might add that this is three times the average level of interchange fees in Australia following the Reserve Bank's reforms in 2003.  2 BIS Review 20/2005 
Graph 1    Of course the increase in US interchange fees has to be paid for by somebody. And, in the first instance, that somebody is the merchant, since interchange fees are built into the merchant service fee (what the merchant's bank charges it for processing credit card transactions). Not surprisingly, average merchant service fees have increased broadly in line with the increase in interchange fees since the mid 1990s.  The end result is that merchants have to bear the extra costs of the competition between the credit card schemes. But, of course, the story does not stop here. Ultimately, higher merchant costs flow through into higher prices for the customers of those merchants. This is a cost borne by all consumers whether they use a credit card or not.  Competition Between Debit Card Schemes  There is a similar story in the competition between two types of debit card systems in the United States. In one system, operated mainly as regional networks, transactions are authorised by PIN (the PIN-based systems), while in the other, operated by Visa and MasterCard, transactions are authorised by signature (the scheme-based systems).  The interchange fee paid by the merchant's bank to issuing banks is much higher in the scheme-based systems than the PIN-based systems (Graph 2). As a result, issuing banks have been switching to the scheme-based systems and their share of the market has increased from 45 per cent to 60 per cent over the past decade (Graph 2). The PIN-based schemes have retaliated to some extent, and their interchange fees have more than doubled over the decade, although they are still well below the scheme-based systems' interchange fees. Once again, interchange fees have encouraged the growth of the relatively expensive payments system at the expense of the lower-cost system, and forced the lower-cost scheme to raise the price that is charged to merchants.  BIS Review 20/2005 3 
Graph 2        There is an interesting additional twist to this story, and it concerns the question of why the merchants of America allowed this to happen? Why didn't they resist more strongly the inroads into their profits caused by the expansion of the expensive system? Partly, of course, it was because they could pass the costs on to consumers in the form of higher prices, but there was an additional factor at work. This was the 'tie-in' arrangement imposed by Visa and MasterCard that forced any merchant accepting their credit cards to also accept their debit cards.  By the mid 1990s, the merchants had become so upset by this rule that they took the credit card schemes to court – in what became known as the Wal-Mart case – arguing that the rule breached anti-trust laws. In April 2003, the case was finally settled, with Visa and MasterCard agreeing to abolish the rule, reduce the interchange fee, and pay damages of $3 billion to the merchants.  Credit and Debit Cards in Australia  This brings me back to where I started. In Australia, prior to the Bank's recent reforms, the average interchange fee for a $100 transaction paid to a credit cardholder's bank was 95 cents. In the Australian EFTPOS/debit card system,1 the interchange fee flows in the opposite direction and the cardholder's bank has to pay around 20 cents per transaction to the merchant's bank (Graph 3). Given these flows, it is clear why card issuing banks wanted to issue credit cards rather than EFTPOS cards – they received $1.15 more for each $100 transaction.                                                        1  Debit cards can be used to make purchases via the EFTPOS system or to withdraw cash from ATMs. In the following account of the Australian case, I will employ the widely-used term EFTPOS rather than debit card. I will ignore the other type of debit card – the Visa debit – because that has a separate set of characteristics, some of which are under separate regulatory review. 4 BIS Review 20/2005 
During the mid 1990s, the Australian banks worked hard at developing reward schemes (largely financed by their interchange fee receipts) to encourage cardholders to use credit cards. Reward points, together with interest-free credit, meant that many cardholders were being paid 1 per cent or more of the value of each transaction by credit card.  Not surprisingly, there was a big shift towards credit cards, with transaction numbers growing at 20 to 30 per cent for around five years, while EFTPOS growth fell to less than 10 per cent per year. As with the US experience, a higher-cost payments system was displacing a lower-cost one, and the community's resources devoted to making payments increased.  Graph 3     One of the longer-term aims of our reforms is to reduce the distortions in the payments system caused by the pattern of interchange fees. If large differences in the fees in the credit card and EFTPOS systems continue, it is hard to see why in the long run banks would continue to put resources into promoting the EFTPOS system. This is why we think that the merchants who oppose our EFTPOS reforms are extremely short-sighted. Without the proposed reforms, we could see a gradual withering away of the EFTPOS system, so that the merchants would face a larger and larger proportion of their sales taking place using the higher-cost credit card system.  Back to Gresham's Law  It is pretty obvious by now where Gresham's Law fits into my account, so I hardly need to spell it out. Instead of the bad currency driving out the good, we have the high-cost means of payment driving out the low-cost one. To take the most obvious example, a credit card offers the same service to a merchant – irrevocable payment – as a debit card, yet costs the merchant a lot more. To the cardholder, the credit card offers more – about 50 days free credit – yet it costs less, with the cardholder often receiving payment for using it. Clearly, the second condition for Gresham's Law is met, namely that the price signals to the decision-maker do not reflect the underlying costs, that is the “user pays” principle is not being applied. This tendency for competition to favour the high-cost product BIS Review 20/2005 5 
seems to be a feature of card-based systems around the world and explains the increasing attention given to the system by competition regulators.  Before I finish, I would like to reassure you that in some other parts of the retail payments system, the normal laws of economics are leading to the normal results. The cheque provides the best illustration of this. All over the world the cheque – universally acknowledged as a relatively high-cost means of payment – is in decline, replaced by more efficient forms of electronic payment. The most important reason for this is that banks at both ends of the payments chain are charging their customers for the costs of writing and depositing cheques. So the “user pays” principle works well in this case, but of course, there are no interchange fees.  At the Reserve Bank, we are in favour of a retail payments system that provides users with a wide choice of options from a wide range of providers. Each payments method has its strengths and weaknesses, and so users should be able to choose the most suitable payments method for each particular type of transaction. In some cases the pricing of the transaction enables them to do so in a manner which contributes to an efficient low-cost retail payments system, while in some other cases it does not. The best way of improving efficiency is usually to increase competition rather than to regulate, but I think I have shown that some parts of the retail payments system are constructed in such a way that competition increases costs and reduces efficiency. In those areas, regulation is required, and the Reserve Bank through the Payments System Board will continue with its task of improving efficiency, competition and safety of the retail payments system.  6 BIS Review 20/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: The success of the euro and its impact on European companies Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Congress on Small-sized Enterprises, organised by Confindustria, Bari, 18 March 2005. *      *      * Signore, Signori, è per me un grande piacere contribuire oggi al dibattito sulle sfide poste alle imprese italiane ed europee dalla crescente concorrenza internazionale. Circa centoquaranta anni fa Italia, Francia, Belgio e Svizzera diedero vita all’Unione monetaria latina al fine di accrescere la concorrenza, gli scambi commerciali e, in ultima analisi, il benessere. L’unione si fondava sull’accettazione reciproca delle monete in oro e in argento dei rispettivi paesi. L’esperimento tuttavia fallì. Dopo un lungo periodo di forti oscillazioni del valore relativo delle monete, accompagnate da elevata instabilità macroeconomica nei paesi aderenti, l’Unione monetaria latina venne sciolta al termine della prima guerra mondiale. Quale lezione possiamo trarre da questa prima esperienza? E quali sono state le carenze di questo progetto? A mio avviso mancavano quattro elementi fondamentali: stabilità politica, un mercato comune, criteri di convergenza e una banca centrale comune. Per la realizzazione dell’Unione monetaria latina non era stato svolto alcun preparativo sul piano macroeconomico e fiscale, né era stata creata una banca centrale comune che mettesse in atto le più basilari misure di controllo valutario congiunto. A ottantacinque anni dalla fine dell’unione possiamo affermare di avere imparato dall’esperienza passata. In un quadro caratterizzato da stabilità politica, quaranta anni di integrazione economica, commerciale e finanziaria hanno aperto la strada all’Unione monetaria europea.  Stabilità dei prezzi e solide politiche di bilancio hanno costituito il fondamento dell’Unione monetaria negli ultimi sei anni e vanno pertanto preservate anche in futuro. Quest’oggi mi soffermerò in primo luogo su quelli che considero i principali successi dell’euro per le imprese europee e, più in generale, per i cittadini europei. In estrema sintesi, stabilità macroeconomica, integrazione finanziaria ed efficienza economica rappresentano importanti conquiste dell’Unione monetaria, indispensabili al fine di promuovere la crescita economica e la creazione di occupazione da parte delle imprese europee.  In secondo luogo, mi soffermerò sulle aree che necessitano ancora di riforme volte a migliorare la competitività e quindi a favorire una crescita economica sostenibile. La stabilità monetaria e un contesto economico più aperto, efficiente e concorrenziale richiedono importanti iniziative complementari da parte dei responsabili delle politiche economiche nazionali. Mi riferisco al bisogno urgente di completare il processo di attuazione delle riforme strutturali, principalmente nei mercati del lavoro, dei beni e servizi e dei capitali.  Inizio ora a illustrare i principali successi dell’euro realizzati finora. Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to be here today in order to contribute to the debate on the challenges that Italian and European enterprises are currently facing with respect to increasing global competition. To enhance competition, trade and ultimately welfare, about 140 years ago Italy, France, Belgium and Switzerland gave birth to the Latin Monetary Union. This monetary union was based on the mutual acceptance of each other’s gold and silver coins. That experiment failed. After a long period of strong fluctuations in the relative values of gold and silver, combined with high macroeconomic instability across the member countries, the Latin Monetary Union was finally dismantled by the end of World War I. Can we learn something from this early experience? What was missing? In my view there were four key missing ingredients, namely, political stability, a Common Market, the existence of convergence criteria and a common central bank. No macroeconomic and fiscal preparations were made before the start of the Latin Monetary Union, no common central bank was in place to exert even the simplest measures of joint monitoring over currency issues. 85 years after the end of that regime we had clearly learnt our lessons. BIS Review 20/2005 1 
In a framework characterized by political stability, a history of 40 years of economic, trade and financial integration had paved the way for the European Monetary Union.  The stability oriented macroeconomic framework, based on price stability and sound fiscal policies, has been the basis of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) in the past six years, and we should keep this framework in place in the future. Today I will first discuss in some detail what I see as the main successes of the euro for European enterprises and more in general for European citizens. Macroeconomic stability, financial integration and economic efficiency have been key achievements of EMU. These achievements are of utmost importance for enhancing lasting growth and employment creation of European companies.  Secondly I will reflect on the areas which still require reforms in order to raise competitiveness and ultimately economic growth in a sustainable manner. Monetary stability and a more open, efficient and competitive economic environment require important complementary initiatives by national policy makers. I am referring to the urgent need to complete the process of structural reforms, chiefly in the labour, product and capital markets.  Let me start with the key successes of the euro to date. Successes of the euro Six years after the start of EMU, we can already count successes on a number of fronts. First, the success of the euro was a technical success. The integration of money markets enabled a smooth implementation of the single monetary policy from early January 1999. The transformation of European financial markets brought about by the euro has been remarkable. The global trend of closer financial market integration witnessed in the past decade has received a distinct additional boost by the introduction of the euro in EMU countries. The introduction of the euro has dismantled barriers to cross-border trading and enhanced risk sharing and opportunities for diversification. The elimination of exchange rate risk has increased the depth and breadth of financial markets and boosted financial innovation. Government bond yields have become nearly perfectly correlated in the euro area. There is also evidence of closer integration of stock markets in the euro area than elsewhere1. The euro had a particularly significant impact on the European market for corporate bonds, with a considerable increase in the number of medium-sized firms placing issues outside their home country. Financial deepening has of course benefited the Italian markets as well. In Italy, between 1999 and 2003 the volume of funds raised directly on the financial markets by firms issuing shares, bonds and other instruments grew from 31 billion to 65 billion euro. Over the same period the amount of Italian households’ financial wealth held in the form of corporate securities increased from 22 to 36% of GDP. Financial integration has facilitated the consolidation of financial structures, thereby increasing cross-border corporate linkages. In recent years, large flows of foreign direct investment among euro area countries have exemplified this intensification of corporate linkages.  The second key success of the euro relates to the convergence of long-term market interest rates towards those of the best performers in terms of credibility and low interest rates. In most countries, including Italy, this convergence has meant significantly reduced financing costs, thereby providing an environment favourable to growth and employment. Thanks to the stability oriented macroeconomic policy framework, focusing on price stability and on sound fiscal policies, - that is the two missing elements of the Latin Monetary Union - risk premia have declined and inflation expectations have stabilized at low levels. Today, the euro area economy benefits from benchmark long-term market interest rates below 4%, a level which most issuers have never seen in the last fifty years. In Italy the 10-year interest rate spread versus the best performers fell from 4.5 percentage points at the beginning of 1996 to 0.3 percentage points at the beginning of 1998 and to 0.2 percentage points at the end of 2004 [see Chart 1]. These two major achievements must be maintained by today’s and future economic policy making.                                                        1  Robin Brooks and Marco Del Negro (2002), “International stock returns and market integration: a regional perspective”, IMF Working Paper WP/02/202. 2 BIS Review 20/2005 
As a third point I would like to mention the improved resilience of the euro area economies against financial crises that the euro has brought about. Also in this respect, European corporations and, amongst them, Italian enterprises have largely benefited from the single currency. Italy as well as many other European countries experienced several episodes of large exchange rate and interest rate volatility between the 1970s and the mid-1990s. Without the single currency, events in recent years - such as the turbulence that followed the September 11 terrorist attacks or the swings in global exchange and stock markets - would have triggered major turbulences in Europe as a whole and in many euro area economies, including Italy. This, of course, does not mean that external factors have no longer been an important driving force in determining the economic performance of the EMU countries in recent years. However, euro area economies proved to be more resilient to external shocks in the 2001-2003 downturn, which were mainly caused by a correction of stock market prices and financial instability, than to the external shocks in the downturn of the early 1990s, which were mainly driven by exchange rates volatility.  Fourth, let me highlight the convergence of inflation rates to low levels across euro area countries thanks to the adoption of stability-oriented macroeconomic policies. A remarkable convergence among euro area member states took already place over the 1990s, triggered by the preparations for EMU, and this process has continued in the years after the start of the EMU. Measured by the standard deviation, the dispersion of inflation rates has more than halved in the period 1999-2004 with respect to the years preceding the monetary union. Low and stable inflation has been a fundamental achievement for the euro area as a whole as well as for Italy. Italian inflation was 4% in 1996 while in the countries that are now part of the euro area it was on average equal to 2.3%. In subsequent years Italy saw a significant reduction in its inflation gap vis-à-vis the euro area average, despite many adverse shocks that hit both Italy and the euro area in recent years [see Chart 2]. Between 1999 and 2004 Italy inflation averaged at 2.4% and euro area inflation at 2%.  Between 2001 and 2003 Italy saw a sizeable increase of perceived inflation [see Chart 3]. The concept of perceived inflation aims to measure changes in the inflation rate which consumers think that have occurred in the recent past. Usually we can observe a good correlation between the behaviour of actual and perceived inflation, which means that consumers have a relatively correct perception about the changes in their purchasing power. In Italy and in some other countries the patterns of actual inflation and perceived inflation started to diverge after the introduction of the euro. While this is a feature which should not be ignored, since what consumers decide to spend depends on their perceived real income, it is now important to acknowledge that it was a temporary phenomenon, and that during the last year and half the gap between actual and perceived inflation has narrowed significantly.  Notwithstanding the many adverse shocks that hit the euro area in the past years, price stability has prevailed in the euro area. The success of the single currency in delivering price stability and stabilizing inflation expectations in the euro area can be explained by the European institutional framework and the principles followed by the European Central Bank. First, the European Central Bank is independent and has a clearly defined mandate given by the Treaty to pursue price stability. Second, the ECB has provided and made public an arithmetical definition of price stability corresponding to inflation rates below and close to 2%. Third, the medium-term orientation and the very nature of our concept of monetary policy contributes to a solid anchoring of medium and long term inflation expectations, in line with our definition of price stability.  The best contribution that monetary policy can provide to economic growth is to maintain price stability. Price stability ensures the transparency of the relative price mechanism, thus enhancing the efficiency of resource allocation. Stable and low inflation supports private consumption via its positive impact on the real value of households’ income and wealth. Price stability reduces the borrowing costs for individuals and firms. As we all know, inflation erodes the purchasing power of the nominal return on long-term loan contracts or bonds. In case of high and uncertain inflation, savers or those who lend their liquid funds would require a higher rate of return from borrowers, in order to compensate for the higher risks related to the uncertainty about future inflation. This inflation risk premium implies that in an economy with high inflation, less investment projects will be profitable. In such circumstances, capital accumulation will be lower than it could have been in a situation of price stability and the potential output growth rate is consequently reduced.  BIS Review 20/2005 3 
The challenge of economic growth Let me now turn to some issues which still need to be addressed. The Economic and Monetary Union has secured macroeconomic stability, has promoted financial integration and led to convergence of inflation and interest rates to low levels. The key question that naturally arises is the following: Why has economic growth, nonetheless, remained subdued? In my introduction I have already hinted at my answer by referring to the need for completing structural reforms. Let me now elaborate further on this urgency.  The first message I would like to convey is that the need to raise economic growth in a sustainable manner is a common challenge for most of the euro area countries and for the euro area as a whole. The need to introduce supply side changes, aimed at boosting potential output growth is a common challenge to most European countries. Over the last decade real GDP growth has averaged just 2.1% in the euro area [see Table 1], significantly below the 3.4% growth rate of the US. The second point I would like to make is that competitiveness is a key driver of sustainable growth. In recent years euro area companies have been facing stronger external competition, especially from low-cost producers in the very dynamic Asian economies, but also from those in the new EU Member States. It is the reason why unit labour costs are such an important indicator, particularly in a single currency area. Let us look at Italy as an example but there are many others in the euro area. In Italy nominal unit labour costs in the total economy and especially in the manufacturing sector - the most export oriented sector - have grown significantly faster than in the euro area as a whole. Let me just mention a couple of figures. Over the last six years, in Italy the cumulated growth rate of unit labour cost in the manufacturing sector was equal to 15.7% against a euro area average of 3.1% [see Table 2a]. What has been driving the strong rises in unit labour costs? On the one hand the cumulated growth rate of compensation per employee has been equal to 16.7%, on the other hand the cumulated growth rate of labour productivity has been equal to 1.1%. There seems to be something in the wage mechanism that prevents compensation developments from following more closely productivity developments. Besides this problem, such protracted weak labour productivity growth needs to be related to intrinsic difficulties in using labour and capital efficiently, possibly due to a lack of innovation. Why is that happening? A number of recent comprehensive reports2, notably by the Banca d’Italia, ISTAT, Confindustria, and various Italian think-tanks, have emphasized a broad range of institutional and economic factors behind the Italian labour productivity-competitiveness problem. Some of them are discussed at your conference today and tomorrow. These factors include rigidities in product and labour markets, features of the financial system and corporate governance, low spending on research and development.  All these factors have certainly worked against the efforts of Italian enterprises to increase their size and to improve competitiveness by renewing their products and reallocating resources towards new, more dynamic sectors3 [see Chart 4].  The lack of innovation might be partially related to the small-size of firms, which continues to be a predominant feature of the Italian industrial system. In that regard the business environment continues to create obstacles to firm-size expansion and to the entry of new and more efficient firms, thus hampering productivity growth. The costs of opening and closing a business as well as the time required to complete the legal processes involved in enforcing contracts remains well-above the euro area average4 [see Table 3].  These considerations bring me to my third and final point: structural rigidities have slowed European firms’ responses to structural changes in the production process. As a result, and in contrast to more flexible economies in the international sphere, many economies in Europe have not fully reaped the benefits of the technological advances of the last ten to fifteen years. Many European countries have not adapted their economic, social and legal frameworks in order to face the new challenges triggered by a rapidly transforming world economy.                                                       2  Banca d’Italia (2004), “Relazione del Governatore sull‘esercizio 2003”, Roma, May 2004. Banca d’Italia (2005), “Bollettino Economico”, n.44, March 2005. Pierluigi Ciocca, (2003), “The Italian Economy: a Problem of Growth”, Banca d’Italia, Economic Bulletin, 37, 145-158, November. ISTAT (2004), “Rapporto Annuale: la situazione del Paese nel 2003”, ISTAT, Roma, May. 3  Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (2001), “La competitività dell’Italia”, Speech held at the Congress on Small-sized enterprises, Parma, 17 March. 4  World Bank (2004), Doing Business Indicators. 4 BIS Review 20/2005 
A sense of urgency to implement structural reforms was transmitted to European policy-makers last February when the European Commission proposed a “Partnership for Growth and Jobs”5 as the core of a renewed Lisbon strategy, by putting forward a program of priority actions. These priority actions can be summarized under three key headings: (1) to extend and deepen the Single Market; (2) to build better infrastructure, motivate investment in research and development and facilitate innovation; (3) to attract more people into employment, improve the flexibility of labour markets and invest more in human capital through better education and skills. Let me further elaborate on this priority list. The objective of extending and deepening the Single Market would imply to eliminate market entry barriers in national regulations which continue to hamper competition. This objective would also require improving national and European regulations in terms of simplification, well shaped legislation and effort to reduce the burden of administrative costs. The need of fostering knowledge and innovation would require more effective public expenditure and more favourable incentives for companies to engage in innovation and Research and Development. The need of attracting more people to employment would imply in many countries a “re-thinking” about the current mix of tax and benefit systems, which continue to provide disincentives to take up work or to work longer hours. Furthermore, measures to make wage growth reflect more strongly regional and sectoral productivity differences would certainly be helpful. The European Central Bank strongly welcomes these proposals. They are fully in line with our own views. Indeed, the drivers of success are innovation, productivity enhancement and employment growth and all measures should be directed to achieve these results. Some European countries that are ahead in the process of adopting such changes show that these reforms are able to deliver higher output and employment growth. Not only would these reforms raise potential economic growth, but they would also make the European economies more flexible and thereby strengthen the resilience against economic shocks. This in turn would facilitate the pursuit of stability oriented macroeconomic policies. Concluding remarks Ladies and gentlemen, you are gathered here to discuss the way ahead in order to increase competitiveness and economic growth. In conclusion, let me once again stress that the maintenance of price stability, low medium and long term market interest rates, thanks to this stability, and financial integration are key successes of the Economic and Monetary Union as well as fundamentals conditions to enhance sustainable economic growth, employment creation and welfare. In order to reap the full benefits of the single currency and to cope with global competitive pressures, a truly dynamic economic environment needs to be put firmly in place. Be assured that the European Central Bank backs the drive towards reforms that is in motion in Europe since the Lisbon consensus in 2000. The European Central Bank backs the renewed Lisbon strategy and the Governments of Europe that are embarking courageously on those structural reforms. We do not underestimate the difficulties of the task and the necessity to explain tirelessly to the people of Europe that all will be better off thanks to these reforms. We consider we have to fully participate in this pedagogic exercise.  Thank you for your attention.                                                        5  European Commission (2005), “Working together for growth and jobs. A new start for the Lisbon Strategy”, Communication to the Spring European Council, February. BIS Review 20/2005 5 
6 BIS Review 20/2005 
BIS Review 20/2005 7 
 8 BIS Review 20/2005 
Radovan Jelasic: 121-year anniversary of the National Bank of Serbia Speech by Mr Radovan Jelasic, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the occasion of the 121-year anniversary of the National Bank of Serbia, Belgrade, 16 March 2005. *      *      * Dear ladies and gentlemen, honoured guests, On this day, exactly 121 years ago, the Privileged National Bank of Serbia obtained the licence to operate as Serbia’s central banking institution in charge of domestic money, or, to cite the words used in the Law on its foundation, the bank has been founded “with a view to upgrading trade and economy in the Kingdom of Serbia by means of inexpensive capital and well-regulated credit.” Celebrating its anniversary, the National Bank of Serbia has enriched its museum exhibition of the numismatic collection of coins and banknotes that originated and have been in use on the territory of Serbia since the seventh century B.C. to the present day by another interesting exhibition, “Dinar – Our Money”, which will be open for public as of today, here in the NBS building in the Kralja Petra Street. In addition to banknotes and coins from our recent and remote history, we also exhibited a selection of foreign and domestic banknotes in higher denominations, showing both the original banknotes and their counterfeits. The visitors to this part of the exhibition will be afforded an opportunity to compare the former with the latter, and become acquainted with security features incorporated in banknotes, in order to reduce the risk of their ever owning counterfeits. We have thus exhibited banknotes and their respective counterfeits in denominations of 1,000 and 5,000 dinars, and foreign banknotes in denominations of 200 and 500 euros. The exhibited “super dollar”, a 100-dollar banknote, produced with a high degree of success, as well as the 200-euro “super euro”, another significantly “improved” counterfeit, indicate to what extent technological development has contributed to the upgrading of counterfeits, adding to the difficulty of recognizing the foregoing. Although the share of counterfeit dinars remains low, at only 0.05 percent relative to the total number of banknotes in circulation, we, at NBS, would like to offer assistance to citizens in this respect as well, so that they should be able to protect themselves more efficiently against the reception of counterfeit money, as well as with a view to contributing to a still faster spreading of electronic forms of payment. This all the more so since counterfeiters today have no limits, while counterfeit dinar and euro banknotes may enter the country from all over the world. By preserving the stability and the strength of the national currency, Serbia ought to prove that it can successfully go through the transition phase, however demanding and difficult it may be, and qualify in that manner for accession to the European Union and for the switch to the euro, the single currency in the EU, without taking any shortcuts. Serbia is a serious country and should not use another country’s currency, especially without prior approval! However, I must point out that the stability of the dinar entails a responsible fiscal policy, a wage policy based on productivity, as well as implementation of structural reforms in practice. If the quality and speed of reforms were measured in words, in particular those said in the past several months and weeks, we would have entered the European Union a long time ago! In September last year, when talking about the necessity of implementing structural reforms, I stated that it is high time something were done in this respect, which at first came as a surprise for some people, only to be confirmed later on, but only in words, and not by any concrete steps taken by the Government. As the time goes by, all we are left with is the hope that the reason for such state of things is lack of readiness, rather than any lack of understanding regarding what needs to be done. Dragging out “mothballed” ideas, such as the distribution of free shares to employees in public companies, pushes structural reforms more than 10 years back. The concept of “patching up” the economy and standard of living through monetary and foreign exchange policy, while sitting idly and observing the inefficiency, abuse of monopolist status, and, to be entirely honest, significant political influence in a large number of public companies, cannot and should not be allowed and is also fully unsustainable. The time has come for all of us to stop for a moment and remember pre-October 5th programmes and proclamations, and ask ourselves whether anything real is being done today or is this just a way to buy time! BIS Review 19/2005 1 
I believe that personal example is the best example and that no one can give advice and lectures on reforms to others unless they are implementing these same reforms in their own house – the National Bank of Serbia. In the past year, we have reduced the number of employees by 1,500. These were mostly employees engaged for a temporary period of time. Owing to that, today, the number of people working in NBS has declined 28.9 percent relative to end-2003. At the same time, the least cost efficient branches have been closed. The wage fund this year has remained unchanged at the level from the year before, whereas any salary increases in 2005 will occur only with respect to a corresponding reduction in the number of employees! The objective of the National Bank of Serbia is to continue increasing in efficiency and I am sure that we can do this still more and still better in order to create an elite institution, on a par with European and world standards. We try to talk less but to do far more. The next major challenge is certainly the issue of the share of public consumption which is not only extremely high, but continues on the increase, both at the level of the Budget of the Republic of Serbia, and at the level of practically all local governments. It is almost as if someone had started a competition to see who can take more, and then allocate the taken funds, proving thus their “efficiency”. However, a game of football should not be played by referees, but by real football players, i.e. the economy, whereas the role of the state is to set the rules of the game and manage the process, in other words, it is the state that ought to be the referee. The RS Budget and local government budgets ought not to see a rise this year in real terms, and if additional incomes do occur, these ought to be reflected through lower taxes and contributions, all with the aim of lending support to the economy! As regards the banking system, I would like to point out that it is not only growing in terms of quantity, but is also strengthening in terms of quality. Banks’ balance sheet sum rose by 39 percent last year, banks’ lending, excluding the public sector, by over 52 percent (by CSD 100 billion), whereas aggregate citizens’ deposits increased by 48.5 percent (or EUR 348 million). Positive growth of all these indicators will continue this year as well; so, for instance, since 1 January until today, household savings rose by over EUR 100 million. With respect to the further restructuring and privatisation of the banking sector, I would like to point out that the NBS is not an owner in that process, but a supervisor, and that it is guided exclusively by the quality of banks, their manner of management, degree of risk, etc, and not by nationality of individual shareholders. My personal advice that I would like to give to those bankers who are aware that their time is ticking away is this: • Not to waste time by arbitrarily proclaiming their own selves as national interest, • Not to organize the purchase of their own shares at bank counters for cash, • Not to fritter away precious time seeking political connections, even family connections in the country and abroad, but simply to do what the Law expects them to do with a view to creating a stable and sound banking system. NBS moves on without turning back! As regards the measures taken by NBS in the field of insurance, I may freely say that we did not “pursue” the supervisory capacity in respect of insurance companies, but rather that such capacity was entrusted to us. However, once we have been given this responsibility, we intend to perform it conscientiously, equally well as we perform control over the banking sector. NBS will take all legally envisaged measures with a view to ensuring the introduction of financial order in the insurance market and its development, as well as the protection of rights and property of policyholders. Whether it will be the citizens who, through costlier insurance policies, will bear consequences of unconscientious business practices of closed insurance companies, and to what extent, does not depend on the NBS – it is the rule of law and judiciary system that are now put to the test! If insurance companies - which “invest” up to as much as EUR 20,000 in one square meter of business space, which tie policyholders’ deposits with banks to loans to the owner, and buy nail polish using your and my insurance policy funds – do all this with impunity, and, what is more, remain in possession of the real estate acquired in that way, then it is equally justified to raise the question as to whether laws in Serbia have equal application to all citizens or the judiciary system may be influenced by money and partisan and “godfather” connections. We all hope for the fastest practicable accession to the EU, with Feasibility Study as the road leading to that objective. That is why I would like to point out that no bypasses, no shortcuts, or “partial” transitions are possible on that way. What we have failed to do with respect to the implementation of structural reforms of the public and real sectors, with respect to privatisation or harmonisation of 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
consumption with real possibilities and requirements of our country’s development, with respect to financial discipline at all levels, may not be compensated for by political yarns. Work on the Feasibility Study does not supplant work on structural reforms! Neither structural reforms nor the Feasibility Study “recognize” party interest, pre- or post-election times, “specific needs” of the transition in Serbia, but only the things that have actually been done. The National Bank of Serbia does not need either IMF or the World Bank to “propel” it, as these institutions are real partners rather than ordering parties for us. We know what we ought to do and it is our hope that other economic policy actors will, if not follow our lead, then at least not try to stop us on our way. Thank you. BIS Review 19/2005 3 
Sir K Dwight Venner: Evolution of global governance and its critical offshoot corporate governance Opening remarks by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the 2nd Meeting of the Caribbean Corporate Governance Forum, St Kitts, 8 March 2005. *      *      * Mr Chairman We meet at a time of unprecedented change in the international system with the advent of the New Millennium. Prior to this, however, the seeds of change leading to the very dynamic, fluid and volatile state of the international economy and political system were being laid by several critical events. These events laid the basis for the evolution of Global Governance and its critical offshoot Corporate Governance, which is the reason why we are gathered here today. An understanding of the history of the evolution of the international system is vital to an understanding of the Corporate Governance movement if one can term it that. The phenomena of globalisation which underpins this seemingly new aspect of our lives is not in fact new, but has been occurring with major interruptions since the 19th century. Certainly between 1860 and 1913 there was a considerable flow of trade and capital between the established states and their colonial empires. This was interrupted by the World War I and the interwar period. The trade disputes and struggles for resources led to World War II, following which there was an unprecedented period of stability and growth during the 1950s and 1960s. This came to an end in the late 1960s and certainly by 1971. During this period the map of the world changed considerably as did the geopolitics of the international system. A large number of countries, parts of former colonial empires, became independent and took their place in the community of nations. At the same time, however, the world became divided along ideological lines, the East-West divide which ushered in the Cold War era. Competition between East and West took the form of differences in political and economic systems, communism versus liberal democracy, and the command versus the market economy. One could describe the post World War II environment as one of ideological competition revolving around politics, finance and trade. This system began to unravel in a remarkable way with the destabilisation of the market system as the inflation generated by the Vietnam War in the United States, and the dollar surplus in Europe, caused the demise of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, which had guided the international financial system in the post war period. This, one can argue, led to the first oil crisis and further destabilisation. The world in very quick time moved from a comfort zone of fixed exchange rates and a low and stable price for oil to a new era of floating exchange rates, and an unprecedented high price and volatility of one of the most critical commodities in international trade. Further, fundamental change came in 1989 with the demise of communism and the unraveling of the Soviet Union, the other super power. The results of these separate events, when put together, represented a fundamental change in the architecture of the international political and economic system on the approach of the New Millennium. A number of seminal books have been written on this new phenomena and they are worthy of note at this point. They are – • The End of History and the Last Man by Francis Fukuyama; • The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order by Samuel Huntington; • The Borderless World by Kenichi Ohmae. All of these books in direct and indirect ways speak to the issue of Global Governance in a world which had apparently lost its original moorings and needed new paradigms on which to base its relationships. These relationships involved those between states as well as between firms. The books raised various questions. For example, will differences in civilizations like Western Civilisation versus Islam be a governing principle in the conduct of international political and economic affairs? The current situation revolving around the issue of terrorism may suggest this, although the jury is still very much out on the matter. BIS Review 19/2005 1 
The ascendancy of liberal democracy has been certainly confirmed as in theory there are certainly more states which have reasonably fair electoral practices. However, the deeper underpinnings of liberal democracy such as an independent judiciary, freedom of the press, and well-regulated markets are yet to appear in many countries. The borderless world is real in so far as the movement of finance, capital and the increasing flow of goods is concerned, but we are yet to see the demise of the nation state as predicted by Ohmae as a corollary to the borderless world. What is clear is that there has been a consolidation of states into one world in terms of inclusiveness through such international institutions as the United Nations, the Bretton Woods institutions, the IMF and World Bank, and the World Trade Organisation representing respectively politics, finance and trade. The demise of communism and the command system of resource allocation has left the market system in sole command as the arbiter of economic decision making. All countries, including the former Soviet Union are moving to, or have established, market-type economies. The debate over whether the state or the market is the more appropriate means of allocating resources has, in a sense, been decisively won by the market. The overriding question which now has to be posed is: who governs the market? This question must be answered both globally and nationally for the simple reason that all states are not equal and within countries all sections of society are not equal. There are, and can be, consequences if there is market failure on a global scale like the Great Depression, or a systemic global financial crisis as was the fear during the Asian crisis or before that with the default of Mexico in 1982 and the subsequent debt crisis in Latin America. The international economic system is so interdependent and the flow of capital so huge and so potentially volatile that safety nets and governance systems must be put in place to prevent an economic and financial melt down. This would have spill-over effects on the system of liberal democracy, as in a response to such crises, governments may be tempted to assume authoritarian power. It could provoke ethnic strife within and between countries as scarce resources may be commanded by those who have political, military and economic power. Where does this place Corporate Governance in the context of a rapidly changing and volatile environment? Firstly, there are serious contradictions in the architecture of the international system. There is an increasing cross border flow of goods, services, capital and even labour. There are international conventions which states subscribe to, but there is no political architecture which can effectively regulate, police and redress the major issues which follow in the wake of these massive cross border flows. Secondly, and because of the first, there has been a perceptible shift in power from nation states represented by their ministries of finance, tax authorities and central banks to the participants in international and national financial and equity markets, namely, pension funds, trust funds, hedge funds, large financial conglomerates and bond holders. Bond holders, for example, have been able to hold up sovereign debt restructurings and pension funds have been able to unseat Boards of Directors and Management. This has in a sense provided a counterbalance to the pressures within the market system, particularly stock valuations for consistency, improving performance to impress markets and investors. This has led to serious abuses and corporate malfeasance as in the celebrated cases of Enron, Worldcom, Parmacat and others. The tensions in the market system spring from competition not only within, but also between countries with variants in the kind of market capitalism they practice. One author, Bruno Amable has identified five types of market capitalism, each characterized by specific institutional forms, and particular institutional complementarities: 1. The Market based Model; 2. The Social Democratic Model; 3. The Continental European Model; 4. The Mediterranean Model; 5. The Asian Model. 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
These models which we will not describe in detail, are characterized by a greater or lesser degree of state involvement, the particular role of financial and labour markets and the presence or absence of welfare state arrangements. The fact of the matter is that market failure and/or corporate malfeasance can create havoc with economic, political and social arrangements and stability. Regulation by the state, social welfare or social protection mechanisms, and the self regulation of private sector entities are critical for stability, growth and development. The rights of shareholders, the rights of participants in pension funds, and the rights of ordinary citizens to enjoy the economic benefits of being part of a community are intrinsically enshrined in the social contract between state and citizen and to the extent that they become threatened, become enshrined in the laws of the country. This certainly is the case in the nation state where the concept of public goods and public policy represent the necessity to protect citizens’ rights en bloc and not a particular section of the society. Since the world is now so interdependent and contagion both in the economic and financial spheres is no longer a theoretical construct, but a highly possible event, there is an understanding that there are such things as international public goods and that corporate governance therefore extends beyond national borders. The most obvious area which reflects this is the financial arena and international standards and codes have started and proliferated from this arena into other related areas. The successive financial crises in different regimes of the world over the last two decades have manifestly illustrated the impact of the volatility of the financial system on both economic and political events. A special G22 Working Group on Transparency and Accountability was established in the late 1990s to review and report on this matter. They concluded that “inadequate transparency by international organizations, national and governmental units, and private sector entities was a contributing force to the serious financial disturbances that have plagued the global economy”. They concluded that markets cannot function efficiently and that they will continue to be highly vulnerable to instability, in the absence of adequate, reliable and timely information from all quarters. A number of standard setting bodies dealing with a number of financial sector related areas have been established to address the situation. The IMF has produced for example, the Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies and there have been standards and codes in Accounting, Auditing, Banking Regulation and Supervision, Bankruptcy, Insurance Regulation, Payment System and Securities Market Regulation, and of course, Corporate Governance. The OECD has taken the lead responsibility for Corporate Governance and has issued the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance in 2004 after extensive international consultation. The Principles, as stated in the preamble, are intended to assist OECD and non-OECD governments in their efforts to evaluate and improve the legal, institutional and regulatory framework for corporate governance in their countries and to provide guidance and suggestions for stock exchanges, investors, corporations, and other parties that have a role in the process of developing good corporate governance. In the Caribbean we have some definite advantages as we embark on the development of our corporate governance systems in the region. The most important of course, is a sound foundation of liberal democracy which has flourished since the attainment of universal adult suffrage in the 1950s and 60s. We have had a system and series of free and fair elections in which the losers were not shot or exiled, and had the right to challenge the results in our courts. We have had an outstanding system of justice certainly in comparison with many countries in the first, second and third worlds. We have also had the rights of religion, free association and freedom of the press. These rights and institutions are the bedrocks on which good corporate governance is built. It has been a principle among our firms that their accounts and performance should be publicly audited and because of the importance of foreign investment the standards of OECD countries have been accepted as the norm. We do have some grounds to cover in this new dispensation when the Standards of Transparency and Accountability have been raised considerably in response to the international environment. The flow of foreign investment needed to facilitate sustainable growth and development over a time period, long enough to treat successfully with our unemployment and poverty issues, will be dependent on our practice of good corporate governance both in the public and private sectors. In the public sector, good public finance and debt management policies will be vital in creating the environment for development. The regulatory activities of the state in passing and enforcing legislation to support good corporate governance will also be important. However, the example set by the government in publishing statistics and having their financial statements pass through the constitutional process of parliamentary scrutiny of the public accounts committee after examination by BIS Review 19/2005 3 
the Auditor General, is absolutely vital to the integrity of the corporate governance process in our region. The regional private sector in order to develop and be internationally competitive has no other option than to accept these practices. Their commitment to good corporate practices and corporate citizenship is critical not only for their own growth and development but for that of the region as well. There is, in our societies because of our history, a great suspicion of the motives of businesses and businessmen. The Anancy image is quite alive and well in our societies. In addition, the ethnic images of our business classes pose some ambiguity, as, since they are essentially family oriented, there is no public disclosure. The suspicion of the Tax Departments also encourages an attitude on non-disclosure. The public and private sectors have to work in tandem to realize an atmosphere of trust. Professions such as Law and Accounting have to play a critical role in bringing our business communities into the new paradigm of transparency and disclosure. The market economy, we can conclude, works best when it is properly regulated and the dissemination of information is supportive of choices which lead to improved resource allocation. All institutions, both in the public and private sectors must strive to ensure that, both nationally and regionally, we set and maintain standards of corporate governance which lead to the sustainable growth and development of our region and our people. 4 BIS Review 19/2005 
Meir Sokoler: The time has come for a new Bank of Israel law Lecture by Dr Meir Sokoler, Acting Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the scholarships award ceremony at the Technion, Haifa, 17 March 2005. *      *      * First, I would like to thank you for inviting me to address such a distinguished gathering in such an eminent institution as the Technion. Many years ago I was a student of economics here, and I remember the excellent students of this august institute and the wonderful experience of outstanding instruction I received. I am sure that you have all heard of the Bank of Israel, the country's central bank. It appears, however, that many Israelis do not know much about it, apart from the fact that it prints Israel's money. A few months ago a 6-year-old from an Israeli primary school wrote to the Governor. In the carefully drafted letters of a child who had just learnt how to write, he asked: "Mr. Governor of the Bank of Israel, I heard that you in the Bank of Israel print the country's money. Why don't you print more money so that there won't be any more poor people, and there will be more roads and schools?" It might seem natural that such a young child would not know the answer to the question, but it transpires that many citizens, adults as well as children, ask us the same question in one form or another. At first glance the question seems to be justified. You might think that operating the banknote printing machines for a few more hours would solve all the economy's problems. In fact, that is how Israel's governments acted until the mid-1980s. Till then the Bank of Israel printed huge quantities of banknotes for all sorts of purposes, some of them highly commendable. The results, however, were disastrous. The value of the notes at the time eroded rapidly, with catastrophic economic consequences. What led the Bank of Israel to print so many banknotes at that time? Why did it allow such a rapid increase in the money supply and the monetary base? Didn't it know that this would create high inflation that would rapidly erode the purchasing power of the currency? It is clear that to the governors of the Bank at that time, to the Bank's economists, and to many other people the outcome was very obvious. This was something that had been known for hundreds or even thousands of years, certainly since the first central bank was established - that of Sweden which was established at the beginning of the seventeenth century - and started printing notes that served as legal tender. Until 1985 the Bank of Israel was not independent, and it had to print money, at the government's request, to finance the government's deficit, with no upper limit (they called it lending the government money, even if the government did not actually pay it back). In 1985 - a milestone in Israel's economy, with the introduction of the Economic Stabilization Program that significantly lowered inflation, but only to between 15 percent and 20 percent a year, higher than the level in the advanced economies - the Bank of Israel Law was amended, and the government was prohibited from asking the Bank to print money for it. This legislative change (known as the Non-Printing Law) is the only one introduced since the establishment of the Bank in 1954. In contrast to us, many advanced and emerging economies have changed their central bank laws in the last two decades, all moving in the same direction in several major aspects:  • Price stability was set as the major objective of interest policy. This means that the central bank has full control over the rate at which money is printed, in most cases by means of control over the very short term rate of interest, known as the central bank interest rate, which is the cost of money. In addition, the central bank must help in the area of long-term growth, as long as price stability is maintained.  • Secondly, the independence of the central bank in its use of the policy instruments to achieve the target was clearly specified. The central bank must have complete freedom to exercise its discretion regarding the various instruments it has available to control the money supply in the economy and thereby to meet the price-stability target.  • Thirdly, the entity deciding on the central bank's policy was defined - a monetary council comprising professionals who are independent of the business and political establishment.  • Fourthly, a framework for reporting and transparency of the central bank's policy vis-à-vis the government, the legislature and the public was determined. In this context communication with the public is important as a means of increasing the effectiveness of the policy. BIS Review 19/2005 1 
In Israel, the main target of the Bank of Israel's interest-rate policy is in the area of inflation, and since the beginning of the current decade it has been in the sphere of maintaining price stability. Hence - since banknotes have been printed sparingly, starting with the governorship of the late Professor Michael Bruno, and in the periods of office of his successors Professor Jacob Frenkel and Dr. David Klein, and to be continued under the newly appointed Governor Professor Stanley Fischer - the purchasing power of the banknotes in your pockets is maintained long term. This is a relatively novel experience for us in Israel. The annual inflation rate since 1999 has averaged 1.7 percent, i.e., close to the 2 percent midpoint of the target range of between one and three percent. You probably all remember the beginning of the 1980s, with two- and even three-digit inflation, which reached more than 500 percent a year. It is important to remember that the banknotes in your pockets are only part of the money supply or monetary base: the rest is the money in your current accounts. It is true that in the old law other objectives are mentioned, apart from that of preserving the value of the currency (or in modern terminology, maintaining price stability) - objectives such as a high rate of employment, and a high level of investment - without price stability being specifically granted priority. However, there is no contradiction between focusing on price stability on the one hand and objectives regarding employment and investment on the other. Quite the opposite: price stability is a sine qua non for sustainable economic growth and for long-term high employment and buoyant investment. This said, to remove any possible doubt the Law should be changed to specify price stability as the Bank of Israel's prime objective. It is worth noting that experience both here and abroad has shown that specific mention of price stability as the major purpose of the central bank increases its credibility, and the greater its credibility, the more freedom it has to support the other objective of long-term growth without jeopardizing price stability. In the area of independence in the use of monetary instruments too it would be well worth introducing some order in Israel, and formalizing the Bank's freedom of action. Another considerable change required in this field relates to the exchange-rate regime. Since the Law was passed in 1954, the reality has changed completely: there is no foreign-currency control, the Bank of Israel has not intervened in the foreign-currency market for almost ten years, and the exchange rate is determined by the market forces of supply and demand. This situation should be reflected in the new law. With regard to a monetary council, the Bank of Israel is in favor of the establishment of such a body that would make decisions on interest policy and would also bear responsibility for it. The establishment of such a council is desirable as part of a system of checks and balances for an independent central bank. At the same time the tremendous importance of the creation of a mechanism to ensure the appointment of the most suitable people to the council must be borne in mind: they must have no axe to grind, and cannot come from the business sector, government, or politics. Turning to the issue of transparency and reporting, the Bank of Israel already publishes a half-yearly inflation report which explains the interest policy to the public, its results, and the implications of the developments during the previous half year, and describes the policy likely to be adopted in the future. The Bank of Israel continues to cooperate fully with the Prime Minister's Office and the Ministry of Finance in discussions devoted entirely to the drafting of the new Bank of Israel Law. This legislation, firmly founded on the principles outlined above, will propel Israel and its economy further along the path towards joining the family of modern countries and economies. The importance of this for Israel lies in its ensuring the existence of a proper framework for the government and the Bank of Israel to operate macroeconomic strategy intended to create long-term growth and employment as a sine qua non for raising residents' standard of living and level of welfare. Such a strategy will provide the necessary resources and the correct framework for promoting a welfare policy for the weaker sections of the population that will not leave them out in the cold. To summarize: the Bank of Israel today has in practice a not inconsiderable degree of independence. This independence derives from changes in economic thinking and in experience gained in setting and implementing interest policy both in Israel and world wide. The legal environment in which the Bank of Israel operates, however, is outdated and should be amended to make it compatible with the new reality. If we enact a new central bank law here in Israel, we will join the many countries that have done so successfully. 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 14 March 2005. *      *      * Madame la Présidente, Mesdames et Messieurs les Membres de la Commission Economique et Monétaire, j’ai l’honneur de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui dans le cadre de notre dialogue régulier. Comme vous le savez, j’attache beaucoup d’importance à nos rencontres trimestrielles qui permettent à la Banque Centrale Européenne d’expliquer ses décisions et de répondre à toutes les questions que se posent les Parlementaires. Mes collègues et moi-même considérons ces rencontres fréquentes comme essentielles au bon fonctionnement de l’Union Economique et Monétaire. Ich möchte meine Ausführungen mit einer Beurteilung der aktuellen wirtschaftlichen und monetären Entwicklung beginnen. Sodann werde ich zu fiskalpolitischen und strukturpolitischen Fragen Stellung nehmen. Abschließend möchte ich Ihnen einige Überlegungen hinsichtlich der Folgeaktivitäten zum EU Aktionsplan für Finanzdienstleistungen vorstellen.  Economic and monetary developments After the positive developments in the first half of 2004, only modest growth rates of economic activity were observed in the second half. Real GDP in the euro area is estimated to have grown at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.2% in both the third and fourth quarter. Taking the year as a whole, real GDP growth – on a working-day adjusted basis – was +1.8% in 2004, marking a significant improvement from the 0.5% seen in 2003. The composition of demand growth in the fourth quarter offered some positive signs with regard to the outlook for economic activity.  In the coming quarters consumption growth could benefit from anticipated developments in real disposable income. Investment is expected to continue to benefit from very favourable financing conditions, robust earnings and greater business efficiency. Euro area exports should continue to benefit from strong world economic growth. Accordingly, we expect continued relatively moderate economic growth in the euro area in 2005 and 2006, as reflected in the ECB staff projections published earlier this month, which are broadly in line with available forecasts from international and private sector organisations. Nevertheless, the outlook for economic activity continues to be surrounded by uncertainties. On the external side, high and volatile oil prices and persistent global imbalances pose downside risks to growth. As regards exchange rates, we confirm our position – expressed when the euro rose sharply – that such moves are unwelcome and undesirable for economic growth. On the domestic side, there are uncertainties surrounding the evolution of private consumption, while the favourable financing conditions and the recovery in corporate earnings could lead to higher investment growth than is currently projected. Turning to price developments, the evolution of oil prices and increases in indirect taxes and administered prices have had a significant impact on consumer price inflation in the course of last year. For 2004 as a whole, annual HICP inflation was 2.1%. More recently, the annual inflation rate declined quite substantially, falling to 1.9% in January from 2.4% in December, largely a result of base effects from developments in indirect taxes and administered prices in some countries. Eurostat’s flash estimate of annual HICP inflation in February was 2.0%.  In the coming months, annual inflation rates are likely to fluctuate around 2%. Looking further ahead, there is still little evidence that stronger underlying domestic inflationary pressures are building up in the euro area. Wage increases have remained moderate over recent quarters and this trend should continue in the context of moderate economic growth. Accordingly, the ECB staff projections put average annual HICP inflation between 1.6% and 2.2% in 2005 and between 1.0% and 2.2% in 2006, broadly unchanged from the Eurosystem staff projections published in December. This is consistent with forecasts recently released by international and private sector organisations. However, risks to price stability over the medium term remain on the upside, requiring continued vigilance. Such risks continue to be associated mainly with oil price developments, uncertainty BIS Review 19/2005 1 
regarding future increases in indirect taxes and administered prices, and potential second-round effects stemming from wage and price-setting behaviour. In this respect, developments in long-term inflation expectations need to be monitored closely. Our monetary analysis also calls for vigilance regarding upside risks to price stability over the medium term and long term. After moderating in the first half of 2004, M3 growth has strengthened significantly since mid-2004, reflecting the stimulative effect on monetary dynamics of the historically very low level of interest rates in the euro area. As a result of the persistently strong growth in M3 over the past few years, substantially more liquidity exists in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary economic growth. The exceptionally low level of real interest rates is also stimulating private sector demand for credit.  In the context of relatively contained underlying inflationary pressures, the ECB has left its key interest rates unchanged since June 2003. The low level of nominal and real interest rates has provided significant and continued support to the economic recovery. At the same time, upside risks to price stability remain. Cross-checking with the indications from monetary analysis supports the case for continued vigilance with regard to those risks. Fiscal policies and the Stability and Growth Pact I would now like to make a few remarks on fiscal policies. While some progress on fiscal consolidation and the correction of excessive deficits is envisaged in euro area countries’ updated stability programmes, further consolidation in a number of countries is needed.  With respect to the Stability and Growth Pact, discussions now need to be brought to a convincing conclusion with an outcome that safeguards fiscal discipline. The fiscal framework enshrined in the Treaty and in the Stability and Growth Pact is a cornerstone of Economic and Monetary Union, crucial for the economic rationale and the overall cohesion of EMU.  As the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament knows, since the beginning of these discussions the ECB has made its views clear. Improvements in the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact, and in particular its preventive arm, would be welcome. But the corrective arm should not be weakened. The credibility of the excessive deficit procedure as a means to deter and correct excessive deficits needs to be fully preserved. This is necessary in order to anchor expectations of fiscal discipline, which is fundamental not only for macroeconomic stability and cohesion in the euro area but also for enhancing confidence and fostering growth prospects in all Member States. The Lisbon strategy Let me now turn to the forthcoming mid-term review of the Lisbon strategy. The Lisbon strategy was designed in 2000 to push forward structural reforms, which Europe so urgently needs in order to maintain its high level of prosperity. Structural reforms raise European economies’ growth potential. They also enable countries to face the challenges of technological change, globalisation and ageing populations. In addition, structural reforms increase countries’ resilience to economic shocks, contribute to improving the management of public spending and make it easier to maintain price stability. Five years after Lisbon, however, there is broad agreement that progress on structural reforms, particularly at the national level, has been unsatisfactory. This is not to deny that there has been notable and in some areas impressive progress on the implementation of structural reforms across Europe. However, much remains to be done to meet the challenges most European countries still face. In particular, the EU needs to increase employment and labour utilisation, especially in the context of ageing populations. At the same time, productivity needs to be raised. Against this background, the ECB supports the Commission’s proposals to push forward the Lisbon strategy by focusing reform efforts at the national and European level on “delivering stronger, lasting growth and creating more and better jobs”. Such an economic environment would facilitate the achievement of the Lisbon agenda’s social and environmental objectives. Through the maintenance of price stability, the ECB will continue to support the Lisbon process by providing a vital element for fostering sustainable output growth as well as for supporting employment and social cohesion. The ECB also supports national governments when they are determined to close the existing implementation gap, which must be done in order to reap the full benefits of reforms. This should also improve consumer and business confidence in the short run. In this regard, the ECB sees the use of 2 BIS Review 19/2005 
benchmarking as an important instrument for fostering the implementation of reforms by surveying best practices across Member States. Benchmarking, based on sensibly defined quantitative indicators, should be regarded as a welcome driver of public debate, raising public awareness that structural reforms can be implemented successfully in EU countries and that they have important benefits.  The post-Financial Services Action Plan strategy Let me now turn to the ongoing structural reform process in the field of financial services. Since the introduction of the single currency, financial integration at the level of institutions, markets and market infrastructures has been making significant progress. This is especially the case in wholesale markets, such as the unsecured money market, the government bond market and the related derivatives markets. This development is also the result of the impetus provided by the public measures taken in the context of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP), which is about to be completed. At the same time, integration in retail markets is not yet sufficiently advanced. As regards the post-FSAP strategy, although the ECB is still in the process of formulating its views on the matter, we have already identified at least three important elements.  First, the focus should be on the effective and consistent implementation of the FSAP at the national level. New legislative initiatives at the Community level should be kept to a minimum and only introduced if strictly necessary. In this respect, the implementation of the Lamfalussy framework represents a unique opportunity to achieve a consistent regulatory and supervisory framework for financial services. Indeed, the experience so far gained with the implementation of the framework in the securities field is broadly positive. It should be recognised, however, that there is still scope for improvement, for instance with regard to striking the right balance between the two levels of Community legislation (core principles and technical details).  Second, the policies relating to the regulatory and supervisory framework should be complemented by and closely coordinated with other relevant policies for financial services, for instance competition policy.  Third, incentives should be provided for the private sector to play its role in exploiting the opportunities offered by public action. Where appropriate, mechanisms should be provided to facilitate coordinated approaches among market participants. Moreover, the Eurosystem has requested that a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) be created for the euro area from 1 January 2008, meaning that citizens and enterprises could make payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as in the national context today. In addition, national infrastructures should migrate to a pan-European payments infrastructure by the end of 2010. We appreciate the Commission’s support for the SEPA project. The ECB is also in a regular dialogue with the banking industry to seek market participants’ support for these objectives. I am now ready to answer your questions. BIS Review 19/2005 3 
V Leeladhar: Managing talent in banks - a few thoughts Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion of the centenary celebrations of the Corporation Bank, Bangalore, 12 March 2005. *      *      * It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. A hundred years is, indeed, a landmark event in the history of an institution and as Corporation Bank celebrates its centenary, it joins the rank of the ‘venerables’. The establishment of the Corporation Bank with its humble beginnings in 1906 was during an eventful period in India’s economic history. It was a brave new era which saw a flurry of activity when a host of what were then termed ‘native’ banks were set up in India, spurred, in no small measure, by the forces of a resurgent nationalism and the yearning for self determination. These forces, later coalesced into the Swadeshi Movement, helped draw out the latent entrepreneual talent of the time in the field of banking to set up banks oriented towards the indigenous communities which they sought to serve.  With the onset of liberalization, banks in India are under pressure to change the ways in which they do business. They now face an increasingly competitive environment not only from banks but also from non-bank financial institutions. Explosive growth in IT has changed the way individuals interact with banks and the way banks respond. In the changed scenario, success will depend on the ability of banks to leverage the human potential and capabilities. This speech is an attempt to reflect on the new challenges facing banks in the management of human resources. The period 1904 to 1913 saw a bank being set up virtually every year – prominent amongst these were the Bank of Burma established in 1904, the Bank of India, the Corporation Bank and the Canara Bank in 1906, the Indian Bank in 1907, the Bank of Baroda and the Punjab and Sindh Bank in 1908, the Central Bank of India in 1911 and the Bank of Mysore in 1913. The Corporation Bank has come a long way since the heady days of the early 20th century. Today, we can proudly state that it has fulfilled the vision of its founders if ‘not in full measure, very substantially’. It has not only survived a hundred turbulent years, but is today one of the more agile PSB players in the market. This has been possible in no small measure by the Bank’s ability to manage and utilize its talent and potential. And this brings us to the theme of my deliberation today - managing talent in banks. In the run up to the hundred years, banks and banking have changed substantially. As we view matters in retrospect, we see two landmark events which constituted strategic inflexion points in the history of Indian Banking in the 20th century – one being the nationalization of banks in 1969-70 and the other, the financial sector reforms that commenced in the early 1990s. Nationalisation generated forces that took banking from an elite class to the masses. It led to the establishment of a very substantial infrastructure across the geographical expanse of the sub-continent and more importantly to the financial empowerment large sections of society which substantially changed the Indian socio-economic landscape. The second inflexion point in banking was the financial sector reforms initiative that was launched in the early 1990s. These reforms heralded a dramatic shift in the way banks functioned and operated in India. The changed environment and the internal compulsions arising from greater competition and the need to improve their market share / profitability gave rise to the quest for greater efficiency and the need to reposition themselves given the realities of the environment and their internal strengths and weaknesses.  A response to competition and the need to shape up has been the quest for efficiency. This quest, like the task of Sisyphus, has been never ending. Every target met, every cost reduction constitutes the new threshold limit to be crossed in the next quarter or half year. Every achievement gives rise to ever greater expectations of greater efficiency and cost reductions and greater output – and this is any CEO’s bane. Banking essentially consists of intermediating and managing risk and providing banking services. In the quest for efficiency what distinguishes one player from another is its human capital. As former RBI Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan had pointed out “capital and technology are replicable but not human capital which needs to be viewed as a valuable resource for the achievement of competitive advantage.”  Where an institution is, in its time trajectory, fundamentally dependent not just on the sum total of its individual human capital, but on how effectively it draws out the best from its talent bank at any point of time, through effective placements, performance appraisal, rewards and recognition mechanism. How the trajectory changes is dependent on how it builds capacities, through training and recruitment. What BIS Review 18/2005 1 
ever be the organizational goals, the key issues facing Managements today is how to draw out the best from its staff? How to build capacities to reposition to achieve the organizational vision and strategic goals? And this boils down to one single factor that makes the difference – viz., talent. Today management itself has come to mean how to attract talented people, how to nurture them, how to develop them and to give them the necessary space  Indeed, when it comes to Human Resources, it is a great humbling factor - the best of knowledge workers who have ready answers for just about every technical issue are necessarily humbled when it comes to human resources. When we deal with humans, there are questions, issues and concerns – but no ready answers, no quick fixes, no instant remedies. It is thus with humility, but humility combined with a will to succeed that we can approach any Human Resource subject. The purpose of Human Resource Management is essentially to enhance the efficiency of the organization, to allow and indeed nurture the personal growth and well-being of the staff and to create a facilitating environment and an organizational culture that removes impediments and irritants and fosters a feeling of pride and belonging – an internal brand building. The first and primary concern is thus organizational efficiency - traditionally HRM addresses this issue by putting in place HR systems that address issues of recruitment, placements, training and capacity building, performance appraisal and finally what is broadly grouped under the rubric - compensation, rewards and recognition. In laypersons terms the questions that we ask are – are we recruiting the right people, are we placing them as per their strengths, are we correctly assessing their training needs, are we assessing the efficacy of training, are we having a succession plan, do we have objective systems for performance appraisal and finally are we compensating, rewarding and recognizing the performance of our human capital?  Issues of personal growth and well-being are important as these not only contribute to a more healthy work environment but can be effectively harnessed to help align personal goals with organizational goals. It implies an approach where the organization attempts to build upon strengths of its human capital combined with appropriate placements where we can harness individual passions and energies into fulfilling organizational objectives. Finally, it is important to sensitize ourselves to the fact that HR functions and systems are here to facilitate and not to impede. An organizational culture that fosters trust, openness fairness and what is alluded to in institutional economics as a ‘security of expectations’, goes a long way in employee satisfaction and a congenial atmosphere at the workplace. This in turn helps attract and retain talent.  While these for long have been common knowledge, these have been difficult to implement in the absence of human resource management systems. Mapping competencies for every job requirement, mapping the competencies of the work force and matching these, anticipating workforce requirements, providing training tailored to individual goals and finally measuring performance are by no means simple. It is in the proper management of talent that opportunities for very substantial gains in productivity, profitability and personnel development lie – It is here that public sector banks can reap very substantial productivity gains. This takes HR and especially talent management from the shadows of the boardrooms on to the proscenium – on to the centre stage of concerns of the banks CEOs. The preconditions for an effective talent management is clarity of where the organisation is, i.e., the starting point and where it wishes to reach in a given time horizon, i.e., the destination. Talents then constitute the prime resource needed to reach the destination laid out in the organisational goals and vision. To put any successful talent management programme into action, we need data and a robust MIS. It is intrinsically linked with strategy, with technology, with processes, with the quality initiatives and the traditional HR subsystems such as recruitment, placements, performance appraisal, and compensation. The questions that come to mind are: do we have a comprehensive idea of all our processes, what percentage of staff is deployed for facilitating functions, can better systems and reengineering of processes release and free valuable talent to explore their potential in functional areas? What are the competency gaps that need to be filled through capacity building and what gaps need to be filled with new recruits or lateral intake or contractual appointments? How do we gauge performance? Are we distinguishing between potential and performance? What forces come between potential and performance and is the institution addressing these? What is the reward mechanism which we have in place? What is the flexibility we can offer to move from a compliance culture to and outcome oriented culture – to foster a mindset driven by teleology rather than bureaucratic processes.  These issues have always been important, it’s just that the imperatives to address them squarely in substance were not so compelling. There have been broadly three catalytic forces that have brought 2 BIS Review 18/2005 
about this changed perception of human resources: First, as the widespread use of the personal computer and the advent of the internet in the 1990s attained a critical mass, it marked a specific inflexion point which ushered in the Information Age. In this age, the intangible assets such as intellectual capital and talent have gradually supplanted hard assets of the Industrial Age such as capital, factories and inventories. The new reality is that people are increasingly the principal assets of an organization and salaries and compensation one of the principal components of the profit and loss account.  Secondly, a host of new industries, such as information technology, media and entertainment which changing technology and social needs have spawned, have given rise to a supply demand imbalance. Today, these new industries compete with the old for talent and banks need to look afresh not only at their recruitment strategies but also how to retain their talent – an issue hitherto far from the ken of the staid banker. Thirdly, there is the issue of ownership. Organizations own physical, financial and property assets – their ownership rights, however, do not extend to people. In the pre 1990s, employment bonding worked on what was termed the ‘psychological contract’ or the ‘loyalty contract’ – this involved the exchange of long term employment for employee loyalty. This in today’s world has been seriously undermined, spurred not merely by a spurt in job opportunities, but also by the greater transparency in job opportunities brought about by the internet revolution. The old values of loyalty have eroded and indeed it is fashionable to have multiple companies in ones resume. This irreversible shift from Industrial age to information age, greater demand for high caliber managerial talent and greater promiscuity of people shifting from one job to another, has changed the playing field for the search and retention of talent – this is the new reality companies and banks in India have to contend with.  The term ‘talent management’, though known to entrepreneurs for centuries, entered the business lexicon in a rather dramatic and perhaps eponymous phrase, ‘The War for Talent’ penned in a McKinsey article. While the article spurred intense debate on both sides of the argument, it nonetheless brought the issue to the fore of the concerns of Management and is today of special relevance to Public Sector Bank in India. There is however a basic definitional issue. What do we understand by talent? There is no consensus – there was a time when talent referred to persons with expertise in a functional area – persons with knowledge, skills, competence or effectiveness to achieve predetermined targets. Today in the age of ‘metrics’, most of these are taken for granted. There is an increasing realisation that it is not functional skills alone or intellectual capacity that matters, but leadership qualities, the ability to straddle different functional areas, businesses, and cultures. In essence, talent in leaders, refers to the ability to effectively handle competing imperatives. While there would always be a place for the passionate niche specialist or the stellar uni-dimensional performer, the task of leaders would be to stitch together and harness their abilities. It is thus that in most corporate training establishments there is an increasing focus on softer skills such as ability to present, to carry a team, values, creativity, and the willingness to learn and to share.  Talent in itself has little meaning unless it is woven into the weft and warp of the corporate strategy. The need for talent arises directly out of the business strategy adopted. The linkage between talent and an organisation’s business challenges and strategies, effective strategy execution requires sufficient numbers of the right people with the right skills and knowledge, in the right roles. The inevitable next issue involves the approaches to talent management. Two quite distinct approaches that come to mind are the (i) Talent based on stellar performers and (ii) Talent based on robust systems. The first approach leverages individual and group performance of an elite group of the brightest people; the second focuses on recruiting and retaining ordinary people and getting extraordinary performance from them. The focus is on systems – focusing on the collective vision which brings together the disparate pieces and sews them together in a common purpose. Whatever be the model followed, talent management entails that the organization knows what it is looking for, that is, what talent one needs for business, now and in the foreseeable future; knowing how best to source such talent; getting it and deploying it for optimum effect within the organisation.  Having said that, one must admit that the ground reality in our country is such that there is a host of issues to contend with before putting in place an effective talent management strategy. Forced with legacy issues, constraints, and the sheer complexity of the task, most organizations abandon the attempt to make rational choices. Most treat their people with diverse skill sets as undifferentiated resources and merely guess how best to assign employees to their job. This reality of course exists not just in India, where Public Sector Banks have their own constraints – ground rules and framework for employment - which make them less agile and responsive, but across the world.  BIS Review 18/2005 3 
One issue that bedevils public sector banks is that of compensation. How do they attract new talent and match the salaries and the compensation flexibility being paid by consultants, by IT firms, by multinationals, by private sector banks? Is the quest for talent lost ab initio? Here it may be stated that while the traditional psychological contract of long term employment for loyalty may have been undermined, quantitative solutions of the 1990s are not necessarily the answer. Money can be matched and topped by competitors – the pay packet may not be the only compensation that attracts talent. The monetary, social and psychological needs of talent today are in a melting pot. It is this ambiguity that can be a source of opportunity for Public Sector Banks. Today, the ‘loyalty contract’ is being replaced by a complex mix. There are a host of non monetary benefits that an organisation can offer ranging from job content, work exposure, project challenge, working at the cutting edge, working with a charismatic leader, flexible work environment, early leadership roles and positions of accountable influence, high-value, visible or high-profile assignments, cross-functional roles, training facilities, opportunities for personal growth, opportunities to build a resume in a particular work area, community bonding, location benefits or for that matter independence and space amongst others.  Understanding what it takes to foster a productive work environment, often alluded to as the "employee value proposition", essentially entails non-discriminatory, hostile-free workplaces with flexible and dynamic HR policies that enable an environment where employees feel included and valued, where commitment and motivation is maximized and where an organization needs to spend fewer resources on managing employee grievances. It is up to the creativity of the Public Sector Banks to turn their constraints into an opportunity to create such employee value propositions that appeal to the talent these banks wish to recruit. It also forces them to revamp their own talent requirements, their job content and reposition themselves as more agile players in the talent market.  In fact, effective recruiting is the beginning of effective retention. Matching between tasks and talents is a challenging problem and it is essential for allocational efficiency that people get allocated to right occupations. Refashioning the recruitment process may well therefore be the precursor of an effective talent management strategy. This may include identification of key positions and turnover risks associated with these positions, and competency/behavioural-based selection criteria that support the retention strategy and business drivers. Only a carefully designed and integrated set of initiatives that allow the employee to align himself with the organisational goals and objectives, map competencies for diverse work areas, build up capacities through a well-crafted and sustained strategy and draw out latent possibilities optimally would ensure emergence of leadership talent that is critical to any organisation’s prosperity and is therefore a central element of talent management. The aim is to align the current and future talents of individuals with the strategic challenges of our business. So while employees need to understand how to be more effective in their current roles, deliver specific business challenges, and pull together a personal development plan for shaping future careers, organizations too have to strategize how best to utilize the people’s talents and identify areas for internal development necessary for ensuring future success.  In a major push to banking reforms in our country, the Government of India has recently announced a slew of HR autonomy incentives for the better performing banks. Differential pay structures, lateral entry, contract employment and perhaps performance-linked pay as a sub-component of the compensation structure may turn out to be a potent talent management instrument in public sector banks too. While the debate on the merits of performance pay remains open and is contingent on an effective Performance Appraisal System being in place, the risks may be manageable if the performance management system is well designed and carefully implemented. Of course this is an area where bank managements need to design carefully calibrated institution-specific responses.  Talent management is thus a broad mandate. Today – more than ever before – banks must be prepared to be collaborative, supportive, and nurturing of their people while at the same time being more exacting. Standing as we do at the cusp of major role shifts and organizational transformations, every successful talent management strategy would have to be the right mix of a set of ‘push’ – motivation, recognition, career progression, capacity building and drawing out plans - and ‘pull’ – more tangible factors like higher pay, better benefits and heftier perks - factors. Misalignment of mutual expectations, person-job mismatch, perception of poor career advancement prospects and work-life imbalance can be huge setbacks which we can ill afford. In the roadmap that has been envisaged for the Indian banking sector, Indian banks have about five years to shape up to face the challenges of unfettered competition. If they get their mix of talent management, performance management and their compensation incentives right, they should be on the threshold of a brave new era in Indian banking. I trust that Corporation Bank with its time-tested track record would convert these challenges into 4 BIS Review 18/2005 
opportunities and emerge as a talent management trend-setter. On this momentous occasion, I wish you all every success in all your future endeavours.  BIS Review 18/2005 5 
Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook and monetary policy Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at SR-banken, Stavanger, 18 March 2005. The speech is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Inflation Report 1/05 and on previous speeches. The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. *      *      * The Norwegian economy is growing at a solid pace, and there are prospects that growth will remain high in the year ahead. The recession was mild after the preceding expansion culminated two and a half years ago. The higher rate of cost inflation in Norway relative to other countries was broken without production being impacted to the same extent as during the recessions in the early 1980s and around 1990. One of the main reasons for this is probably that low inflation in the 1990s and the current monetary policy have anchored expectations of low and stable inflation among economic agents.  The need to bring down inflation was the main reason why New Zealand, the first country to do so, introduced an inflation target for monetary policy at the end of the 1980s. Canada, the UK, Sweden and Australia followed suit later in the 1990s. Inflation targeting has gradually become the normal monetary policy system in developed economies. In Norway, the Government introduced an inflation target in 2001. The target is set at 2.5 per cent. In the euro area, monetary policy is oriented towards price stability, defined as inflation below but close to 2 per cent.  Inflation targeting has proved to be a sound system and particularly well suited for small, open economies. Normally, interest rate setting under an inflation targeting regime will also contribute to stabilising output and employment. In periods of recession, with prospects of low and falling inflation, the interest rate will be reduced to boost demand and prevent an inflation level that is too low. During an upturn when there are prospects of high inflation, the interest rate will be increased. Inflation targeting is softer around the edges than the exchange rate regimes Norway and many other countries operated earlier. The system has proved fairly robust to disturbances.  Nevertheless, the soft landing of the Norwegian economy after several years of high domestic cost inflation and a low level of activity abroad must not lead us to believe that output and employment cannot show pronounced fluctuations in the future. We cannot expect the interest rate to have the same impact from one period to the next. The economy is also exposed to unexpected disturbances. As a result, we cannot fine-tune economic developments using the interest rate, but avoid the largest effects when the economy is exposed to disturbances. Experience seems to indicate that inflation expectations remain stable even if inflation varies somewhat as long as the interest rate is used actively to curb effects. Given our highly open economy, we may have to accept somewhat wider variations in inflation than some other countries.  The last time I was here, almost exactly a year ago, Norges Bank’s Executive Board had just decided to reduce the key rate by 0.25 percentage point to 1.75 per cent. Since then, the key rate has remained at this historically low level.  Real interest rates are also low. From December 2002 to March 2004, the key rate was reduced by a total of 5.25 percentage points. The interest rate decline can be ascribed to a number of factors.  In late autumn 2002, inflation started to fall. The inflation projections were also revised down. Gradually new information about the outlook for other countries and the Norwegian economy indicated that inflation might be very low. Short-term interest rates fell by close to 4 percentage points. It would seem that it is not only changes in the real interest rate that have an influence, but also the level of real interest rates. Between December 2002 and March 2004, the interest rate has moved from a high to a low level. The real interest rate is now lower than a neutral interest rate. A real interest rate that is lower than the neutral rate will stimulate activity even after the effects of the interest rate fall itself have been exhausted.  Calculations seem to indicate that the neutral real interest rate for Norway is between 2½ and 3½ per cent, and it has probably fallen somewhat in recent years.  BIS Review 18/2005 1 
It takes time for an interest rate reduction to have an impact on inflation. We are now seeing the effects of monetary policy decisions some of which were taken two years ago.  The interest rate has affected inflation via the krone exchange rate and via demand for goods and services. In particular, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services has picked up. In addition, the reduction in the interest rate has probably contributed to holding up expectations of future inflation even when inflation is low.  If there is confidence in monetary policy, economic agents will expect inflation to be close to target over time. This will provide a basis for company budgets. This will then contribute to stabilising inflation. Many companies change their prices only once or twice a year. When they change prices, they probably take into account the expected rise in other prices.  It has been important to prevent inflation expectations from falling and becoming entrenched at a low level. Surveys of inflation expectations indicate that expectations are well anchored around the inflation target in the long term.  The first signs of the effects of the interest rate cuts appeared in the foreign exchange market. The interest rate differential against other countries narrowed. It became more attractive to borrow and less profitable to invest in the Norwegian krone. The movement in the krone exchange rate was reversed and it depreciated through 2003 and into 2004. However, the impact on the krone exchange rate has been considerably dampened because external interest rates have remained low. High prices for oil and gas and other export goods also contributed to an appreciation of the krone last year.  The depreciation of the krone in 2003 contributed to restraining the fall in prices for imported goods. The effect occurred gradually. Companies and importers may have preferred to observe changes in the exchange rate over time before changing their selling prices.  After several expensive wage settlements and a short period when the krone exchange rate was high had weakened profitability in the Norwegian business sector, the depreciation of the krone contributed to curbing the decline in activity and employment. The recession was short-lived.  Together with private consumption and fixed investment in the petroleum sector, traditional exports were an important factor underlying growth in the early stages of the upturn that started in the first half of 2003. Prices for many of our most important export goods have risen as a result of strong growth in new markets. Growth in Norway’s total exports excluding oil and gas is, however, lower than import growth among our trading partners.  Mainland fixed investment has gradually become an important driving force behind the upturn. Investment has picked up in most industries and growth was stronger than expected towards the end of 2004. Norges Bank’s regional network has registered rising investment in all industries. Petroleum investment in particular appears to be growing at a faster pace than projected. This may continue to boost mainland output.  In the past few years, household demand has been underpinned by low interest rates, high real wage growth and higher asset prices. According to preliminary national accounts figures, private consumption increased by 4.3 per cent last year. House price inflation has slowed somewhat, but remains high. Housing starts in 2004 were at the highest level for several years. Home refurbishment is probably also rising sharply.  Overall, the supply of capital to households has increased sharply. Debt accumulation was slightly higher than 11 per cent in 2004 and is now considerably higher than growth in household disposable income. This largely reflects the sharp rise in house prices since the mid-1990s.  According to TNS Gallup’s consumer confidence indicator for the first quarter of 2005, households are still highly optimistic with regard to their personal finances and the domestic economy. Our regional network confirms this view with reports of strong growth in companies that provide goods and services to households. On the whole, household consumption and housing investment are projected to show fairly strong growth over the next few quarters.  Despite the strong upturn in the mainland economy, the rise in the number of employed has been fairly modest. Productivity rose quite sharply in the first few quarters after economic growth picked up. Normally, strong productivity growth is gradually followed by an increase in employment. The current upturn has lasted about two years. The fairly low level of growth in employment, as measured by the number of employed, must be seen in the light of the sharp decline in sickness absence through 2004 after rising for several years. The decrease in sickness absence has increased companies’ supply of 2 BIS Review 18/2005 
labour and reduced the need for new employees. Measured in person-hours worked, employment growth was solid last year. Person-hours worked increased by 2.2 per cent from 2003 to 2004. A corollary to the increase in the number of person-hours worked is partly reduced sickness absence and partly three more working days in 2004 compared with 2003.  An increase in available person-hours and increased competition and rationalisation in many sectors led to higher-than-normal growth in potential output last year. The economy has therefore been able to grow a fairly rapidly for a period without the emergence of bottlenecks in the labour market.  In the business tendency survey, manufacturing industry reported higher output volumes and capacity utilisation. Average capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector is now close to its historical average. Norges Bank’s regional network reports that nearly half of the contacts would have some or substantial problems in increasing production in excess of planned levels. This may indicate approximate balance between supply and demand in the economy, and that capacity utilisation is about normal. A normal level of capacity utilisation is consistent with an output gap – the percentage deviation between actual and potential output - that is now close to zero.  Growth in demand and output is expected to remain high in the near term. Unemployment may fall somewhat more quickly than has been the case over the past year. The output gap is expected to be positive in 2005.  Higher demand for companies’ goods provides scope for increasing prices. Experience shows that inflation is directly influenced by the level of capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. Some of the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services can be attributed to higher margins in the business sector.  The effects of the interest rate decline on demand, output and employment have been pronounced. It has taken time for inflation to pick up. This partly reflects low external interest rates and high oil prices, which have moderated the impact on the krone exchange rate. Higher imports from low-cost countries, competition and improved efficiency in Norwegian production have also kept inflation at a low level.  Initially, it was the fall in prices for imported consumer goods that pushed down underlying inflation. After a period, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services also decelerated. This was due in particular to increased competition in some goods and service markets. At the same time, wage growth slowed as a result of lower capacity utilisation in the economy. A slower rise in house rents also contributed. Inflation measured by the CPI-ATE reached its lowest level in the first months of 2004. Inflation remained at less than ½ per cent until after the summer before picking up in autumn. Inflation moved up primarily as a result of a slower decline in prices for imported consumer goods, but the depreciation of the krone since the beginning of 2003 has also contributed. In addition, the rise in prices for domestically produced goods and services stabilised, and towards the end of 2004 there was a tendency towards a higher rise in prices for these goods and services.  At the beginning of 2005, inflation measured by the CPI-ATE was lower than expected. Prices for imported consumer goods fell more than expected. It is uncertain whether this price decline was due to abnormal seasonal patterns or a fall in underlying inflation. The fall in prices may be related to an unusually warm winter, which has made it more difficult to sell winter clothing and sports equipment at ordinary prices. On the other hand, there are indications that prices for imported consumer goods in foreign currency may have fallen somewhat more than previously assumed.  The wide variations in prices for some imported consumer goods, especially clothing and footwear, may entail wide monthly variations in consumer price figures. Excluding changes in prices for clothing and footwear, the year-on-year rise in the CPI-ATE was 1.3 per cent in February, up from 1.1 per cent in January.  Changes in indirect taxes and particularly in VAT rates make it difficult to interpret the most recent price figures. The low level of inflation at the beginning of the year may be due to a lag in price adjustment following the indirect tax changes.  Among the companies in our regional network, the share expecting a sharper rise in selling prices is larger than the share expecting a slower rise in prices. TNS Gallup’s business sentiment survey gives a more neutral impression. Nevertheless, both surveys indicate expectations of a sharper rise in prices in the service sector.  The other Nordic countries have also experienced falling inflation.  BIS Review 18/2005 3 
Inflation in the Nordic countries has declined, and is now relatively low in Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway. According to the harmonised indices of consumer prices, inflation in February was around 1 per cent in Denmark, Sweden and Norway, while the rise in prices remained unchanged in Finland, as measured by 12-month changes. By comparison, price inflation in the euro area was close to 2 per cent.  A common feature of the low level of inflation in the Nordic countries seems to be the trend in prices for imported consumer goods, even though developments have not been entirely the same in all the Nordic countries.  The upturn is broadly based, and its effects are no less pronounced here in Rogaland. Demand is increasing in all sectors, particularly in oil-related industries and the construction sector.  The market outlook for export-oriented and oil-related industries in the next six months is very bright and optimism is greater now than in the previous round of interviews. Domestically oriented manufacturing has not experienced large fluctuations in demand and output to the same extent.  It appears that growth in investment will increase in the period ahead: the high level of investment in the petroleum sector will contribute to higher investment growth in the offshore supplier industry. There are signs of rising investment in the construction industry. "Repatriation" is also being considered in Rogaland: the Gjestal Spinneri spinning company is looking at the possibility of investing in a new facility in Oltedal, enabling the company to transfer production from the UK to Norway.  Employment is rising, with the most marked increase in the construction sector. Almost a third of the enterprises report that shortages in the supply of qualified labour may constrain output growth.  Through the past year, there have been increasing reports of higher selling prices. One in four manufacturing enterprises is expecting a higher rise in prices this year than in 2004. In retail trade, two in three enterprises are expecting an accelerating rise in prices. The picture is mixed for the corporate service sector.  Profitability is still improving considerably in all sectors. This reflects both an increase in volume and cost reductions.  In the adopted budget for 2005, the structural, non-oil deficit increases compared with 2004. It therefore appears that fiscal policy will provide some stimulus to growth this year. In the National Budget for 2005, the underlying rise in expenditure over the central government budget was projected at 5.2 per cent, which is somewhat lower than the previous year and somewhat lower than projected nominal growth in mainland GDP. As from 2006, it is assumed that nominal growth in general government expenditure will be approximately the same as nominal growth in general government revenues and that the real tax level will remain unchanged.  Growth in the euro area and Japan was weaker towards the end of 2004 than projected in the November Inflation Report. It appears that it will take time for structural changes that have been implemented, in Germany for example, to contribute to an increase in output. In the US, on the other hand, economic growth remains firm and capacity utilisation is rising. Even though developments in the US economy are favourable, higher interest rates, among other factors, will gradually result in an increase in household saving. At the same time, the plans call for a lower rise in government spending. Weaker growth in US demand may imply slower growth also in other countries. In addition to the euro area, economic growth is expected to slow in the UK and Sweden.  On balance, we assume that growth among our trading partners will slacken this year and stabilise in the years ahead.  Growth in Asia, except Japan, and in Central and Eastern Europe is expected to moderate but to remain strong.  Robust expansion in China and India has in particular pushed up prices for oil and other important commodities. Growth impulses to the Norwegian economy may therefore be somewhat stronger than the overall outlook for our most important trading partners would indicate. High demand for commodities produced by Norway is boosting activity and is strengthening profitability for Norwegian enterprises.  Partly due to very high growth in demand for oil, the average price of Brent Blend rose to almost USD 40 per barrel in 2004. Strong economic growth, particularly in the US and China, has resulted in high energy consumption. So far this year, the price of Brent Blend oil has largely hovered around USD 45 per barrel, although the price rose to more than USD 50 per barrel at the beginning of March.  4 BIS Review 18/2005 
Oil futures prices have also increased. Little idle production capacity in OPEC countries, combined with the prospect of lower production in non-OPEC countries, has probably influenced oil prices. At the same time, there are prospects of continued strong demand growth in important oil-importing countries, such as China and some other emerging economies.  On the other hand, US crude oil stocks are now far larger than they were at the same time last year and the previous year. Petrol stocks are also relatively high. This reduces the risk that low stocks and high petrol demand will push up the price of crude oil, as was the case last summer.  Planned, large-scale projects resulted in strong growth in petroleum investment in 2004. Due to persistently high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high, investment in the petroleum sector may reach record levels this year. The investment intentions survey for the petroleum sector points to very high growth. The level is expected to remain high throughout the projection period. Activity in the petroleum sector will have spillover effects on the mainland economy, initially on the shipbuilding industry and the construction sector.  The scale of petroleum investment and its spillover effects are highly uncertain. The last time petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than had been assumed. An upturn occurred in the Norwegian economy as a whole at the same time. The unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was substantially stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a long period, petroleum investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn more than projected.  Inflation among our trading partners is expected to be low over the next few years. It is likely that high prices for oil and other commodities will continue to push up prices for goods where wages account for a small portion of total costs. On the other hand, growth among most of our main trading partners will probably be too low for idle resources to be utilised in the next few years. Particularly in the euro area, wage growth is likely to be low as a result of moderate economic growth and high unemployment.  Overall, it would appear that international price impulses via consumer goods to the Norwegian economy will remain negative this year and next. There is no indication that growth in imports from low-cost countries is declining. For example, China’s share of footwear imports to Norway increased by 4 percentage points to 20 per cent in 2004. The share of clothing imports increased by 2 percentage points to 32 per cent. The decline in prices for clothing and footwear will probably continue in the coming years. Prices for audiovisual equipment are still falling as a result of strong international competition and high productivity growth.  We assume that the effects of structural changes in these markets will gradually be exhausted towards the end of the projection period. External price impulses via consumer goods are expected to increase in pace with unit labour costs among our trading partners.  The projections in Inflation Report 1/05, published on 16 March, are based on a gradual increase in the interest rate. This is in line with financial and foreign exchange market expectations. The krone exchange rate is assumed to move in line with the forward exchange rate. This implies that the krone will remain fairly stable around the current level in the years ahead.  Growth in private consumption is expected to remain buoyant both this year and next, primarily reflecting low real interest rates, strong growth in real disposable income and a continued rise in house prices. In the period ahead, higher employment and wage growth will continue to fuel household demand. On the other hand, household debt has risen sharply. This implies that a normalisation of interest rates will increase household net interest expenses. After a period, growth in consumption may be fairly low. However, we assume that households will spread consumption over time so that the savings ratio will continue to fall in spite of an increase in interest rates.  Growth in housing investment is expected to ease through 2005. However, the projection for housing starts is also very high for 2005. Such a high level of housing starts over several years probably means that more dwellings will be constructed than implied by underlying demand. As a result, housing investment is expected to decline after a period. Higher interest rates and weaker developments in the Norwegian economy may also lead to a fall in residential construction after a period.  The upturn in mainland fixed investment is broadly based. Stronger profitability, higher capacity utilisation and solid export growth will contribute to continued investment growth in goods-producing industries. Demand for services is expected to continue to grow for a period ahead with an attendant BIS Review 18/2005 5 
increase in investment in service sectors. When growth in the economy gradually slows down, investment growth will probably slacken.  Mainland exports of good and services from mainland Norway will also benefit from solid global growth this year. Later in the period, a continued loss of market shares as a result of high cost levels will dampen export growth.  Unemployment is expected to decline this year and next. In subsequent years, growth in demand and output is expected to ease, and unemployment may edge up again when capacity utilisation approaches a more normal level.  With a somewhat tighter labour market in the years ahead and rising inflation, wage growth may pick up. Over the past year, low consumer price inflation has probably contributed to keeping nominal wage increases lower than implied by labour market tightness in isolation. Low inflation has resulted in high growth in household purchasing power, even with moderate pay increases.  With a path for the interest rate and the krone exchange rate in line with the baseline scenario in Inflation Report 1/05, inflation may increase gradually from less that 1 per cent today to close to 2 per cent in mid-2006. Under these assumptions, inflation may stabilise at around 2½ per cent at the three-year horizon. However, continued shifts in trade patterns, with higher imports from Asia and intensified competition in retail trade, may prolong the period of low inflation.  Developments in the krone exchange rate are uncertain. The real krone exchange rate measured by relative labour costs is strong. Historically, the real krone exchange rate has tended to return to an average measured over a longer period. Should this occur in today’s situation, through a depreciation of the nominal krone exchange rate, inflation will pick up somewhat faster than projected. If the krone appreciates, on the other hand, there is a risk that inflation will not move up as quickly as projected.  Developments in line with the projections imply that the output gap will increase to about 1¼ per cent in 2006. As the interest rate gradually increases to a more normal level, growth in private demand will probably ease, and capacity utilisation may be brought down and stabilise. There is uncertainty associated with developments in demand and output in the near term, partly because the interest rate has been low for a long period. Higher growth may rapidly trigger stronger pressures in the economy.  Output growth in Norway is high, and capacity utilisation is rising. It may appear that growth has become more self-driven. The low interest rate will probably contribute to an increase in the output gap and inflation ahead. The operational objective of monetary policy is inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. In the conduct of monetary policy, emphasis is also placed on curbing fluctuations in output and employment.  The objective of stabilising developments in output and employment implies, in isolation, a higher interest rate. This will reduce the risk that capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy will become too high. High capacity utilisation could give rise to bottlenecks in some sectors of the economy and lead to a higher rise in property prices and household borrowing. This could be a source of instability in demand and output in the somewhat longer run.  The objective of bringing inflation back to target and anchoring inflation expectations nevertheless implies a continued expansionary monetary policy. International interest rates are rising, albeit slowly and from a low level. There are prospects of continued low inflation for a period ahead. Even if capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy rises, there appears to be little risk that inflation will rapidly move up to a level that is too high. Inflation was unexpectedly low in the first months of this year, but in the light of our highly open economy we must perhaps expect somewhat wider variations in inflation than some other countries.  The projections and assessments presented in Inflation Report 1/05 may as a whole imply that the key rate can after a period, and then gradually, be brought up to a more normal level.  At its monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Norges Bank’s Executive Board decided to leave the key rate, the sight deposit rate, unchanged at 1.75 per cent. The Executive Board weighed the objective of bringing inflation back to target and stable inflation expectations against the risk that output growth may eventually be too high. 6 BIS Review 18/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration - the view of the ECB Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Eurofi conference entitled “Europe’s single capital market: time to tackle the toughest challenges”, Luxembourg, 10 March 2005. *      *      * Introduction  Ladies and gentlemen, It gave me great pleasure to accept the invitation to this conference, which addresses an issue of the highest importance to the ECB and the Eurosystem. With this in mind, I would like to express the ECB’s views on European financial integration.  Let me start by reminding you that financial integration is achieved through an effective interplay of market forces in an environment of free competition, coordinated action by private actors and specific measures taken by public authorities. The ECB both supports and complements such steps. Our support for financial integration is not something we see as optional. On the contrary, we see it as an issue that is of great importance in the conduct of our own activities. Let me give the underlying reasons behind this stance. First, a well integrated financial system is pivotal to the smooth and effective implementation of monetary policy throughout the euro area. In this regard, I would also like to mention the ECB’s task of promoting the effective operation of payment systems, as well as its interest in the smooth running of securities settlement systems. Second, a well integrated financial system helps to make the euro area economy more efficient through the reduction of financing costs and an improved allocation of financial resources. This is likely to be conducive to higher and more sustainable non-inflationary growth. A study sponsored by the European Commission concluded in 2002 that further integration in the European Union might generate additional gains of 1% in the overall level of real GDP over a decade or so. Third, European financial integration is a priority that has been reiterated by the European Council on several occasions. The ECB’s support for European financial integration is therefore in accordance with Article 105 of the Treaty, which states that “the ESCB [– European System of Central Banks –] shall support the general economic policies in the Community with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objectives of the Community”. Finally, there is the interconnection between financial integration and financial stability. As deeper financial integration may, to some extent, change the interplay of vulnerabilities, the potential impact of these on financial stability – which is of natural interest to central banks – has to be taken into account.  The ECB uses all available channels in its efforts to foster European financial integration. We try to raise awareness of the need for integration and the means of achieving it. We also advise on the shaping of the legal framework. Furthermore, the ECB can act as a catalyst for collective initiatives from the private sector. Finally, where appropriate, the ECB can take direct action. I will later give several examples of these different roles. I would like to discuss now the three major components of the financial system, namely the institutions, the markets and the infrastructure. I will address both the wholesale and retail aspects of these three components, and will touch upon developments that can be deemed a success, as well as areas where more effort is required.  Institutions Following the adoption of the single currency, the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) represented the next major stage in the integration process. Now that the FSAP is nearing completion, I see the post-FSAP period as a “window of opportunity” for further enhancing financial integration. At the same time, I am convinced that further progress is inextricably linked to the improvement of the regulatory and supervisory framework and the financial stability arrangements. In particular, institutional BIS Review 18/2005 1 
arrangements must respond to the need for greater cross-border cooperation, with a view to both supporting further integration and at the same time preserving financial stability. In the area of financial regulation and supervision, a key objective is to achieve a high degree of regulatory and supervisory convergence across countries. This will help reduce the compliance burden on financial institutions, thus addressing one of the largest remaining obstacles to enhanced cross-border activities. At the same time, well developed arrangements for the exchange of information and the cooperation among supervisory authorities have become a prerequisite for the effective supervision of cross-border entities. In the area of financial stability, arrangements for financial stability monitoring and crisis management need to be tailored to the fact that liquidity and solvency problems at financial institutions are increasingly likely to affect more than one country. The institutional framework for banks is especially important. Given its pivotal role in channelling funds into the EU economy, a well integrated banking sector is a prerequisite for achieving a truly single financial market. In recent years, we have witnessed an increase in cross-border banking. The considerable competitive pressures in the global markets and the increasing saturation of domestic markets should normally spur further cross-border banking. Policy-makers have already launched important initiatives to step up cross-border cooperation in line with the growth of cross-border banking. While some challenges for the coming period certainly remain, impressive progress has already been made.  In the area of financial regulation and supervision, the extension of the Lamfalussy approach to the banking sector and the establishment of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) are such milestones. Here, I would like to emphasise the crucial work performed by the CEBS, which develops common benchmarks and best practices for the consistent implementation of EU Banking Directives as well as agreed principles for cooperation between home and host supervisors. In addition, the forthcoming revision of the Codified Banking Directive will provide a robust underpinning for greater cross-border cooperation among authorities, especially for large banking groups. The revised Directive will tighten the requirements for the information exchange and coordination between the consolidating supervisor and host supervisors. It will also assign the consolidating supervisor a coordinating role in the gathering and dissemination of information about the group as well as the planning and coordination of supervisory activities. Following these two major reforms, efforts should now focus on their effective implementation. As regards financial stability, there has been a significant increase in cross-border arrangements in response to the recommendations of the reports by the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) on financial stability and crisis management. The important role of the Financial Services Committee (FSC), which was responsible for monitoring the implementation of the EFC recommendations, should be fully acknowledged at this point.  With regard to crisis management, the 2003 Memorandum of Understanding between EU banking supervisors and central banks, and to which the new EU Member States adhered in June 2004, was a great accomplishment. For the first time, principles for managing financial crises that may have a cross-border impact were agreed at EU level. Nevertheless, the Memorandum may be not sufficiently detailed to cover large cross-border banking groups comprising several authorities, where crisis management is particularly complex. Given the potential far-reaching implications of financial disturbances involving such groups, the development of group-specific agreements could be an important avenue to explore. Another important issue is the involvement of finance ministries in the crisis management framework. A High-Level Working Group, comprising representatives from the ministries of finance, central banks and banking supervisors, is working on concrete proposals for cooperation arrangements between the three authorities at EU level. As regards financial stability monitoring, the EU framework has been enhanced considerably in recent years. In this context, I would like to highlight the stability assessment of the EU banking sector, performed by the ESCB’s Banking Supervision Committee, and the comprehensive analysis of potential vulnerabilities in the euro area financial system as a whole, which was carried out as part of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. In addition, the CEBS is expected to improve its internal exchange of information on individual institutions and groups. 2 BIS Review 18/2005 
Markets I now turn to the second component of the financial system, the financial markets. The introduction of the euro and the measures adopted under the FSAP have spurred the integration of the European financial markets. Nevertheless, there continue to be varying degrees of integration.  Wholesale money and bond markets tend to be relatively well integrated, but only the unsecured euro money market has reached a fully satisfactory level of integration.  The integration of the market of debt securities has been significantly increased, although not yet reaching the level of the United States. In the euro area, the amount of outstanding debt securities issued by non-financial corporations in their domestic currency represents around 5% of GDP, compared to a figure of more than 20% in the United States.  Integration is progressing in the government bond markets and, to a lesser extent, also in the corporate bond markets. The corporate bond markets have grown and deepened substantially in Europe over the past years, although a large gap with the United States still exists as regards the outstanding volume. But the new issuances in 2003, according to the best estimates, were of the same order of magnitude on both sides of the Atlantic. The business of underwriting corporate bonds in euro, on the other hand, is a wholesale banking area that has become largely pan-European and even international.  The short-term securities markets in Europe are slowly integrating. The market’s size for commercial paper in the EU represents about EUR 1000 billion, which is about two thirds of the size the US market for commercial paper. As I mentioned earlier, one of the ECB’s approaches to fostering financial integration is to act as a catalyst for initiatives from the private sector. One such example is the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, which was set up by the ACI – The Financial Markets Association. It aims to promote the convergence of the practices prevailing in the fragmented European short-term securities markets through market players’ voluntary compliance with the standards set out in the STEP Market Convention. The Governing Council of the ECB has decided to support, in principle, the activities pertaining to the introduction of a STEP label, which would acknowledge adoption of the standards, for the first two years after its launch. It has also decided to produce and publish STEP yield indices as well as statistics on volumes on an ongoing basis. The ECB would like to strongly encourage similar initiatives to promote financial integration in Europe. Continuing my assessment of the wholesale markets, I will briefly discuss the equity market. Recent empirical evidence shows that the degree of integration has increased here. For example, the so-called “home bias” in the equity holdings of investment and pension funds has decreased substantially over the time. Overall, however, this market segment is still one of the least integrated. As a final comment on the wholesale markets, I would like to say a few words on the development of new credit markets. Sometimes, these markets are set up in a pan-European context right from the start – we might say they are “born integrated”. One example of this is the European market for synthetic collateralised debt obligations.  This development is encouraging. However, the existence of cross-border activity, with its impact on prices and volumes, does not always signal the absence of hurdles and the achievement of full integration. Factors of segmentation may still exist, but can be overcome by innovative instruments. For example, in the securitisation market, originators need a two-layer structure to create pan-European transactions backed by well diversified multi-jurisdictional asset portfolios: first, assets must be securitised at the domestic level, and then, a pan-European vehicle backed by several domestic securitisation transactions must be set up. This is a complex procedure and incurs costs. I now turn to an important retail market, namely the mortgage credit market which represents in the EU an outstanding volume of around EUR 4 trillion. The lack of integration manifests itself here in numerous ways. In no national market can borrowers access the full range of mortgage products. Moreover, only a negligible portion of European mortgage credit is granted across borders, and the techniques for loan origination and servicing differ substantially from country to country.  More than half of mortgage lending is still financed by retail deposits, although in recent years capital market instruments, such as covered bonds and residential mortgage backed securities, have gained in importance. These are important asset categories that can also be used as collateral in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations. Nevertheless, they still exhibit a high degree of heterogeneity across countries due to differences in their legal, tax and regulatory framework.  BIS Review 18/2005 3 
Given the size of the mortgage credit market, the costs incurred through the lack of integration cannot be ignored. In this regard, the ECB supports both private-sector and European Commission initiatives to encourage further integration, such as the follow-up to the report of the Commission’s Forum Group on Mortgage Credit.  Infrastructure  Integration of financial markets cannot take place without an integrated payment, clearing and settlement infrastructure. This brings me to the third component of the financial system, the financial infrastructure, which also gives me the opportunity to illustrate some cases of where the ECB has taken direct action.  TARGET is one such example. Had TARGET not been operational from the first day of Monetary Union, there would have been no means of transferring liquidity from a country with a liquidity surplus to a country with a liquidity deficit. Consequently, we would not have had a single but several money markets, which would have made monetary policy far more difficult to implement. Over time, TARGET has continuously increased its market share in large value payments in euro. TARGET's market share is now around 90% of the total traffic value compared to 70% at the moment when the euro was launched. At the same time, the domestic component has remained at roughly three quarters of the total traffic value. However, our ambitions did not stop in 1999. We are currently building TARGET2, which is due to go live in 2007 and will replace the current decentralised system with a single technical platform. By the way, with EUR 1.7 trillion settled every day, TARGET is already one of the two largest wholesale payment systems in the world, alongside Fedwire in the United States. With the functionalities that will be introduced in TARGET2, we also expect it to be one of the most, if not the most, sophisticated. TARGET2 will further improve financial integration in several respects. Not only will it increase cost effectiveness, but it will also allow for the provision of a harmonised service level ensuring a level playing field for banks across Europe. This will be supported by the implementation of a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments. Moreover, TARGET2 will offer new functionalities enabling banks to better integrate their euro liquidity management. For example, participants will be able to group some of their accounts and pool the available intraday liquidity for the benefit of all of the members of the group of accounts. In addition, TARGET2 will benefit its users in terms of consolidated information. Whereas in the past an institution’s head office has not been able to see the information being held across its various branches, TARGET2 will enable it to monitor and process automatically all of its data from a single location.  The level of integration that TARGET had already achieved in 1999 can be considered higher than that of the securities infrastructure today. Owing to the single currency, a significant process of consolidation has also taken place in the securities infrastructure in the euro area. At the present moment, the current configuration remains complex, with a significant number of national exchanges, clearing houses and central securities depositories. Further consolidation of some of the European infrastructure is advisable. The ECB has a particular interest in an integrated securities infrastructure because it uses it in the context of the collateralisation of its intraday credit operations for payment system purposes and its monetary policy. In addition, a major disruption in a securities settlement system could undermine the stability of financial markets.  There are numerous private and public-sector initiatives under way to promote the integration, efficiency, and security of the European securities infrastructure. The “Standards for Securities Clearing and Settlement in the European Union” that have been drawn up jointly by the ESCB and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) are an important initiative. In its communication on “Clearing and Settlement in the European Union”, the European Commission recently outlined the actions it intends to undertake to improve clearing and settlement arrangements, which are welcomed by the ECB and the Eurosystem. In particular, we agree that the barriers as identified by the “Giovannini Group”, must be eliminated. In addition, we concur that some parts of the clearing and settlement industry deserve careful attention from a competition policy point of view. Finally, in order to ensure the smooth operation of the markets and guarantee financial stability, we share the Commission’s view that a sound regulatory framework is essential.  4 BIS Review 18/2005 
In principle, the ECB and the Eurosystem also support the adoption of a framework directive on clearing and settlement, for two main reasons. First, a directive would complement the market-led removal of the “Giovannini barriers”, a necessary condition for competition to be able to fully play its role. Second, the implementation of the ESCB/CESR standards, as well as any other harmonisation measures, may require changes to the national legal framework that cannot be made by the national supervisory authorities. We do not expect this framework directive to duplicate the work of the ESCB/CESR. Rather, in line with the Lamfalussy approach, the directive should stipulate high-level principles to be further developed by implementing measures. We agree with the Commission that the ESCB/CESR standards might form the basis of such implementing measures. Last, but not least, in the light of our interest in the financial market infrastructure, the Commission is invited to recognise explicitly, the responsibilities and tasks of the ESCB and the Eurosystem, especially their role in the oversight of the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure.  Having covered the wholesale aspects of the financial infrastructure, I now turn to the retail aspects, which are very important. Take the example of the mortgage markets that I covered earlier. A pan-European mortgage market cannot develop if there are limitations on making payments from one bank to another within the euro area.  In this regard, the Eurosystem’s initial objective is to have a Single Euro Payments Area – a SEPA – for citizens and enterprises in the euro area from 1 January 2008 onwards. According to the Commission’s regulation, the price charged by banks for a cross-border transfer must be the same as that of a transfer within the same country. While prices to the end-customer have been homogenised through legislation, the level of service cannot be influenced by legislation. What is lacking is the possibility of using national instruments for pan-European business as well. A real SEPA will only be achieved when payments can be made throughout the whole area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as in the national context today.  The ECB’s second objective is to have a SEPA for the infrastructure by the end of 2010. Once national instruments, services and standards have been gradually phased out and replaced by pan-European ones, national infrastructures will be abolished or transformed into pan-European ones. Consequently, decisions related to the next generation of national systems should be made from a pan-European perspective to ensure compliance with the SEPA. To encourage national implementation, the respective national banking communities should translate the SEPA objectives into national transformation plans, allowing each bank and infrastructure provider to tailor its strategies and solutions towards a SEPA. The ECB intends to monitor this progress with the assistance of the European Payments Council (EPC). National banking communities will be requested to provide national migration plans for a SEPA in the course of this year. The EPC has the initiative and capability to define the pan-European schemes for credit transfers, direct debits and cards. However, since the EPC has no power to enforce, it would have to rely on the cooperation of the banking sector and infrastructures. The ECB, in cooperation with the Eurosystem NCBs, stands ready for facilitating the implementation of the SEPA objectives and for fostering the full adoption of the project which it considers key for achieving financial integration. Concluding remarks Ladies and gentlemen, I have explained why the ECB attaches utmost importance to progress in European financial integration and I have talked about the various channels we have at our disposal for fostering it. In describing the present state of affairs, I have also given the main examples where the ECB actively contributes to European financial integration. At the same time, I have made it clear that the ECB expects continued efforts from the private sector and I have mentioned the substantial opportunities of, but also the challenges to, the relevant public policy framework. The ECB has demonstrated since the first days of its existence that it is a credible and solid anchor for monetary stability. Financial institutions and market participants know also that they can count on the ECB to be in the domain of financial integration a very strong pillar to sustain their efforts and to facilitate the success of this important European endeavour.  Thank you very much for your attention. BIS Review 18/2005 5 
Susan Schmidt Bies: Bank Secrecy Act and capital compliance issues Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, DC, 14 March 2005. *      *      * Good morning. I want to thank you for the invitation to speak at the Institute's annual Washington conference. International banking organizations are playing an increasingly important role in the U.S. financial sector. Foreign banking organizations hold more than $3.5 trillion in banking and nonbanking financial assets in the United States - making these organizations some of the biggest financial holding companies operating in this country. For two broad reasons, U.S. banking supervisors give a great deal of thought to the foreign banking organizations here. First, the management of complex international banking businesses creates inherent risks, which must be mitigated through sophisticated enterprise-wide risk management and internal controls. International organizations face difficult questions of management and control across their geographically dispersed offices. They often operate in new and unfamiliar financial terrain, which poses strategic challenges. And they are vulnerable to terrorist financing, money laundering, and other customer fraud issues that tend to involve cross-border transactions.  Second, international banking organizations are regulated by supervisors in various national jurisdictions that have different legal, regulatory, and supervisory frameworks. Thus, the supervision and regulation of these organizations requires the continuous coordination and cooperation of host- and home-country supervisors. While banks operate globally, supervisory and regulatory responsibility for the various operating units of the organizations is still based on laws and regulations of sovereign states. Complying with diverse laws and regulations can be complex and costly for global banking organizations.  Today, I want to touch on two regulatory issues that are currently high on the list of both bankers and supervisors: Bank Secrecy Act compliance and Basel II implementation.  Compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act Since the passage of the USA Patriot Act in 2001, which significantly amended the Bank Secrecy Act, compliance in this area has been a major concern for the banking industry. In large part, bankers' concerns center on the increased burden of complying with the amended Bank Secrecy Act, the apparent lack of consistency in oversight and supervision, and law enforcement issues. The Federal Reserve recognizes that banking organizations have devoted significant resources to helping the government identify and prosecute those who are involved with money laundering, the funding of terrorist activities, and other crimes. But some recent events are affecting bankers' perceptions about their role in this critical area, and have raised serious questions about what bank regulators and other government authorities - most notably law enforcement agencies - expect of bankers.  Today, I want to provide some background information and describe what the Federal Reserve is doing, in coordination with the Justice and Treasury departments, to clarify expectations and dispel misconceptions about compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. But first I want to emphasize an important point about the Bank Secrecy Act: Implementation of the act has traditionally been accomplished through a partnership among banks, supervisors, and law enforcement authorities. The law requires reports and recordkeeping that is useful to all these entities. Further, the law capitalizes on the role of banks in payment systems. As collectors of financial information, banks are in a good position to identify questionable or suspicious payments or activities. For the past decade, the key obligation of banks within this partnership has been the filing of Suspicious Activity Reports, or SARs, in accordance with regulations issued by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and all of the federal banking and thrift regulators. The agencies' rules require banking organizations to file SARs to alert law enforcement authorities and federal bank supervisors about a known or suspected violation of law, or about any suspicious activity being conducted at, by, or through a bank, thrift, or credit union. By filing SARs, banking organizations put critical information into the hands of the proper law enforcement authorities in a timely and effective manner. Since the SAR system was started in 1996, banking BIS Review 17/2005 1 
organizations have filed more than 1.7 million SARs. That is an enormous amount of cooperation and information sharing.  However, recent criminal investigations and prosecutions based on Bank Secrecy Act and SAR reporting violations have attracted significant industry attention. Most importantly, these cases have generated complaints from the financial industry about the increased burden of Bank Secrecy Act compliance, as well as the uncertainty of future requirements - particularly for the filing of SARs. Believing that regulators and law enforcement authorities have set a zero-tolerance level for SAR-filing deficiencies, banking organizations are concerned that in certain situations failing to file a SAR could result in a criminal prosecution.  Bankers are telling us that regulatory criticism and criminal prosecutions based on SAR-filing deficiencies can produce collateral consequences. For example, banks are tending to avoid customers, such as money transmitters and check cashers, who present perceived heightened risks. Yet the closing of accounts for these types of businesses is effectively a denial of banking services to many categories of legitimate customers. Banking organizations have also begun to file "defensive" SARs in an effort to avoid any criticism of their judgment about whether some activity is illegal or suspicious, and to avoid sanctions for failing to file particular SARs. The Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has reported that these defensive filings threaten to clutter the SAR database with information that cannot be properly analyzed due to the volume.  Bank regulators and FinCEN recognize that no process for fraud or money laundering detection and control can reasonably be expected to perfectly detect every transaction. But, financial institutions are expected to have a sound anti-money-laundering compliance program. This must include well-defined processes to identify suspicious activities, and those processes should be tailored to the risk and complexity of each business line. Banks should provide sufficient training to line staff, compliance officers, internal auditors, and legal staff to keep employees on the alert for suspicious activities. Further, when questionable activity is detected, the bank must respond promptly and effectively, and work with appropriate law enforcement authorities and bank regulators.  I am sure that you are aware by now of the interagency efforts to develop and issue new, enhanced Bank Secrecy Act examination guidelines and procedures within the next few months. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking supervisors, with the active participation of FinCEN, are drafting these more-detailed uniform examination guidelines and procedures. We are reaching out to the industry during this stage of the project. Once the procedures are completed, we will work hard to educate our examination forces and the industry about the guidelines and procedures. These efforts are intended to better ensure consistency in the Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering supervision programs of the bank regulators and FinCEN - the entity within the U.S. Treasury that is statutorily responsible for the implementing the Bank Secrecy Act.  In addition, the Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisory agencies recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding with FinCEN to share critical information about banking organizations' compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. By providing pertinent Bank Secrecy Act information to FinCEN, which is adding additional staff to fulfill its responsibilities, the Federal Reserve and the other regulators can now better coordinate their supervision and enforcement efforts, thus further reducing the potential for unwarranted compliance burdens. FinCEN is also committed to providing both bankers and regulators information about emerging money-laundering schemes and guidance for continually improving Bank Secrecy Act compliance.  The Federal Reserve is also working with senior Justice and Treasury officials to ensure they understand the efforts of banks and the regulators to ensure compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act. We want awareness of these compliance efforts to be consistent throughout the criminal justice system so that the industry and its regulators can continue building partnerships with law enforcement authorities.  I would now like to move on to a discussion of Basel II implementation. Basel II Implementation Basel II represents a fundamental change in how bank capital is determined for regulatory purposes. The advanced approaches require banking organizations to make significant investments to improve risk-management processes and measurement so that minimum regulatory capital better reflects each institution's unique business mix, risk appetite, and control structure.  2 BIS Review 17/2005 
Internationally active banking organizations, in particular, have understandable concerns about the prospect of each national supervisor across the expanse of their global operations asking a multitude of questions about Basel II implementation, demanding considerable amounts of data, applying the framework differently, or taking other actions that increase costs. Inevitably, some of you will find your institutions calculating capital under different approaches in the various jurisdictions in which you operate.  To help national supervisors coordinate and achieve greater consistency in the implementation of Basel II within their individual countries, the Basel Committee, as you all know, has established the Accord Implementation Group (AIG), headed by our colleague Nick Le Pan, Canada's superintendent of financial institutions and the vice chairman of the Basel Committee. Nick is here today and will be addressing the recent efforts of the AIG and the greater issue of home-host supervisory coordination in some depth.  I want to assure you that U.S. supervisors are sensitive to the need to coordinate their efforts. We will do our best to make compliance manageable for global banking organizations and to improve our coordination efforts with foreign supervisors. These initiatives include entering into written supervisory cooperation and information-sharing arrangements with financial institutions' supervisors in countries that share cross-border banking operations with the United States. However, while we can strive to minimize the burden on regulated institutions, we cannot eliminate it.  A critical point for this audience, and this is true for Bank Secrecy Act issues as well, is that we as regulators are committed to applying the same rules to foreign-owned organizations that we apply to domestic ones. Foreign-owned U.S. bank holding companies, banks, and thrifts that meet the criteria for mandatory Basel II institutions will be required to follow the advanced approaches. U.S. bank holding companies, banks, and thrifts owned by foreign organizations that do not meet these criteria - including the great majority of institutions represented in this audience - will have a choice to either follow our current capital framework in the United States or to "opt in" to the advanced Basel II approaches. If you decide to opt in, you will have to meet the same qualification requirements as domestic organizations.  The new Basel II rules are expected to take effect on January 1, 2008. To qualify by that date, both supervisors and bankers have substantial work to accomplish. Currently, we are reviewing the submissions received from various banking organizations as part of a quantitative impact study, QIS-4, to assess the effects of Basel II rules on bank capital levels. This summer, the agencies will issue a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) for Basel II. We will also issue for comment, amendments to the existing capital framework. Thus, bankers will be able to compare the two alternatives and to evaluate which is appropriate for their U.S. operations. In the run-up to 2008, institutions subject to the new rules will be required to conduct a year of parallel calculations; that is, institutions will have to perform a dress rehearsal, if you will, to demonstrate not only that the design of the Basel II systems is sound but also that the rules can be practically implemented.  As you know, the federal banking agencies in the United States have stated that a small number of large, internationally active banking organizations will be required to follow the advanced approaches of calculating capital under Basel II. A year and a half ago, we proposed setting the threshold at $250 billion or more in total banking assets or $10 billion or more in foreign banking assets. The criteria in the forthcoming notice of proposed rulemaking are unlikely to differ materially from those levels.  At the same time, U.S. regulators - especially those among us who spent the greater part of our careers as bankers - are very sensitive to the competitive implications of having two sets of rules for the banking industry. Regulators recognize that Basel I can be enhanced and that the Basel II standardized approach is not well suited to the needs of our domestic-focused community banking organizations. Accordingly, we are now seriously considering making some targeted adjustments to our existing regulatory capital rules and looking for ways to enhance their risk sensitivity without increasing regulatory burden. The staffs of the agencies are drafting an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) suggesting possible changes to our existing capital rules. This advance notice will be published close to the publication of the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking.  Finally, those institutions considering adoption of the advanced approaches at the earliest possible date should begin defining the details of their own implementation plans, while identifying gaps and placeholders for further discussion with supervisors. In this regard, the U.S. banking agencies recently issued guidance describing how we expect the implementation process will work in the United States and some steps that banking organizations could consider. To be sure, several important implementation issues still need to be worked out, but the focus on enhanced risk management in BIS Review 17/2005 3 
Basel II (especially in the advanced approaches) means that banking organizations should not view Basel II preparations with a checklist mentality. Rather, they should be moving ahead on many fronts, looking at how to make the fundamental changes needed for better risk identification, measurement, management, and control. By doing so, banking organizations can position themselves to succeed in implementing the accord on a timely basis.  Throughout the process, it will be critical that you regularly communicate with your primary supervisor about whether you plan to "opt-in" to the advanced approaches and about your timeframe for compliance. Regular communication can help the supervisor allocate resources to support the qualification process. It can also help the supervisor focus on your implementation efforts, identify issues that need to be addressed, and provide prompt responses to your questions. 4 BIS Review 17/2005 
V Leeladhar: Basel II Accord and its implications Speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Bankers’ Club, Mangalore, 11 March 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to share my thoughts with you on a subject which is currently engaging the attention of the banking community, not just in India but worldwide. Let me first admit upfront that although I am at the moment wearing the regulator’s hat, yet I have been a commercial banker for most part of my professional career. So, the banker in me still goads me to put myself in bankers’ shoes before evaluating any regulatory options. I can better appreciate some of nuances from a practical stand point, and therefore shall try to put them more from a banker’s perspective rather than that of a regulator. Managing risk is increasingly becoming the single most important issue for the regulators and financial institutions. These institutions have over the years recognized the cost of ignoring risk. However, growing research and improvements in information technology have improved the measurement and management of risk. It’s but natural therefore, capital adequacy of a bank has become an important benchmark to assess its financial soundness and strength. The idea is that banks should be free to engage in their asset-liability management as long as they are backed by a level of capital sufficient to cushion their potential losses. In other words, capital requirement should be determined by the risk profile of a bank. The initial capital accord of 1988 was hugely successful with more than 100 countries accepting it as a benchmark. One of the major reasons for the success of this framework was its being simple. It brought in uniformity and attempted to make regulatory capital requirement consistent with the economic capital. Reserve Bank of India introduced risk assets ratio system as a capital adequacy measure in 1992, in line with the Basel accord of 1988, which takes into account the risk element in various types of funded balance sheet items as well as non-funded off balance sheet exposures. In fact, RBI norms on capital adequacy at 9% are more stringent than Basel Committee stipulation of 8%. Shortcomings in the present accord  However, the present accord has been criticized as being inflexible due to its focus on primarily credit risk and treating all types of borrowers under one risk category regardless of credit worthiness. The major criticism against the existing accord stems from its • Broad brush approach – irrespective of quality of counter party or credit • Encouraging regulatory arbitrage by cherry picking • Lack of incentives for credit risk mitigation techniques • Not covering operational risk As time passed, some of the major international banks began using sophisticated models to measure risk. This was when a need was felt to upgrade the Basel framework. Therefore, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision thought it desirable that the present accord is replaced by a more risk-sensitive framework. Three pillars The new Basel Accord has its foundation on three mutually reinforcing pillars that allow banks and bank supervisors to evaluate properly the various risks that banks face and realign regulatory capital more closely with underlying risks. The first pillar is compatible with the credit risk, market risk and operational risk. The regulatory capital will be focused on these three risks. The second pillar gives the bank responsibility to exercise the best ways to manage the risk specific to that bank. Concurrently, it also casts responsibility on the supervisors to review and validate banks’ risk measurement models. The third pillar on market discipline is used to leverage the influence that other market players can bring. This is aimed at improving the transparency in banks and improve reporting. BIS Review 17/2005 1 
Issues and Challenges Having given you a brief overview of the current and proposed new framework, I shall now move on to the implementation challenges for the banks especially in a developing country like India. Here, I would skip the methodological details and technical nitty-gritty associated with the new accord, and concentrate instead on more profound implications for the banking industry.  ISSUES AND CHALLENGES While there is no second opinion regarding the purpose, necessity and usefulness of the proposed new accord - the techniques and methods suggested in the consultative document would pose considerable implementational challenges for the banks especially in a developing country like India. Capital Requirement:  The new norms will almost invariably increase capital requirement in all banks across the board. Although capital requirement for credit risk may go down due to adoption of more risk sensitive models - such advantage will be more than offset by additional capital charge for operational risk and increased capital requirement for market risk. This partly explains the current trend of consolidation in the banking industry. Profitability:  Competition among banks for highly rated corporates needing lower amount of capital may exert pressure on already thinning interest spread. Further, huge implementation cost may also impact profitability for smaller banks. Risk Management Architecture:  The new standards are an amalgam of international best practices and call for introduction of advanced risk management system with wider application throughout the organization. It would be a daunting task to create the required level of technological architecture and human skill across the institution. Rating Requirement:  Although there are a few credit rating agencies in India, the level of rating penetration is very low. A study revealed that in 1999, out of 9640 borrowers enjoying fund-based working capital facilities from banks, only 300 were rated by major agencies. Further, rating is a lagging indicator of the credit risk and the agencies have poor track record in this respect. There is a possibility of rating blackmail through unsolicited rating. Moreover rating in India is restricted to issues and not issuers. Encouraging rating of issuers would be a challenge. Choice of Alternative Approaches:  The new framework provides for alternative approaches for computation of capital requirement of various risks. However, competitive advantage of IRB approach may lead to domination of this approach among big banks. Banks adopting IRB approach will be more sensitive than those adopting standardized approach. This may result in high-risk assets flowing to banks on standardized approach, as they would require lesser capital for these assets than banks on IRB approach. Hence, the system as a whole may maintain lower capital than warranted and become more vulnerable. It is to be considered whether in our quest for perfect standards, we have lost the only universally accepted standard. Absence of Historical Database: Computation of probability of default, loss given default, migration mapping and supervisory validation require creation of historical database, which is a time consuming process and may require initial support from the supervisor. Incentive to Remain Unrated:  In case of unrated sovereigns, banks and corporates, the prescribed risk weight is 100%, whereas in case of those entities with lowest ratting, the risk weight is 150%. This may create incentive for the category of counterparties, which anticipate lower rating to remain unrated. Supervisory Framework:  Implementation of Basel II norms will prove a challenging task for the bank supervisors as well. Given the paucity of supervisory resources, there is a need to reorient the resource deployment strategy. Supervisory cadre has to be properly trained for understanding of critical issues for risk profiling of supervised entities and validating and guiding development of complex IRB models. Corporate Governance Issues:  Basel II proposals underscore the interaction between sound risk management practices and corporate good governance. The bank's board of directors has the responsibility for setting the basic tolerance levels for various types of risk. It should also ensure that management establishes a framework for assessing the risks, develop a system to relate risk to the bank's capital levels and establish a method for monitoring compliance with internal policies. 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
National Discretion:  Basel II norms set out a number of areas where national supervisor will need to determine the specific definitions, approaches or thresholds that they wish to adopt in implementing the proposals. The criteria used by supervisors in making these determinations should draw upon domestic market practice and experience and be consistent with the objectives of Basel II norms. Disclosure Regime:  Pillar 3 purports to enforce market discipline through stricter disclosure requirement. While admitting that such disclosure may be useful for supervisory authorities and rating agencies, the expertise and ability of the general public to comprehend and interpret disclosed information is open to question. Moreover, too much disclosure may cause information overload and may even damage financial position of bank. Disadvantage for Smaller Banks:  The new framework is very complex and difficult to understand. It calls for revamping the entire management information system and allocation of substantial resources. Therefore, it may be out of reach for many smaller banks. As Moody's Investors Services puts it, "It is unlikely that these banks will have the financial resources, intellectual capital, skills and large scale commitment that larger competitors have to build sophisticated systems to allocate regulatory capital optimally for both credit and operational risks." Discriminatory against Developing Countries:  Developing countries have high concentration of lower rated borrowers. The calibration of IRB has lesser incentives to lend to such borrowers. This, along with withdrawal of uniform risk weight of 0% on sovereign claims may result in overall reduction in lending by internationally active banks in developing countries and increase their cost of borrowing. External and Internal Auditors:  The working Group set up by the Basel Committee to look into implementational issues observed that supervisors may wish to involve third parties, such a external auditors, internal auditors and consultants to assist them in carrying out some of the duties under Basel II. The precondition is that there should be a suitably developed national accounting and auditing standards and framework, which are in line with the best international practices. A minimum qualifying criteria for firms should be those that have a dedicated financial services or banking division that is properly researched and have proven ability to respond to training and upgrades required of its own staff to complete the tasks adequately. With the implementation of the new framework, internal auditors may become increasingly involved in various processes, including validation and of the accuracy of the data inputs, review of activities performed by credit functions and assessment of a bank's capital assessment process. CONCLUSION Implementation of Basel II has been described as a long journey rather than a destination by itself. Undoubtedly, it would require commitment of substantial capital and human resources on the part of both banks and the supervisors. RBI has decided to follow a consultative process while implementing Basel II norms and move in a gradual, sequential and co-coordinated manner. For this purpose, dialogue has already been initiated with the stakeholders. A steering committee comprising representatives of banks and different supervisory and regulatory departments is taking stock of all issues relating to its implementation. As envisaged by the Basel Committee, the accounting profession too, will make a positive contribution in this respect to make Indian banking system stronger. BIS Review 17/2005 3 
Süreyya Serdengeçti: Derivatives markets - Turkish Derivatives Exchange Speech by Mr Süreyya Serdengeçti, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, on the occasion of the opening of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, İzmir, 3 February 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen and Distinguished Guests, It is indeed a great pleasure for me to address you today on the occasion of the opening of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, which is the beginning of a new era for the Turkish economy.  Today, I will focus on the changing process of the Turkish economy within the framework of uncertainty and risk factors. I will also talk about the development of derivatives markets within this process, including their functions in the economy and especially in monetary policy. My remarks will be based on a macro framework rather than a micro one. Dear Participants, When we look at the Turkish economy, it can clearly be seen that risk management and derivatives markets, where risk is managed, as well as the institutionalized risk management culture established in the economy have failed to reach a satisfactory level and yet are still weak both in financial and real sectors, although this had constantly been on the agenda since the 1980s. The questions that should be asked at this point are that why risk management principles could not be established in our economy in a modern sense until now and why functionality in the derivatives markets could not be achieved in the proper sense. At this point, two factors come into the foreground: The most important and principal factor to be underlined in both an economic and social aspect is chronic inflation and the uncertainty that its presence has caused in Turkey for thirty years. This period has seriously damaged the economy. For instance, money and capital markets have failed to develop, long-term financial resources have remained limited and it was not possible to develop markets, which occupy a significant share in the capital markets of developed countries, namely those for the provision of housing financing. Moreover, our economy has failed to achieve sound integration with international markets and a short-term vision has prevailed in all fields, including the social arena.  Furthermore, chronic inflation triggered volatility in basic economic indicators, including growth and employment, as well as in variables such as exchange rates and interest rates. The excessive volatility in economic fundamentals resulted in a continuous increase in uncertainty and crises. Thus, after each economic crisis, uncertainty jumped to a higher level. Uncertainty and volatility caused a vicious circle and made risk management almost impossible.  Dear Guests, At this point, let me elaborate on the concepts of uncertainty and risk, which have a key role in the development of derivatives markets and are of great significance for both policy practitioners and the economic agents acting as decision-makers.  Although the word “risk” refers to both its literal meaning and uncertainty in daily use, in fact these two concepts differ from each other as to their effects on economic agents and events1. Risk can be measured. Cases where the course and results of the events neither cannot be measured nor predicted are not referred to as risk but uncertainty. In other words, the intangible aspect of events is defined as uncertainty.  Due to the intangible nature of uncertainty, its results and the extent of its effects cannot be predicted. Probability cannot be attributed to uncertainty. Uncertainty is inevitable and its results are unmanageable. There exists no market that can avoid uncertainty.                                                        1 Knight, F.H. (1985), “Risk, Uncertainty and Profit”, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, Chapters 2 and 7. BIS Review 17/2005 1 
On the other hand, risk refers to the part of the future effects of events which can be measured. Risk can be calculated; results of risks can be explained by certain probabilities. In this context, risk is predictable and we can manage its results. There exist markets for risk management.  In Turkey, high and volatile inflation has been the main source of uncertainty for the last 30 years. Concepts of uncertainty and risk have become indistinguishable. Hence, it has been impossible to implement risk management or to establish risk management agents on this slippery slope.  At this point, I would like to emphasize on a technical matter. As it is known, volatility is priced in derivatives markets. When uncertainty is high, volatility increases significantly. This makes pricing difficult and in these circumstances prices reach very high levels. Hence, risk management becomes almost impossible. This is one of the underlying reasons for the poor risk management in our country. The fact that future uncertainty was high until recently due to macroeconomic instability had kept the general level of interest rates in an upward trend. As a result, these factors have prevented the smooth operation of derivatives markets.  The second factor that has led to the poor development of risk management and of derivatives markets in Turkey is high public deficits, which caused the fragility of the public finance. As we are all aware, in the past, capital accumulation was based on public resources in Turkey. However, as a result of increasing public deficits, the capital provided by the public sector to the private sector was then extended by the private sector to the public sector. In this context, the market developed by “government securities” that are issued against public debt have become the most important and only market, which uses almost all the resources of the economy due to increasing public debt as well as high real interests payable. Such a framework, in other words, an environment where fiscal dominance is rather high did not allow neither the emergence of new financial instruments to finance the private sector, nor the deepening of financial markets. Moreover, portfolio diversification, the simplest element of risk management; could not be achieved. The most significant point in this process is that, as an outcome of both the structure of financial markets and other policies implemented, a lot of risks such as exchange rate risk, interest rate risk, price risk and default risk were assumed by the public. In this scenario, the private sector did not feel the need to manage its own risks. In other words, both individuals and institutions left risk management to the government and this process created a vicious circle.  In conclusion, the uncertainty caused by chronic inflation and high public debt created by public deficit hindered the development of risk management and therefore, of derivatives markets.  Dear Participants, I am glad to say that as of today we have started to solve problems of the past. The Turkish economy is still undergoing a structural change process and significant progress has been made.  Let me outline this process of change in the Turkish economy in three main points, which will serve as guidelines to the necessary steps we should take in the future.  The first point is that we have made great progress in the fight against inflation, the primary source of uncertainty as well as in establishing lasting macro-economic stability. Today, inflation is in single-digits. More importantly, our surveys measuring expectations reveal that the public now recognizes that inflation is controllable and price stability is definitely an achievable target.  The tight fiscal policy implemented during the process of establishing macroeconomic stability has contributed to both entering a growth period based on solid foundations arising from the private sector; reducing the role of the private sector by decreasing fiscal dominance and establishing stability through its impact on expectations.  Parallel to this, following these developments, the capital accumulation process is undergoing a change as well. The source of growth is no longer the public sector, but the private sector. A rise in productivity has come to the foreground in all sectors. We are about to establish an economic structure for which measurements and criteria of the global market apply.    In this scenario, the ease of uncertainties brings risk management and risk instruments into the foreground. From now on, each economic unit should assume and manage its own risk as in every sound market. This is the basic concept that underlies the development of derivatives markets in the world.  Secondly, I would like to focus on some concepts that are relatively new for our country; namely institutionalization, accountability, transparency and, in this context, the importance of communication 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
policies. Both the institutionalization of the policies in implementation and transparency of the government agencies implementing these programs and sharing them with the public play a key role in easing the uncertainties in our economy. The third point regarding the changing process of the Turkish economy I would like to share with you is the increase in confidence, which is actually an outcome of the issues that I have just mentioned. To clarify this point, public confidence in the economic policies in implementation and favorable expectations of the results of these policies have improved and are continuing to improve.  The most concrete indicator of this confidence is that the inflation target is becoming a more credible nominal anchor for most of the economic agents. In other words, it is more commonly used as a reference.  The existence of a strong nominal anchor in an economy, which can be used as a reference, helps to shape other economic variables. Accordingly, volatility both in economic fundamentals and in other variables gradually decreases. As I have already emphasized at the beginning of my speech, this point is of great importance with respect to resolving the pricing difficulty arising from excessive volatility. Moreover, today we are happy to see that economic units are now able to foresee longer terms and they are now able to carry out longer-term transactions. These developments are drastic steps for determining benchmark interest rates for pricing derivatives operations.  Thanks to the macroeconomic stability and structural transformation process, we have now reached the point where we can make risk management in a sound and healthy environment.  The Turkish Derivatives Exchange is the most important pillar and complementary element of this process. In all our presentations held in several Anatolian cities, at the Grand National Assembly or in the Council of Ministers Meetings since 2001, we, as the Central Bank, has pointed at the significance of the derivatives market and indispensability of these markets. Dear Guests,  Now that we have briefly considered the phase of uncertainty and the process of development of risk management in Turkey, I would like to give you an overview of this development process in the world. First of all, let me remind you that although conducting transactions on the futures market dates back to a long time ago, its development has taken a long time. Regarding this issue, I would like to share with you some information that I believe to be interesting. Aristotles’s writings inform us that the first recorded account of derivative contracts can be traced 2500 years back to the ancient Greek Thales of Miletus, for the spring olive harvest during the winter. We know that rice futures were being traded in Japan in 17th century and futures for grains were traded in Holland in 18th century. The development of the financial derivatives exchange accelerated parallel to the need for hedging increased exchange rate risk after the collapse of the Bretton Woods System in the 1970s, which lasted for approximately 30 years and provided a system of fixed exchange rate system. At the outset of this process, many people severely objected to the establishment of derivatives markets claiming that they would encourage volatility and increase speculations and manipulations on the markets. This very much reminds me of the “it is not possible in Turkey” or “it is not the right time,” comments I hear whenever we try to implement something new. The Nobel prize winning economist Milton Friedman’s speech at the opening of the foreign exchange options market at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange in Autumn 1971 contains some very important information for us2. As Friedman pointed out, financial instruments relating to foreign trade are all complementary and the British case shows that financial services may well become a very profitable export item. Within this framework, he argued that the development of a derivatives market, which is normally expected to exist in the natural evolution of markets, not in another country but in the USA is important not because it increases trade and investment here but it enables export of these services as well. Thus, he claimed that the development of derivatives markets would support the development                                                       2  Friedman, M. (1971), “The Need for Futures Markets in Currencies”, in The Futures Market in Foreign Currencies, Prepared for the International Monetary Market of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc. pp. 6-12. BIS Review 17/2005 3 
of other financial activities in the country, would bring additional income through exports in services sector and enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. Dear Guests, Today the transaction volume in derivatives markets is very much above the transaction volume in spot markets, where the trading and exchange of goods traded is realized on the same day. In 2004, the volume of daily derivatives transactions in the global foreign exchange market, excluding over-the-counter markets, was US dollar 1.2 trillion, which equals 65 percent of the total market turnover3.  Dear Participants, Today we are about to bring in, and more importantly, institutionalize risk management principles and to initiate the development process of derivatives markets. This process is of great importance with respect to the overall economic activities. It should be borne in mind that this process will sometimes be arduous and time-consuming and it will also be a self-fulfilling process. Even if it takes a long time, sooner or later the derivatives markets will be established in our country.  I am pleased to say that I am very happy to witness the efforts to develop derivatives markets and this achievement as well as its significance for the entire economy is a very important step for Turkish economy.  At this point, I would like to share with you an expression we frequently reiterated at the initial stage of the fight against inflation, which was supposed to be a tough and long-lasting process: “Even a thousand-year long journey starts with a single step4.”   Dear Guests, As I have mentioned before, derivatives markets are one of the components of economies that “ought to be present anyhow in the natural evolution of markets”, as put forward by Friedman. At this stage, I would like to draw your attention to the magnitude and significance of the functions performed and changes brought about in the economy by these markets, which were also evaluated within the framework of the experiences of other countries. The more informed we are about this subject, the more derivatives markets will be embraced and derivative instruments will become more widespread.  Considering the three-dimensional nature of the functions of financial markets; time, risk and information, the time dimension creates risks concerning the future, whereas the information dimension facilitates more accurate decisions to be taken as the future can be predicted with fewer errors.  Within this framework, the first function of derivates markets is to ensure the management of risks on a wide spectrum ranging from financial instruments such as foreign exchange rates and interest rates to commodity prices. The second function is to provide economic agents with correct information through the prices formed in the market.  At this point, let me clarify certain points with regards to the floating exchange rate regime, which has been implemented in Turkey since 2001 and in almost eighty countries all over the world up to now. This has to do with the exchange rate being among the first contracts to be operative in the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, as well as its significance within the context of risk management, which is the primary function of derivatives markets.  As we have emphasized at all times since the first day of the floating exchange rate regime in Turkey, under this regime exchange rates are determined by supply and demand conditions. The level of the exchange rate is shaped by economic developments, external shocks, and expectations and fluctuations in the risk premium are applicable to all of them. Neither the Central Bank nor any other authority has any commitment or target whatsoever as regards the level of exchange rate.                                                        3  Bank for International Settlements (2004), “Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in April 2004”. 4  Chinese proverb. 4 BIS Review 17/2005 
At this point, I would like to underline two points missed by those who held the opinion from the start that the floating exchange rate regime could not be implemented in Turkey, as the risk in this regime was too high, there would be too much volatility in the foreign exchange markets, and the economy, especially the foreign trade would be adversely affected as a result of these.  The first point is that when fixed or foreseeable exchange rate regimes are implemented - like we did in the past-, in economies similar to our economy, where capital movements are free the exchange rate risk does not disappear, but is assumed by the public sector or by the central banks, as the monetary authority. Considered as a whole, in environments where the economy has a relatively fragile structure, further elevated by the loose fiscal policies of governments, this may be even more costly than each economic unit assuming its own exchange rate risk under the floating exchange rate regime.  The second point is that the presence of derivatives markets would enable foreign trade firms, under the floating exchange rate regime, to act as if exchange rates were fixed. In other words, with the development and widespread use of derivatives markets, the level of foreign trade would not differ under the floating exchange rate regime from that under the fixed exchange rate regime, and exchange rate risk would cease to be a factor influencing the level of foreign trade5. Although these markets are being newly founded in Turkey, I would like address a point, which often comes up in international literature and which I believe might arise in Turkey in the coming periods. Leaving aside the fact that speculative transactions are frequently made in derivatives markets, and especially in the foreign exchange market, these markets are alleged to increase risk and volatility in the economy. However, derivatives markets do not create new risks in the economy; instead, they allow the management of the imminent risk. The origin of such thoughts is a common misperception with regards to transactions carried out speculative purposes. Especially in foreign exchange markets, the level of exchange rate is determined not by futures transactions, but by spot market transactions. As transactions in the derivatives markets do not affect one-to-one the supply or the demand-side liquidity, they equally do not affect the price formed in the spot markets. In this case, speculative transactions that might be observed in the derivatives markets should not be expected to have a drastic impact on the spot markets.  Furthermore, as I have already pointed out several of my speeches, there are two groups of speculators in markets. The first group buys when prices go up, expecting prices to rise further or sells when prices go down, expecting prices to decline even more; we can describe this group as bad speculators. This is the type of speculator mostly seen in Turkey. Also in the process of the fight against inflation, this group held its assets in foreign exchange, in line with old habits; thus continuing to buy foreign exchange at high rates, with the belief that Turkish lira would depreciate anyway, used no instruments whatsoever for risk management; and when Turkish lira appreciated under the floating exchange rate regime due to market conditions, the group criticized the stability program and policies implemented. This group of speculators, despite increasing volatility to a certain extent, cannot remain in the market for long, as they generally lose money.  The second group or the good speculator, on the other hand, in line with his/her forecasts, sells when it is a bull market and buys when it is a bear market. Leaving aside the problems of causing volatility, this group contributes to stability in the markets.  Within this framework, it is possible to see members of both groups in any market. In an effective market, it is not possible to make a profit continuously guided by bad speculation, nor do the prices formed in the market approach those prices indicated by economic variables. Consequently, speculation does not have much effect on prices created in an effective market; on the contrary, it may make a positive contribution to the markets by increasing liquidity. Hence, speculation is not a threat in derivatives markets, but a guide in activating the spot market by increasing liquidity. Another important point with regards to derivatives markets is that these markets enhance the predictability of spot markets, which form the basis, and help them perform more effectively, by enabling the expectations of economic units in the future to be measured and reflected on prices. As a matter of fact, prices in derivatives markets are actually the prices that are expected in spot markets in the future.                                                        5  Baron D. (1976), “Flexible Exchange Rates, Forward Markets and the Level of Trade”, The American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 3, pp. 253-66.  BIS Review 17/2005 5 
Consequently, derivatives markets contribute to the predictability cash flows of economic agents and their profits or losses arising from risk or volatility by reducing excessive volatility in spot markets, on one hand, and by offering an opportunity to economic agents for risk management, on the other hand.  In this way, fragilities in the firms sector arising from deteriorations in balance sheets are restored and the economy as a whole strengthens itself against shocks. At this stage, I would like to highlight one more point about the floating exchange rate regime. In Turkey, firms have to be cautious about imbalances in foreign exchange denominated assets and liabilities on their balance sheets. Under the floating exchange rate regime, firms with foreign currency-denominated income and domestic currency-denominated expenditure, or vice versa, should restore the imbalances on their balance sheets, in other words, eliminate the exchange rate risk they are faced with. In order to achieve this, firms should observe risk management principles and employ derivatives market instruments.  Firms, especially production firms, can allocate more resources for production by reducing the financial risks on their balance sheets. This also makes an important contribution to enhancing the competitiveness of firms.  As of 2003, 92 percent of world’s largest 500 non-financial firms are protected against risk through derivatives instruments and this further reinforces the importance of such instruments6. Moreover, I would like to point out that the benefits of derivatives instruments do not depend on the size of the firms they are used by. Derivatives instruments are beneficial for all firms and the decision to use these instruments is largely shaped by the goals of the firm rather than its size.  Here, I would like to touch upon a point about the information transmission function of derivatives markets. Derivatives markets offer economic agents the chance to price their expectations of the future. Thus, thanks to derivatives markets, expectations become measurable and through prices, more information concerning the future is shared with other economic agents. This structure enables a more effective resource allocation mechanism through more effective financial markets in the economy as a whole.  Besides their contribution to the effectiveness of the resource allocation mechanism, the development of derivatives markets helps the financial sector to grow. Hence, derivatives markets contribute to the increase in national income and employment by indirectly encouraging more effective resource allocation and by providing value added. Derivatives markets introduce new investment instruments to the financial intermediary system, or in a broader sense, to the financial system. This, in turn, increases the number of instruments investors can use in order to diversify their portfolios and thus deepens financial markets.  If we analyze what the diversity in investment instruments means for our country, we see that thanks to the derivatives markets, both real sector and financial sector investors will be able to manage their risks in diversity in line with the world markets and this structure will help our country to integrate with world markets.  Here, I would like to draw your attention to the large number of studies that stress the favorable effect of the presence of sufficiently developed, deepened and efficient derivatives markets on foreign direct investments. Dear Participants, In addition to all these benefits derivatives markets provide to the economy, they bear extra importance as a complementary element of financial markets in terms of their interaction with monetary policy and thus with the central bank.   As it is known, establishing financial stability is one of the most important factors to be considered by all central banks that have set price stability as their primary objective. In this framework, derivatives markets, which help to sustain financial stability through their contribution by reducing volatility in the markets, support central banks in maintaining financial stability.  The second contribution of derivatives markets to the monetary policies of central banks is that thanks to their functions in risk management and in providing information, they expedite and activate the transmission mechanism used by monetary policy in giving direction to the economy.                                                        6 International Swaps and Derivatives Association, News Release on April 9, 2003.  6 BIS Review 17/2005 
Central banks adopt a long-term perspective in their target and try to affect the long-term movements of economic variables with the decisions they take. In this framework, it is crucial for a central bank to have as much information of a long-term nature about the economy and the future as possible. Hence, derivative markets play a crucial role in enlarging the information set used in monetary policy via the information they provide about the future.  The critical point here is that while derivatives markets enable the enlargement of the information set required by central banks in making their decisions, on the one hand, they improve the flow of information about the future course of monetary policy needed by economic agents and make contributions in terms of assuring a more predictable monetary policy, on the other hand.  Dear Guests, In the framework of the interaction between monetary policy and the derivatives markets, of which I have tried to outline main points, I should clearly state that the development of Turkish Derivatives Exchange will make outstanding and diverse contributions to monetary policy.  Transactions in the Turkish Derivatives Exchange will play a key role in the inclusion of quantitative and forward-looking information in Central Bank reports, especially with the transition to full-fledged inflation targeting in 2006.  Before I finish, I want to mention a few issues concerning the future of derivatives markets in Turkey.  A new era will start with the operations of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange. The main goal in the coming period should be carrying out all the arrangements concerning the functioning of derivatives markets with the utmost care while bearing in mind that these markets act as a catalyst for the whole economy. Moreover, measures should be taken in order to direct banks and firms towards transacting in these markets.  Examples in other countries show us that there is a strong positive correlation between the transaction volume and liquidity rise of derivatives markets and the presentation of the issue, introduction of the markets and the training to be given. It has been confirmed that training programs aimed at enabling the economic agents to perform more effective risk management using derivatives instruments fueled the development of derivative markets in many countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Japan. Taking these examples into consideration, we see that the training of institutional and individual investors bears great importance in Turkey as well, where derivatives markets are a new concept. The Central Bank has provided all kinds of support for the development of these markets and will also continue to give support from now on. However, it is crucial that especially non-governmental organizations should fulfill their liabilities, introduce the Turkish Derivatives Exchange to their participants and provide the necessary training.  Dear Participants, To conclude, I would like to emphasize once more that a drastic step has been taken today with the inauguration of the Turkish Derivatives Exchange, in line with recent favorable developments in our country. I hope this step will bring with it new opportunities for the future.  Thank you. BIS Review 17/2005 7 
Jaime Caruana: Basel II - a review of ongoing work Keynote address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the 20th Annual General Meeting of the ISDA (International Swaps and Derivatives Association), Barcelona, 16 March 2005. *      *      * Mr Moulds, Mr Pickel, Ms. Sebton, distinguished guests, It is an honour for me to be invited to join your meetings today and it is furthermore my pleasure to welcome you and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association to Spain.  It appears to me that you have all of the ingredients for a stimulating and memorable conference. The agenda is ambitious and addresses the latest topics in the ever-evolving derivatives markets. The speakers are distinguished, deeply experienced, and represent a wide range of perspectives and institutions at the forefront of financial services.  And, of course, I must commend you on your selection of a marvellous location for your annual meeting. Barcelona has undergone a fantastic transformation, is a gateway for the world and a city that celebrates the ancient and the innovative. I hope that you take some time outside of your sessions to explore its blending of the old and the new. A walk through the “Gothic” quarter serves as a window into our past. A visit to any of the creations of Antoni Gaudì – after whom this conference hall was named – offers a vision of Catalan modernism through architecture. Selecting Barcelona as the venue for ISDA’s discussions offers us a chance as well to celebrate the ancient and the innovative, the old and the new, in financial services. This conference, for example, will address some of the most sophisticated products in banking and finance and the risk management practices, legal developments, and technological advances that are emerging to support these new businesses. At the same time, our discussions here in Barcelona will remind us that we must all always monitor and control the fundamental – and traditional – risks involved in our activities.  Credit risk, market risk, and operational risk have always been with us in various forms, although they have increased in complexity over recent years. What has changed dramatically, however, is our ability to measure and monitor those risks more comprehensively than our predecessors ever could. We have, moreover, improved our ability to manage or transfer those risks, and I would like to share with you today some thoughts on work underway in the financial community in this regard. There are three topics that I would like to address in my intervention.  I will begin by sharing first, in my personal capacity, some thoughts regarding the need for standards to evolve and keep pace with the times, whilst ensuring that new standards are not unduly burdensome and do not hinder firms’ abilities to innovate. In this respect, I’d like to look forward and address some of the work we are doing to ensure that the new international capital standard - Basel II - remains flexible and able to adapt to emerging practices and risks. Many of you have a very strong interest in the efforts the Committee is undertaking to consider how best to apply Basel II to certain trading-related exposures using the latest tools being developed by the industry. While this work is still ongoing, I would like to share a status report with you on that effort. Finally, I will highlight some of the work that we are undertaking to promote a smooth and consistent transition to Basel II, including our plans to conduct a review of the calibration of the framework, as well as our efforts in the field of supervisory co-operation and validation, and the key messages that are coming out of these initiatives.  The evolution of standards and regulatory burden Allow me to begin by sharing some personal thoughts on a topic that has captured some attention recently: The view, held by at least some in the financial services sector, that the tide of regulation has risen to a high water mark. In my own conversations around the world, I have heard similar concerns from some bankers. Some point to the long debates that have taken place in the accounting BIS Review 17/2005 1 
profession. Others point to regulatory reforms underway, such as those to transpose and implement the Committee’s own work on Basel II, the new capital framework.  It should be said that the industry itself recognises that there is work to be done in these areas.  However, I do have sympathy for the sense that much is changing today. I understand that keeping pace with these changes can absorb resources and require attention. In this sense, and especially in relation to our work on Basel II, I see some merit in concentrating, at least for a while, on completing current regulatory work, and on ensuring the quality and consistency of its implementation. Let me expand a little on this point. Financial service providers often compete on their ability to create value by offering new products and services to customers. As just one example, ISDA represents institutions that are among the most active in the private negotiation of derivative instruments. These instruments are initially tailored to unique sets of circumstances and may involve novel features of risk-taking or risk mitigation.  The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that the rules support and encourage  firms in their efforts to improve their ability to manage their businesses while pursuing new opportunities. That is a constant responsibility for legislators, for standards-setters, and for supervisors, but also for the industry. We must all review and ensure that our rules are implemented fairly and in line with our intentions.  Some reforms underway represent efforts to ensure that our rules keep pace with the achievements that the industry has already made. On this note, I would argue that Basel II is just as much about aligning supervisory practices more closely with the industry’s latest advances as it is about promoting improvements in the management of risk within the industry itself. But I sympathise with the sense that the wide range of standards that are evolving in parallel represents a drain on the limited resources that firms have to keep pace with those changes. I agree that we must find a way to balance the dangers we are trying to ward off against the time and resources it takes to adapt to new circumstances and new rules. And I want to work with you to make sure that the labours you undertake are not merely exercises in compliance with new rules, but rather will represent honest efforts to strengthen your practices and your long-term prospects for growth and innovation. From my perspective as chairman of the Basel Committee, I can say that the Committee’s main focus in the near future will be on completing the current work and on implementing Basel II in a sound, consistent, and effective manner. This will allow us all a period to digest the framework we have designed. At the same time, we have always said that Basel II should be an evolutionary approach.  This does not mean a moving target.  We have designed a stable framework that we believe will stand the test of time.  But we have always been clear that some of the details may need to change over time to ensure that they remain relevant to the ongoing evolution in banking markets and risk management practices.  Indeed, in the text of the Basel II framework that was published in June 2004, the Committee re-iterated its intention to maintain an active dialogue with the industry to ensure that the new framework keeps pace with, and can be applied to, ongoing developments in the financial services sector. The framework itself already provides banks with a great degree of latitude in developing new measures of exposures to risk and new means for addressing them. But supervisors – and banks – are still responsible for evaluating whether the framework addresses risk exposures in a sensible manner and in line with our sense of sound and best practices that are being developed. Status of work on the trading book There are two areas where both banks and supervisors recognised that this work could already commence. One was to find a prudentially sound treatment under Basel II for exposures to “double default,” where the risk of both a borrower and a guarantor defaulting on the same obligation may be substantially lower than the risk of only one of the parties defaulting. The other area concerns the applying Basel II to certain exposures arising from trading activities.  This brings me on to my second topic. As you know, we have already spent close to three-quarters of a year studying both sets of issues in depth. Because both banks and securities firms have a great interest in the potential solutions to these particular issues, the Basel Committee has worked jointly with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) to consult with industry representatives and other supervisors on 2 BIS Review 17/2005 
these matters. I must say that this co-operation with IOSCO in areas of mutual interest has been a very fruitful and beneficial experience, and  the work has been conducted in a very positive and collaborative spirit.  Also in this regard, I must extend my thanks to ISDA and its members for being faithful and active participants in these discussions. ISDA and its members have volunteered again considerable data, time, and energy to the work at hand.  As you may already know, there are five specific areas of focus, namely  First, the treatment of counterparty credit risk for over-the-counter derivatives, repo-style and securities financing transactions;  Second, the treatment of double-default effects for hedged transactions, in relation with trading book, but also banking book, exposures;  Third, the short-term maturity adjustment, under the internal ratings-based approach, for some trading book-related items; Fourth, a limited number of improvements to the current trading book regime, especially with respect to the treatment of specific risk; and  Fifth, the design of a specific capital treatment for unsettled and failed transactions. I can report informally that I personally am highly satisfied with the progress that the joint Basel Committee and IOSCO working groups have achieved to date, which reflects in no small way the cooperation of the industry in preparing data and responses for the discussions. I expect that the Committee will release a proposal for a six-week period of public comment next month such that the proposals can be released in final form this summer. However, intensive work will continue prior to the discussions at the meetings of the Basel Committee and IOSCO’s Technical Steering Committee toward the end of March and the beginning of April.  So I cannot yet comment on the solutions that may be proposed or approved by the Committee and IOSCO. I can tell you that we set, as a guiding principle, a goal to apply Basel II to these exposures in a manner that reflects as best as possible sound practices already in use when those practices appeared to be both prudent and broadly acceptable to many kinds of banks and markets.  Some industry representatives have raised concerns that finding ways to apply Basel II to trading book exposures might lead to a revision of the existing “Market Risk Amendment” to the capital framework that was approved in 1995. Understandably, those industry representatives expressed concern that this might disrupt banks’ efforts to prepare for Basel II, which addresses mainly credit and operational risk. The members of the Committee shared this concern when we decided to undertake work on the prudential treatment of certain trading-related exposures under Basel II. We do not intend to overhaul the capital rules for trading book exposures, but rather seek to address narrowly a handful of concerns that relate either to potential inconsistencies that could arise with the new treatment for banking book assets or that relate to a limited number of issues that have arisen since the adoption of the Market Risk Amendment.  The implementation of Basel II With that, I would like to turn now to my third topic and report on our efforts to smooth the path from the existing capital standards to the new Basel II framework.  On the regulatory side, supervisors are working with national authorities to transform the framework into enforceable rules and regulations, within the context of each jurisdiction’s process. This work is well underway in all of the Basel Committee member jurisdictions, but also in many other countries as well. On the supervisory side, let me mention three areas in particular where we are devoting resources to promote a seamless transition to the new framework. Calibration First, we are verifying that Basel II has been calibrated appropriately. The Committee has long stated its intention to conduct work to re-confirm that the new framework meets our objective to broadly maintain the aggregate level of capital requirements, while keeping incentives to adopt the more advanced approaches that are offered.  BIS Review 17/2005 3 
In order to establish a common data set on which to base this review, the Committee has decided to begin a recalibration exercise in autumn this year. In addition, national field tests are already underway in some jurisdictions, while there will be a period of time during which banks will calculate their capital requirements in parallel under the 1988 Accord and under Basel II.  We recognise that these tests and reviews will demand resources from both banks and supervisors. Yet I must emphasise that neither banks nor supervisors will be able to evaluate the calibration of the new framework – and hence its effectiveness – if banks do not participate fully and seriously in these initiatives. Only you can provide the data that all of us will need to ensure that Basel II functions as we intend and that it does not create unintended side effects. Consistent and co-ordinated implementation Second, supervisors are working to avoid unexpected outcomes by developing, in advance, a better understanding of how various jurisdictions will apply Basel II. This is also helpful to developing a more consistent set of expectations across countries. In a world where the business of banking is increasingly international, the need for supervisors to cooperate and to strive for more consistent principles would exist even if Basel II did not. But under Basel II, this need is even more pronounced, especially for internationally active banks that wish to adopt one of the advanced approaches to credit or operational risk provided under Basel II.   In fact, in many ways, Basel II is acting as a catalyst for enhanced co-operation. The Committee is finding ways to avoid the need for those firms to endure redundant or uncoordinated reviews of the systems and processes they develop to benefit from Basel II. The Accord Implementation Group, which is chaired by Nick Le Pan, the Canadian Superintendent of Financial Institutions and Vice-Chair of the Committee, has already undertaken a number of practical exercises to encourage supervisors from many countries inside and outside the Committee’s membership to consider how they will review those systems and processes for firms that operate across borders. The AIG, as this group is known, identified two key lessons for banks to consider that may help to ease the transition to Basel II. One lesson is that the more detailed, comprehensive, and clear a firm’s plans are for moving to one of the more advanced approaches to risk management, the better able supervisors will be to assess and evaluate those plans in a less intrusive manner. But a second lesson takes this one step further: it is also important for banks to share those plans broadly with their branches and subsidiaries worldwide. Already some host supervisors have found that local managers may be unfamiliar with the parent organisation’s plans for Basel II: this understandably tends to make host supervisors less confident about the quality of an organisation’s planning and its readiness to move to Basel II. Moreover, it increases their need to ask more questions, some of which may duplicate the questions that the home supervisor or other host supervisors are asking. If a bank has already developed sufficiently detailed and transparent plans for its application of Basel II, a substantial portion of the hard work has already been done. Sharing those plans with home and host supervisors, and with managers throughout the bank’s operations and locations, should not require too much more effort. Instead, the bank should be in an even better position to focus on running its business confidently while still implementing its plans carefully for the future.  Validation One of the greatest challenges – for both banks and supervisors – of the Basel II framework is the need to validate the systems and processes used to generate the parameters that serve as inputs into the IRB approach to credit risk. Although validation is foremost the responsibility of banks, supervisors must have a thorough understanding of validation in order to ensure overall integrity of bank’s activities in this area. In recognition of the importance of validation the Committee recently published six principles on validation that will guide our future work.  We also published a working paper called: “Studies on the Validation of Internal Rating Systems” Let me mention these principles briefly. Firstly, we set out our understanding that validation is fundamentally about assessing the predictive ability of risk estimates and the use of ratings in credit processes.  Secondly, we stress that the primary responsibility for validation lies with the bank itself, while the supervisor’s responsibility is to review the bank’s processes and outcomes – a point which I think we all agree is very important.   4 BIS Review 17/2005 
The remaining principles relate more to the process itself.  We note that validation is a likely to be an ongoing, iterative process which will require an ongoing, iterative dialogue between banks and supervisors.  Then our fourth principle reflects that there is no single validation method, or universal tool for validation, even though techniques may converge over time.  We also highlight, in our fifth principle, that validation should encompass both quantitative and qualitative elements – validation is not a purely technical or mathematical exercise, but should also include an assessment of controls and other qualitative factors.  Finally, we stress our view that validation processes and outcomes should be subject to review within the bank, by parties which are independent of those who are responsible for the design and implementation of the processes.   I think these principles set out clearly what supervisory expectations are, and should provide a useful steer to the industry.  Our work on validation will accelerate over the coming months, although our focus will be more on sharing and cataloguing information and approaches, and not on trying to develop a prescriptive method.  As we have stated in our principles, the primary responsibility for validation lies with the banks themselves.  Close dialogue with the industry in our work will, of course, be of great importance. In turning to my conclusions, I would like to use this opportunity to make a brief comment from my perspective as Governor of the Banco de España.  Although I have talked about the work underway in the AIG on implementation, you are probably also aware of similar work being conducted in Europe, by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors, which is seeking to promote consistency and convergence in the application of Basel II in the EU.  As I have said on other occasions, I believe that Basel II represents a great opportunity for the EU – as a single market - to lead the way on international convergence, and I hope that we can seize this opportunity.  Certainly, the progress made by CEBS so far is encouraging in this respect. Conclusion Coming back to the points I made earlier, even considering the ongoing work on trading activities under Basel II, I believe that the vast majority of efforts being undertaken by banks and supervisors alike today related to Basel II are focused on implementing the very good rules that have already been developed. I believe that this should be the Committee’s main focus for the near term. It is important as well to remember that Basel II is not meant to be an exercise in compliance. Its goals are to improve the quality of risk management across the banking sector; to strengthen the resilience of the financial system; and to promote more sustainable economic growth for the good of both consumers and businesses alike. I look forward to continuing to work with you as we all enhance our efforts to make those goals a reality. BIS Review 17/2005 5 
Paul M W Tucker: Monetary policy, stability and structural change Speech by Mr Paul M W Tucker, Executive Director and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, at the Confederation of British Industry, Guildford, 1 March 2005. *      *      * MONETARY POLICY, STABILITY AND STRUCTURAL CHANGE1 Judging by the macroeconomic data, either there have been some fairly profound changes in our economy or we have been blessed by extraordinary good luck over the past decade or so.  GDP has grown without interruption for 50 quarters.  Unemployment has fallen from around 10½ % in 1992 to 6½ % in 1997, and just over 4½ % on the latest reading.  Inflation fell through the first half of the 1990s, and since 1997 has, on average, been close to the Government’s target.  All that is, of course, well known.   But it may be less familiar that quarter-to-quarter changes in output growth and inflation have over recent years exhibited a strikingly different pattern from those of previous decades.  Both output growth and inflation have been less variable (Chart 1; Table 1).  Inflation also seems to have become less persistent.  By that, I mean that, whereas in the past rises or falls in inflation tended to be protracted, more recent fluctuations in inflation have been short lived.  Work undertaken by Bank of England economists,2 summarised in Table 2, suggests that – at least statistically – this apparent change occurred around the time of the UK’s introduction of inflation targeting in 1992.   The policy debate – inside and outside the Bank – has recently refocused on the possibility of some other changes in the way our economy functions.  Less than 18 months ago, the Bank’s interest rate was just 3.5%, essentially because the MPC wanted to stimulate private sector domestic spending to offset the effects on aggregate demand of weak net trade, given adverse developments in the world economy.  As global conditions recovered, and with a pick up in public sector spending, we were able gradually to withdraw much of that stimulus during 2004 in a series of steps which were widely anticipated and understood across the financial and real economy (Chart 2).   With the slack in the economy being absorbed, attention shifted to gauging the degree of demand pressures and their implications for the inflation outlook.  In particular, on the basis of some simple statistical relationships, a question has been posed about whether there has been some change in the extent to which demand pressures feed through into wages and prices.  Most notably, as discussed in the Bank’s February Inflation Report, the steady falls in unemployment over recent years have not been accompanied by a rising rate of earnings growth (Chart 3).  These issues obtained some prominence towards the end of last year when, despite apparently buoyant demand, inflation on the CPI measure fell to 1.1%. Lower variability in output growth and inflation, lower inflation persistence, apparently weaker pass through of demand pressures – all told, this points to the importance of identifying and understanding the complex combination of structural changes affecting our economy.  Today, I plan to give a broad overview of some of them, as they confront policymakers.       Our standard tools of economic analysis – in particular, statistical modelling – are not especially well-suited to real-time detection or quantification of the underlying forces of change.  They can, though, alert us to puzzles when the data persistently deviate from past patterns.  Business managers, by contrast, are exposed to the reality of change day by day.  Unable to shield yourselves from change, businesses can indeed succeed by embracing it – shaping your environment as well as responding to it.  That underlines the value of the Bank’s dialogue with business, facilitated and led by our regional Agents across the UK.  Colloquially, you enrich our grasp of what is ‘going on out there’.                                                         1 My thanks to Peter Andrews, Ian Bond, Spencer Dale, Neal Hatch, John Whitley and Tony Yates for comments; to Damien Lynch for comments and research and to Sandra Bannister for secretarial support. 2 Benati L. (2004), ‘UK Monetary Regimes and Macroeconomic Stylised Facts’, mimeo, Bank of England. BIS Review 16/2005 1 
Economic analysis then helps us to match your various real-world stories to puzzles we see in the data. Inflation and firms’ price-setting behaviour In the medium-to-long run, the average rate of inflation is determined by the rate of nominal expansion permitted by the monetary authority.  But over shorter horizons, decisions taken by businesses – in particular, about wages and prices – affect quarter-to-quarter fluctuations in inflation and, more generally, how demand pressures feed through to inflation.   Economic policymakers draw on a number of ways of thinking about those influences on inflation dynamics.  There is no model that can, uniquely, capture the richness of the real world.  But surprising though it may be to some, one of the ways in which we think about firms’ price-setting behaviour would be familiar to anyone running a business.  Namely, that firms charge a mark up, or profit margin, over the marginal costs of their various inputs – labour, capital, raw and intermediate materials, etc – with both the mark up and costs varying according to current and prospective demand conditions.  This is represented schematically, indeed crudely, in Diagram 1.  The key feature is that when demand rises and firms utilise their capacity more fully and add to their labour force, their costs and prices tend to rise.  That might involve old-fashioned ‘cost-push’ inflation, with firms raising prices to maintain margins in the face of increased (marginal) costs.  Or firms might initially be able temporarily to raise margins, with labour and other costs later ‘catching up’.  In either case, firms and wage bargainers will be influenced by what they think is going to happen to inflation in the future.  Again simplifying, two features are added to the diagram to bridge from firms’ so-called ‘output’ – or wholesale – prices to the retail prices which the Bank targets.  First, as well as being an input to producing firms, some imports are directly consumed by households.  Second, distributors – including, most obviously, retailers – add another mark up, reflecting their own costs and desired profit margins.  Changes in the economy affecting any of the links in this (stylised) chain will have a bearing on inflation dynamics.  The challenge is to separate out cyclical, or temporary, factors from the more structural influences that over some periods alter firms’ costs and margins.  That is important for policymakers, as to form a view on the medium-term outlook for inflation we need to distinguish between short-lived and persistent influences. Monetary regime change The monetary framework is one such structural influence. One of the most encouraging features of the post-1997 landscape has been that, as well as inflation tracking the target fairly well, expectations of inflation have been well anchored to the target (Chart 4).  Uncertainty about future inflation has also fallen3 (Chart 5 ).  It was different in the past.  A characteristic shared by the various monetary regimes tried out by UK governments during the 1970s and 1980s was that no one could easily judge what rate of inflation the authorities were trying to achieve – or, therefore, have much idea about the outlook for inflation.  As feared by one distinguished economist of an earlier generation, “every business venture [risks being] transformed into a speculation on monetary policy”.4  In those circumstances, it may well have seemed reasonable to assume that recent inflation outturns were a good basis for guessing the near-term path of inflation.  And given the evidence, firms and households could also have been forgiven for acting on an assumption that the authorities would be slow to respond to excess demand and so to upward pressures on inflation.   By contrast, the current regime seems, so far at least, to enjoy high credibility.  In consequence, when setting prices, firms might well place more weight on policy delivering inflation in line with the target than on recent inflation outturns.  If so, that might be part of the explanation for the much lower persistence in inflation I described earlier.  In other words, when shocks to the economy cause inflation to deviate from target, firms may nevertheless set prices on the basis that it will return to target fairly quickly – which would, of course, itself help to bring inflation back to target.  In a similar                                                       3  Tucker P. M. W. (2004), ‘Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy Regimes’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring 2004, pages 84-96. 4  Simons, H. (1947),’Rules versus authorities in monetary policy’, in A Positive Program for Laissez-Faire and Other Essays, Chicago. 2 BIS Review 16/2005 
vein, firms and households might now expect the Bank to tweak policy fairly promptly in response to shifts in demand.  In which case, the influence of such demand shocks on wage and price setting, and so on inflation, would plausibly be somewhat weaker than in the past. But sound monetary policy is not the only important change in the economic environment.  That much is apparent from even a brief examination of real-economy influences on firms’ costs and prices.  I shall discuss just three:  the labour market, financing markets, and competitive conditions in product markets. Labour market For most businesses, their workforce accounts for the major part of their input costs (Chart 6).  Firms in general – and the economy in aggregate – have therefore been profoundly affected by the transformation in the UK’s labour market over the past quarter century.  The key influences have been well documented.5   In particular, industrial relations legislation altered the way in which unions operate, and union membership has fallen (Chart 7).  Unemployment and social security benefits have been progressively reformed, increasing incentives to work.  Use of part-time workers has increased (Chart 8), in part due to the expansion of the services sector, and perhaps also more flexible ideas about working patterns.  The mechanisms via which employers and employees find each other – job search – have improved, helped by investment in employment exchanges and perhaps recently by the internet.   In combination, these developments provided the conditions for unemployment to fall over the past decade without adding to inflationary pressure.  During the transition, the supply capacity of the economy accordingly increased by more than would otherwise have been achieved; and any given increase in real aggregate demand would have put less pressure than otherwise on supply, and so would have had a weaker effect on firms’ costs and prices.   That does not mean, however, that the feed through of demand pressures into inflation will be permanently weaker.  Instead, the apparently flat relationship, illustrated in Chart 3, between unemployment and wage inflation is, at least in part, most probably a symptom of the sustainable level of unemployment having gradually fallen.  That is effectively what the MPC has assumed in making judgments about the outlook for inflation.  We can be reasonably confident about the direction of change, but not about its size.   That can be illustrated by the current conjuncture.  Over the past few years, there have been at least two other influences at work.  First, for some years we enjoyed an improvement in our ‘terms of trade’.  That meant, simply put, that the aggregate price of the goods and services we produce and export rose relative to the aggregate prices of our imports.  This increased the purchasing power of households’ incomes (Chart 9), and so may have dampened wage pressures as the labour market tightened.  To the extent that this explanation should be given any weight, it would tend to be a temporary factor, pointing to an upside risk to earnings growth looking ahead. A second apparent feature of our environment works the other way round.  Anecdotally, the role of migrant labour has increased in various sectors – partly associated with the enlargement of the EU’s single labour market.   If that continued, with new residents continuing to help to meet particular skill shortages, the labour supply available to UK businesses would increase, implying that the economy could potentially accommodate stronger aggregate demand than otherwise.  However, the available data do not really enable us to get beyond anecdote and speculation. Financing Another important input for firms is finance – for working capital and investment.  Here too, there seem to have been changes – in the range and terms of the sources of finance available to both firms and households – that could potentially influence the extent of cyclical fluctuations in output and inflation.   One characterisation of the past would be that firms and households depended on bank loans for external finance; and that banks loosened or tightened credit conditions sharply in the different phases                                                       5  See, for example, Nickell S. and Quintini G.,(2002), ‘The recent performance of the UK labour market’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 6(4), pages 26-35. BIS Review 16/2005 3 
of a business cycle, reining back when the economy suffered a downturn and arrears and losses mounted.  For the UK, this is well documented for small-firm finance during the early-90s recession.6 Although the stability of output growth over the recent past happily deprives us of a proper test, there are reasons to think that cyclical swings in the availability of finance may now be somewhat less marked than in the past.  In the first place, the greater stability brought by the new monetary regime may make a difference.  Compared with the past, there should be less risk of the monetary authority delaying a response to incipient inflation until the point that it is forced to slam on the brakes, effectively engineering recession to quell inflation expectations and in the process contributing to a sharp spike in unemployment, loan defaults and bank losses. A more stable macroeconomic environment may also, by reducing the risks for new entrants, be one amongst a number of influences fostering competition.  There is perhaps some circumstantial evidence of that in, for example, the decline in margins on personal loans (Chart 10).   That would tend to reduce the credit constraints facing households.  As does the increased availability of loan products that enable homeowners to borrow against the free equity in their houses.   Broadly similar changes have been underway in business finance, where competition also comes from outside the banking sector through firms’ access to richer capital markets.  The proportion of UK non-financial firms’ debt accounted for by bonds has risen from around 15% in 1990 to over 30% now (Chart 11).  Our largest firms have access to the international commercial paper, bond and asset-backed markets; and to derivative markets for managing their financial risks.  For smaller firms, compared with a decade or so ago, there seems to have been an expansion in asset-based financing options enabling them to utilise collateral more effectively.7 Taken together, a richer supply menu may leave firms and households somewhat less exposed to being severely credit rationed in an economic downturn; and may enhance their ability to cope with cyclical economic fluctuations.  If that helped to dampen the effect of shocks, output growth and inflation may vary a little less than otherwise, and monetary policy may need to respond less aggressively than in the past to keep the economy on a stable path. But, again, it can be difficult to disentangle cyclical from more durable changes.  A topical example is the risk premium priced into financial instruments.  To pick just one indicator, corporate credit spreads have been falling for a few years, to levels that last prevailed in the mid-90s (Chart 12).  In degree, that seems likely to reflect a relatively benign global macroeconomic environment together with balance--sheet strengthening in the corporate sectors of a number of major industrialised countries.  But, conceivably, it also reflects better diversification of risk – facilitated, for example, by the rapid growth of new instruments such as credit derivatives and by greater cross-border investment of savings.  If so – if risk premia were systemically lowered – that would tend to reduce firms’ cost of capital and increase households’ financial wealth.  Alternatively, the price of risk may just be temporarily low, possibly too low.8  The upshot is that we cannot yet be confident about the durability and macroeconomic implications of the changes seen in the financial environment. Mark ups It is a commonplace that competition has intensified.   This is associated with ‘globalisation’.  The facts are familiar.  World trade has grown relative to world output (Chart 13).  A wide range of emerging-market economies, notably in Asia, have become material participants in the world economy.  Some UK businesses have relocated part of their production, or outsourced to firms operating in markets with cheaper labour costs.  Partly reflecting these developments, although also increased specialisation, the share of imports in UK business investment and in consumption has steadily risen (Chart 14).                                                         6  ‘The financing environment for smaller firms over the last decade’, in Finance for Small Firms – An Eleventh Report, Bank of England, 2004. 7  Hewitt, A. (2003), ‘Asset Finance’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer 2003. 8  See, for example, section 2 of ‘Financial Stability Conjuncture and Outlook’ Financial Stability Review, December 2004. 4 BIS Review 16/2005 
These developments make markets more contestable.  As does effective competition policy.  An example in recent years was the car market, where prices converged with those prevailing on continental Europe. The internet, or e-commerce, also brings greater contestability, by making it a lot easier for businesses to check the prices of competing suppliers, and for consumers to compare prices across different retailers (Table 3).  Over time, these forces would be expected to reduce firms’ margins – at least in sectors that were not previously especially competitive.   So long as that process of adjustment was underway, inflation would tend to be lower than would otherwise be implied by any given set of demand conditions.   In addition, if and when their margins became thinner, firms might become more aggressive in controlling costs in the face of fluctuating demand, which might weaken the pass through of demand shocks into inflation.  The new monetary framework might reinforce some of those effects.  Over recent years, more than a handful of business managers have commented that, when inflation was both high and highly variable, it used to be easier to implement – or ‘get away with’ – price increases.  In a low inflation environment, it should be easier for business customers and consumers to distinguish relative price changes from increases in the general price level.  That too should foster greater flexibility and efficiency in our economy; and is one of the contributions that low and stable inflation can potentially make to broader economic welfare.  One striking example is the distribution sector.  Anecdotally, competition in UK retailing has been intense.  This seems to manifest itself in the aggregate data in two phases.  As documented recently by my MPC colleague Steve Nickell,9 retailers’ margins were compressed in the years around the turn of the century.  Since then, they seem to have crushed their costs through measures delivering rapid productivity growth.  In part, that appears to have been achieved by disintermediating wholesale distributors, whose margins have continued to fall (Chart 15).   At a macro level, the effect was, for a period, to open up a gap between producer output price inflation and retail goods price inflation (Chart 16).  In other words, for a while some structural changes in the distribution sector reduced the feed through of demand pressures into retail price inflation.  Looking ahead, one downside risk to the MPC’s central projection is that we cannot rule out that this process has further to go.   The current conjuncture and policy  Monetary regime change, labour market reform, financial innovation, the technological revolution, globalisation – it is a heady combination, which unavoidably adds to the challenge of discriminating between cyclical and structural influences when forming a view on the macroeconomic outlook.  But it is equally unavoidable that policymakers must try to do just that. That brings me to the current conjuncture and so to policy. My own take at present is as follows.  In my judgment, there is, on balance, most likely a degree of excess demand in the economy.  Surveys suggest above-average capacity utilisation.  And there is some corroborative evidence in the rise in output price inflation relative to costs, and in anecdote of some firms being able to pass on cost increases (Chart 17).   Given a tight labour market, how does that fit with earnings inflation having been relatively subdued?  One possibility is that as aggregate demand has picked up, firms have in the first place increased output by making greater use of their existing workforce and capital.  That would be consistent with anecdotal evidence of firms having held on to labour during the earlier slowdown in aggregate demand;  and with the pick up in private sector productivity growth over the past year or so (Chart 18).  Looking ahead, it would also suggest a degree of upwards pressure on earnings growth. As reflected in the Inflation Report published a couple of weeks ago, conditions of excess demand, combined with the likelihood of stronger import prices, point to inflation gradually rising back towards and through the 2% target over the next two years or so.   There are many risks around that central outlook but, taken together, compared with November I judge them to be slightly less to the downside over the medium term.  The recent rise in CPI inflation suggests, for example, that we were not stuck                                                       9  Nickell, S. (2005), ‘Why Has Inflation Been So Low Since 1999?’, Bank of England . BIS Review 16/2005 5 
materially below the inflation target.  And, as I discussed earlier, the puzzle about the apparent weak feed through from demand to inflation is reduced somewhat by the Committee’s judgment that the performance of the labour market improved over recent years.  That leaves continuing demand pressures likely to feed through to inflation, looking ahead.  With monetary policy needing to be set on a medium-term view, overall I concluded at the MPC’s latest meeting that our interest rate should be increased by 25 basis points – a small tweak to reflect the outlook.   But, as my remarks today have emphasised, there are considerable uncertainties.  Two final thoughts about them. The first concerns the precision with which any monetary authority can achieve its objective.  In the bad old days, it should probably have been clear when the economy was experiencing unsustainable excess demand.  In today’s world, when we discuss excess or deficient demand we are generally addressing much smaller deviations from trend than in the past, as Chart 19 suggests.  In consequence, our debates about cyclical conditions lie well within the margin of error of any sensible estimate of underlying trends – especially given uncertainty about the structural changes affecting the economy.  In a similar vein, we – and commentators – need to keep some perspective about deviations from the inflation target.  In November, the year-on-year measure of CPI inflation was 1.1%.  By January it was 1.6%.   Secondly, when inflationary problems loomed in the past, inflation expectations – amongst businesses, households and in financial markets – increased, both signalling and bringing about the incipient rise in inflation.  Today, we appear to enjoy well-anchored inflation expectations, which will affect price-setting behaviour in the ways I have touched on.  Indeed, modern economic models of various kinds – inside and outside the Bank – tend to assume policy credibility, anchoring medium-term expectations.  If that were so, the medium-term outlook for inflation would be assured.  In fact, credibility is not something that can just be assumed.  It has to be achieved, and continually reachieved, by policymakers – through our actions, and reasoned explanations of them.   For that reason alone, policy inevitably remains a judgmental process – not one mechanically tied to a particular model, but one that draws on a wide range of inputs, including the insights of our business contacts.  Learning is, accordingly, inherent in our mission.  Over the next few years, if the economy escapes being buffeted by shocks, we will learn quite a lot.  In the meantime, notwithstanding the uncertainties, we have to make judgments and explain them.                 6 BIS Review 16/2005 
Chart 1: Absolute changes in quarterly inflation 0.01.02.03.04.05.06.0196019651970197519801985199019952000RPIConsumption deflatorPercentage pointsSource: Bank of England and ONS         Table 1: Average absolute changes in quarterly inflation and GDP growth RPIConsumption DeflatorGDP growth1960-19791.100.761.451960-19720.830.571.181973-19791.581.111.931980-19921.190.590.691993-20040.790.340.34         Table 2: RPI inflation persistence 1947-19720.561972-19920.911992-2004-0.05  BIS Review 16/2005 7 
  Chart 2: Bank of England repo rate and two-week forward curves 3.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.52000200120022003200420052006Nov 03 IRFeb 05 IRPer centOutturnsSource: Bank of England        Chart 3: Earnings growth and unemployment 0.05.010.015.020.025.030.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.01971 - 791980 - 891990 - 992000 - 2004LFS unemployment rate in Q1 (per cent of workforce)Average earningsin Q4 (percentage change on a year earlier)1971198019902000  8 BIS Review 16/2005 
  Diagram 1: Inflation process  Demand pressuresLabour costsOutput pricesOther costsDistribution sectorCPI inflationImports (directly consumed)        Chart 4: Inflation expectations 0.02.04.06.08.0198919921995199820012004Per centIndex-linked giltsConsensusSource: Consensus and Bank calculations.  Inferred expectations are for five-year inflation in five years' time   BIS Review 16/2005 9 
  Chart 5: Implied volatility of a 3-month option on a 20-year swap contract  050100150200250199319951997199920012003basis pointsaverage since establishment of MPCaverage prior to establishment of MPC2005         Chart 6: UK labour share 6065707580195519611967197319791985199119972003percentage of GDPSource: ONS  10 BIS Review 16/2005 
  Chart 7: Percentage of workforce with trade union membership 2030405060197019741978198219861990199419982002Per centSource: LFS and Nickell, S. and Quitini , G. (2002), 'The recent performance of the UK labour market', Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 6(4), pp 26-35.       Chart 8: Proportion of part-time workers 10152025301985198819911994199720002003Percentage of total employedSource: ONS and Bank calculations  BIS Review 16/2005 11 
  Chart 9: Real household disposable income growth and terms of trade -8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.0199019921994199619982000200220049296100104108112Terms of tradeReal household income growth1990 = 100Percentage change on a year earlier        Chart 10: Margins on personal loans to households 0.02.04.06.08.010.0199319951997199920012003Per centSource: Bank calculations. Spread of effective personal loan rate rates over Bank of England repo rate  12 BIS Review 16/2005 
 Chart 11: Composition of UK PNFC sector gross debt 02040608010012019901992199419961998200020022004Other debtSecurities other than sharesBorrowing from non-UK resident MFIsBorrowing from UK resident MFIsPer cent         Chart 12: Corporate credit spreads 05010015020025030020002001200220032004200502004006008001000Basis pointsBBB (rhs)AA (rhs)AAA (rhs)Source: Merrill Lynch Option-adjusted corporate bond spreadsBasis pointsHigh yield (lhs) BIS Review 16/2005 13 
 Chart 13: Share of world imports in world GDP 0.00.30.60.91.21.51970197319761979198219851988199119941997200020031995 = 1Source: UN (pre-1980); IMF WEO Summer 2004 database (post-1980)      Chart 14: Import shares in consumption and business investment  expenditures 510152025303540451970197519801985199019952000Per centConsumptionBusiness investment    Table 3: Value of sales over the internet by  UK non-financial sectors £bnHouseholdsBusiness-to-businessTotal20026.412.719.0200311.428.239.5Source: ONS   14 BIS Review 16/2005 
  Chart 15: Distribution sector profits (margins) 0.05.010.015.020.025.0199219941996199820002002Percentage of output at basic pricesTotal distribution sectorRetailWholesale         Chart 16: Output price inflation and CPI goods price inflation -3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.03.04.0199719981999200020012002200320042005Percentage change on a year earlierCPI goodsProducer output prices  BIS Review 16/2005 15 
 Chart 17: Domestically produced manufactured goods: costs and prices -8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.0199619971998199920002001200220032004-15.0-10.0-5.00.05.010.015.0Percentage changes on a year earlierOutput prices (rhs)Unit wage costs (rhs)Input prices (lhs)Percentage change on a year earlier         Chart 18: Private sector productivity 0.01.02.03.04.05.019951997199920012003Percentage changes on a year earlierPer jobPer headPer hourSource: LFS, workforce jobs data and Bank   16 BIS Review 16/2005 
 Chart 19: Private sector factor utilisation (based on production functions) -8-6-4-20246819861990199419982002Elasticity of Substitution = 0.5Elasticity of Substitution = 1Percentage deviation of output from trendSource: Bank calculations. Based on an assumed production function which describes the relationship between inputs - labour and capital - and output. The measures show estimates of the changes in output estimated to be due purely to changes in the utilisation of the inputs.     BIS Review 16/2005 17 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Prospects for the Swiss franc in the heart of the euro area Summary of a speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Associazione Carlo Cattaneo, Lugano, 9 March 2005. The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * The launch of the euro in January 1999 fundamentally transformed the international monetary order. Switzerland, a small country that strongly depends on exports and capital transactions, suddenly found itself surrounded by a market with almost 300 million people sharing a single currency. What were the monetary consequences of this development, and what are the prospects for the Swiss franc, which is traditionally considered a "success product"?  The role of the Swiss franc in commercial and financial transactions has certainly diminished. Although the euro is only rarely used as a means of payment in the Swiss market, billing within the euro area is increasingly taking place in the single currency only – a fact to which Swiss companies have to adjust. In the financial markets, the euro now acts as a counterweight to the dollar. The Swiss franc has thus lost some of its significance as a safe-haven currency and has performed more in line with its fundamentals.  The introduction of the euro has, however, not affected our monetary autonomy or the Swiss interest rate advantage. The Swiss National Bank has been able to respond with flexibility and determination to the recent economic slowdown. As a result, the Swiss economy has benefited from far more favourable monetary conditions than Germany, for example, which is subject to the same interest rate regime as those euro area countries in the process of convergence. Furthermore, the interest rate bonus has remained, partly because of the heterogeneous economic development of the euro area.  Even if the international significance of the Swiss franc diminished, its unique character should strengthen in view of the increasing complexity and diversity of the euro area. The markets have correctly assessed this process. The development of the euro area also presents a challenge to the Swiss economy. In this context, Switzerland's monetary autonomy will remain a significant asset. BIS Review 16/2005 1 
Alan Greenspan: Bank regulation Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention, San Antonio, Texas (via videoconference), 11 March 2005.  *      *      * I am pleased to join you once again at the annual meeting of the Independent Community Bankers of America. In past years, I have discussed many and varied issues with you, from technological change to the future of community banking in the United States. Today, I sense that concern about the burden of regulation is high on your agenda. I thought it might therefore be useful to share some views on regulatory burden from the perspective of a bank regulator.  A Framework American banking dates to the earliest days of our nation, and its long history has, I believe, taught us some valuable lessons. Foremost is that our banking system plays a central role in allocating resources, pooling capital, and funding and fostering economic growth. That role has not changed as our financial system has become more complex and diverse. We also have learned that leveraged banking systems can be both an initiator and a conduit of painful financial and real economic instability. We must keep both of these historical lessons in mind in any evaluation of banking regulation for they explain the tension between our appreciation for the central role that banks play in our prosperity and our concern about banks' potential effects on economic stability.  Over the years, that tension has been reflected primarily in "safety and soundness" regulation, the supplement to banking supervision. Banking supervision is intended to be flexible and to be carried out case by case; it is designed to limit--not eliminate--the risk of failure. Over the past fifteen or so years, supervision has focused on ensuring that bank management has in place policies and procedures that will contain such risk and that management adheres to those policies and procedures. Supervision has become increasingly less invasive and increasingly more systems- and policy-oriented. These changes have been induced by evolving technology, increased complexity, and lessons learned from significant banking crises, not to mention constructive criticism from the banking community.  Regulations, on the other hand, prescribe and proscribe what must be done and what may not be done in specific areas, and most reflect past events. Many regulations are thus backward-looking, adopted in response to specific problems but often remaining after the problems are resolved. However, public comments, changing market realities, and our internal programs help us to identify regulations that no longer serve public policy objectives. We then update or remove those regulations. In other cases, market changes and innovations often require changes in regulations, or even new regulations, to ensure that policy objectives continue to be achieved.  The need for safety and soundness supervision and regulation has been greatly reinforced in the past century to address the market distortions that are unavoidable consequences of the special benefits provided to banks, benefits that were promulgated because of the tensions between bank contributions to growth and concerns about banks' role in economic instability. These benefits are access to the Federal Reserve's discount window; access to the payment system, especially Fedwire; and deposit insurance. These provisions, collectively often called the bank safety net, were designed to minimize the potential for asset or other problems in the banking system to disrupt the real economy, but, as an unavoidable byproduct, also provide an important subsidy to banks. By protecting depositors and counterparties, they also reduce, if not eliminate, much of the market discipline that constrained risk-taking by nineteenth-century banks. While there is some evidence that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 has reduced the value to banks of the safety net, bank safety and soundness regulation and supervision still must act as a supplement to, if not a substitute for, the market discipline that the safety net undermined  The increasing scale and diversity of our nonbank financial institutions has suggested to some that those institutions, too, need to be subject to bank-like supervision and regulation, since their risk-taking, while contributing to our economic growth, also has implications for stability. However, it is clear from leverage ratios and other indicia of their funding process that the market monitors and BIS Review 16/2005 1 
disciplines nonbank entities far more intensively than banks. Indeed, the real difference between banks and these entities is the difference we have made for banks: the creation of the safety net and the resultant need to find a mechanism to substitute for the market discipline displaced by the safety net. To be sure, we have increasingly tried to make supervision and regulation more like the discipline the market would impose if there were no safety net, but human beings cannot duplicate the market, or adjust as adroitly, and hence we turn to rules and to insistence on prudential policies and procedures.  Traditional banking regulation is well understood and appreciated, or at least tolerated, by bank management. But other forms of regulation have been required by the Congress in the last three or so decades. One class of regulations is concerned mostly with ensuring that banking institutions serve their communities by addressing possible instances of discrimination and, more recently, by assisting law enforcement. Examples are regulations adopted to carry out provisions of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), and, the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA).  Another class of regulations addresses "consumer protection," which the agencies, at the direction of the Congress, have implemented by adopting rules designed primarily to provide consumers with information to protect themselves (in some cases, however, the rules also involve substantive restrictions on certain practices). More generally, these regulations, if crafted carefully, should enhance market efficiency by providing consumers with more complete, consistent, and timely information; by promoting consumer awareness and shopping; and by opening the way for more-effective competition. That is surely our intention with our Truth-in-Lending and Truth-in-Saving regulations, for example.  The same factors that make banks candidates for supervision and regulation--their central role in the financing process coupled with the benefits of the safety net provided to banks by government--have also made banks prime candidates for lawmakers to select as vehicles to achieve desired social and economic objectives. Not only can banks deliver because of their economic role and expertise, but also legislators often believe banks have an obligation to do so because of the special benefits that have been provided for them.  In implementing the law of the land, cost-benefit calculations often require compromises and modifications. The recently announced proposal by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Reserve to modify CRA exams is an example. In addition, the agencies constantly struggle to avoid unintended consequences, particularly to limit the extent to which our rules, as well as our compliance supervision, cause an undesirable change in credit availability or in bank behavior that undermines the objective of the rules. To be effective regulators, we must also attempt to balance the burdens imposed on banks with the regulations' success in obtaining the intended benefits and to discover permissible and more-efficient ways of doing so. Because we understand that regulatory changes can be quite costly, we recognize as well the important regulatory responsibility to balance the cost of change with the desired benefits. But markets are not static, and changes must be made from time to time to fulfill the objectives of the law being implemented.  Basel II All of these factors--unintended consequences, balancing burdens and benefits, as well as the need for and the cost of change--enter the calculus for the implementation of the proposed new Basel Capital Accord. As you know, although they will not be required to adopt the new capital rules, many community and regional banks are uneasy that they may be left at a competitive disadvantage after the 2008 adoption of the new rules by their larger rivals. To gauge whether these concerns are warranted, the Federal Reserve has been studying the competitive implications of Basel II implementation. Some of our studies have been completed and made public; others will be published in coming weeks. For some business lines, the studies have suggested that competitive impacts are not likely, while for others, such as some types of small business loans, it does appear that unintended competitive advantages and disadvantages might be created. Where concerns appear valid, we and the other federal banking agencies will this summer propose some options for simple revisions to the current capital rules that would mitigate any unintended and undesired competitive distortions engendered by the new Accord. Moreover, as in the past, if competitive or other issues later arise that we cannot now adequately foresee, the Federal Reserve would make appropriate further adjustments to the rules.  2 BIS Review 16/2005 
HMDA Disclosure Another example of the need for and the cost of change--and perhaps the risk of unintended consequences--can be found in the new rules regarding HMDA disclosures.  Several factors have substantially changed the structure of residential mortgage lending over the past decade or so. Prominent among these are developments in information processing technology that permit more-efficient and more-accurate risk assessment and management. In addition, the dynamics of the marketplace have induced banks to seek new lending opportunities. Moreover, earlier HMDA data collections have led many institutions to review and, in some cases, to modify their marketing and underwriting practices.  These developments have induced banks to change their policies from simply not making riskier mortgage loans to making such credit available but charging for the additional risk taken. Banks are now making many more such loans to higher-risk borrowers, and they justifiably seek compensation for the higher risk through higher interest rates. An economist would suggest that in perfect markets nominal rates on loans would be different, but risk-adjusted real rates, that is, the rate after deduction of expected losses, would be about the same on all loans.  Such risk-based pricing is consistent with expanding access to credit. Indeed, many of those receiving higher-rate loans would in the past have been denied credit at lower rates. However, some banks are concerned about the risk to their reputation that might be precipitated by the new HMDA data on rates charged for the higher-rate segment of the market. Specifically, by doing what public policy intended--increasing credit availability to less creditworthy, often minority, borrowers--banks might be accused unfairly of discrimination by those who fail to connect risk to price or to evaluate rates in terms of risk measures. Such concerns are understandable as, indeed, also are concerns that race, gender, ethnicity or other characteristics not reflective of risk per se may still adversely affect the cost of credit to some borrowers. The adoption of risk-based pricing, together with elements of discretion that are often afforded loan officers or brokers in the pricing of credit, does raise the concern that some borrowers, in fact, may not be treated fairly.  The changes in market structure coupled with such concerns suggested to us the need to revise our HMDA data collection in order to gather information on rates charged to aid us in seeing if, in fact, differences in rates are truly driven by differences in risks and costs and not tainted by discrimination. We recognized that such conclusions require far more detailed evaluations than is possible using HMDA information alone, with or without the additional data on rates. Nonetheless, the pricing data will assist as a screening tool to facilitate self-monitoring and enforcement activities. If screening suggests that there might be a fairness issue, additional information will need to be collected from banks' loan files or other sources.  Bank Secrecy Act and Suspicious Activity Reports In the last year or so, banks have also become concerned about the scope of their obligations to file Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) under Bank Secrecy Act regulations and the sanctions used to address deficiencies, which have included criminal prosecutions. The purpose of the law and its associated regulation is to capitalize on the banks' central role in payments and financial flows by, in effect, making banks partners with law enforcement to address criminal activities such as money laundering by drug dealers, the financing of terrorist activities, and fraud. As you know, SAR regulations call for banks to report what they believe to be "known or suspected" violations and suspicious activities by their customers that could be associated with such criminal activities.  Bank regulations and supervisory oversight are designed to reinforce the building of systems and the development and application of bank policies, both of which are to highlight for management what could be suspicious or unlawful activity by customers and employees, the basis of the SARs reports. But banks are to make the judgment of what is likely to be useful information for law enforcement.  The banking agencies are in the process of developing compliance examination guidelines under the Bank Secrecy Act, which we hope can provide uniform direction on SAR filing requirements. The Federal Reserve is working closely, and will continue to work closely, with the staff of the Treasury Department responsible for anti-money-laundering and terrorist-financing enforcement, as well as with other bank regulatory agencies and the Justice Department, to support a fair, effective, and consistent approach to Bank Secrecy Act compliance.  BIS Review 16/2005 3 
All of us want the system to work, including the bankers who want to do their part in curbing criminal and terrorist activities. Besides participating in interagency discussions, we intend to monitor developments so as to be in a position to help make the system work without excessive burden. Such assistance will, we believe, require that all parties, including law enforcement authorities, better understand not only how banks and banking supervision operates but also the unintended consequences that will surely accompany a misunderstanding of these operations.  Conclusion In closing, let me underline just a few key points. When implementing the law, we try to avoid unintended consequences and excessive burden. Our regulatory programs go through intensive initial reviews that include extensive public comment, periodic review, and more-or-less continuous evaluation. Our cost-benefit analysis goes beyond burden to encompass likely effects on credit flows and bank behavior that may unintentionally defeat the purposes of the regulation. We are particularly aware that changes in regulations, even if intended to lighten burden or to reflect new market realities, carry new costs that must be evaluated. But we can always do better, and I encourage this association and each of you individually to continue your efforts to make sure that we implement the law in the most efficient manner possible.  4 BIS Review 16/2005 
Polibio Cordoba: Overview of activities undertaken by the Central Bank of Ecuador Speech by Mr Polibio Cordoba, President of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Ecuador, held on 17 February at the inauguration of the 2005 BIS Central Bank Legal Experts’ Meeting, Quito, 17-18 February 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen It is an honour for the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) to host the Central Bank Legal Experts’ Meeting organised by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and its Representative Office for the Americas. The role of the BIS as one of the most important centres in the world for monetary and financial cooperation between central banks is fulfilled precisely through forums like this one, promoting high-level legal discussion and research on key economic topics. For this reason the government of Ecuador and the central bank are particularly pleased that Quito has been chosen as the location for such an important event, with participants including legal experts from Europe and America as well as renowned international speakers representing the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the European Central Bank, Euroclear Bank and the Hague Conference on Private International Law. The main objective of the meeting will be to analyse the use of collateral and complementary guarantees in central bank operations as well as rights associated with guarantees in the hands of intermediaries and possible conflicts between national laws. At the same time, the meeting represents an ideal setting in which to exchange views and opinions on this topic and to reconcile views with respect to the application of international standards which make central bank operations more viable and secure. In this regard, it is very important to the BCE to emphasise its functions and role as from the year 2000; it was then that the country adopted the dollar as its official currency. This meant that the money supply became an endogenous variable; that is, a value determined by each line of the balance of payments (trade in goods and services, and net capital inflows). However, this renunciation of the money issuance function also significantly restricted the central bank’s ability to act as a provider of liquidity assistance to the financial system via money markets and as lender of last resort, despite ongoing problems relating to economic liquidity, systemic risk and competitiveness. For this reason, the BCE’s focus has now shifted more towards economic tasks, resulting in greater emphasis on functions such as establishing guidelines and carrying out activities linked to financial and credit policy, aimed at improving conditions for access to financing by the manufacturing sector, strengthening the solvency of public and private financial intermediaries and stabilising and deepening the payment system in accordance with constitutional provisions. In this context, the BCE works to ensure the stability of the economy and the prevailing monetary regime via monitoring and analysis of developments in public finances, which, in the short, medium and long term, help maintain the financial sustainability of the state. With regard to the subject matter of the meeting, the BCE is somewhat restricted when it comes to using collateral, since, with the official dollarisation of the economy, its role as lender of last resort is very limited. Without prejudice to this, it should be highlighted that commercial trustee accounts were and still are the most important collateral for the BCE, having been used successfully in the past, including in complex situations and during bankruptcy proceedings for financial institutions, thus guaranteeing the interests of the BCE and the state. On the other hand, repurchase operations, one of the typical central bank strategies for recycling liquidity, are another important tool which is used in the same way as in other countries. I am sure these aspects will be addressed in detail as part of this event. In addition to participating in the meeting itself, you will also have the opportunity to enjoy the historical and cultural wealth of Quito, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city, together with the BCE, welcomes you and wishes you every success with this event. BIS Review 15/2005 1 
Thank you. 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: The strengths and weaknesses of the Thai financial system Address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Annual Dinner organised by the Thai Bankers Association, Bangkok, 18 February 2005. *      *      * Distinguished members of the Thai Bankers Association Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Thirty years ago, when I first started to work at a commercial bank, I well remembered that every year there would be an evening of informal gathering among top management of commercial banks and the Bank of Thailand. The event provided an occasion for us to get together after one full year of hard work. The gathering is not one where supervisors meet the regulated. It is a gathering of people in the financial sector, bonded in fellowship, for they have shared the fruits of their success and their labour. It is therefore natural that in a gathering such as this, the central bank Governor who has been given the leadership role to steer the herd, would use the occasion to discuss the future direction of our financial system, including the strength and weaknesses, and prospects for improvement. I once had an opportunity to join such an event when Dr. Snoh Unakul was Governor of the Bank of Thailand. I still hold fond memories of that event till this day. I am very pleased that the Thai Bankers Association has once again revived this noble tradition. And, wearing the headmask of a central bank Governor, I will avail myself of this forum to share with you some thoughts and suggestions coming from one who has followed and spearheaded the developments of our financial system. I will be frank and candid in my remarks. I will share with you my perspectives on the strength and weaknesses, which we all have a responsibility to overcome. First of all, I would like to express my sincere thanks to all the bankers for the wonderful cooperation we have been receiving these past few years. Since I assumed office, I received your cooperation on the sale of 300 billion baht in government bonds to finance the historical losses of the FIDF. It was probably the biggest launch ever and one that received tremendous success. And in response to the Tsunami tragedy, which affected the 6 provinces in the South, commercial banks threw their support by extending loans at concessionary rates to those who were affected in the areas. So far, more than 43 billion baht have been approved. In addition, commercial banks have also reduced the interest burden on the customers affected by the outbreak of violence in the 3 southern border provinces. The banking community has willingly stepped in to help without undue regard for their balance sheet. On business operations, commercial banks have given their full cooperation in the setting up of the nationwide Banknote Operations Centres, which enabled the completion of the new system within a short period of 1 year. Other than that you have also rendered your support to the Data Management System (DMS), a large and important project that is currently making progress and will significantly reduce the burden of reporting and eliminating duplication and the wasteful use of resources. Lastly, I wish to thank you for your commitment and cooperation to develop the Interbank Transaction Management and Exchange System (ITMX), which is an important infrastructure of our modern payment system. The system provides a standard linkage to serve customers and to support interbank transactions such as E-clearing. This will boost the efficiency of the payment system in line with international best practices. More importantly, it is a significant move from a government-owned payment system to a privately run system owned and operated by all commercial banks. This development, in turn, will provide a basis for the system to respond more efficiently to the changing environment and where commercial banks can set appropriate fees consistent with their costs. I am truly delighted to see such cooperation being worked out in the spirit of fair and collective responsibility, which will help enhance the efficiency and stability of our financial system. Distinguished members BIS Review 15/2005 1 
It is well recognized today that the Thai economy is on the recovery path after years of sluggish performance. Economic indicators point to firm and clear signs of improvement, albeit not to the extent of skyrocketing performance, but one of continuous recovery at a steady pace. The credit standing of our country has also improved where reputable credit rating agency such as Moody's has upgraded Thailand's sovereign rating from Baa3 to Baa1; whilst S& P, from BBB to BBB+. I have to especially congratulate financial institutions, especially on your last year financial performances. Banking sector operations was more profitable than the previous year as reflected in the average Return on Asset (ROA) of 1.33% for the industry. Such an achievement is no doubt the product of your hard work and perseverance. I recall, back in 2001, when I assumed office, I was disheartened by the earnings results of the banking system. In the year 2000, the banking system incurred losses of more than one hundred billion baht (-106.49 billion baht) or an average ROA of negative 1.7% of total assets. The first question that came to my mind was to return the banking industry to profitability or else the system would not survive. You may recall that at the end of year 2001, we had a discussion at the BOT. Following that meeting, banks started to gradually reduce the deposit rate and stop competing for deposit through high deposit rates. These were important steps that helped reduce banks costs and gradually turn in profits. You should take pride in the way we have overcome the tough times following the economic crisis. We started with the massive bank recapitalization at very high costs; we dealt with tough debt restructurings in amount and volume unknown in Thai history; we moved to reduce costs by re-engineering our work process and downsizing our work force; we improved services to find alternative source of income, we ceased to compete for deposit through offering high interest rate; and we succeeded in recapitalizating for the second round at lower costs than the initial round. These events combined to show up in better carving results and the potential to grow profitably. Today, I can say with confidence that our banking industry no longer has a weak spot that would pose systemic risk on the economy. Although many analysts still considered the NPLs number high, in my view, the current situation is much better. Banks have been putting a lot of efforts to solve the NPLs problem. Recently NPLs of the banking system came down to 11.03 %. A closer look at the remaining NPLs of 576.8 billion baht, shows that 84.6 billion baht are loans which have been restructured and awaiting the signing of the agreement or the fulfillment of the 3 months obligation after which they will be reclassified as normal loans. Another 241.6 billion baht is awaiting foreclosure and will eventually become the assets of the banks. The Government is planning to amend the Asset Management Company (AMC), to enable the AMC to buy these NPLs from commercial banks at a fair value. Meanwhile, the remaining 250.6 billion baht are under the restructuring process of banks. I trust that with your efforts the 250.6 billion baht can be brought down to less than 100,000 million baht or to 2% of total loan portfolios in the year 2006. By that time we will be able to announce to the world that our banking system is as strong and competitive as any leading institutions in the region. Other than the challenges of the resolution of NPLs, the Bank of Thailand has also entrusted upon you the responsibility to develop our financial system in line with the international best practices, namely the adoption of the Basel II framework. The Basel II emphasizes the adequacy of capital in accordance with the underlying risks. Its main objective is to build confidence of international investors and to ensure that Thai commercial banks can increase their access to and compete in a level playing field in international capital markets. I recognize that working towards the adoption of the Basel II framework has been burdensome, complicated, and difficult, but, once we have pointed out its benefits, every bank has been very forthcoming to meet this new international standard. I would like to record our thanks and appreciation for your positive response on this issue. In addition to moving towards such guidelines, an important element to achieve sound banking with public acceptance, both domestically and internationally, is to have "Ethical Management", a term I prefer to the term "Good Governance". This is where Board members and senior management of banks have a duty to play role models to others. Banking failures in the past have often been associated with unethical mismanagement through lending to related parties, lending to affiliated companies or those of families and friends, or lending to inconspicuous groups upon request of influential powers. In some cases, senior management have also benefited from return favours in the forms of share ownership in the debtor company. The board 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
of directors of the bank has a duty to prevent these abuses. This must start from the process of selection of bank management who must have high moral grounds and integrity. I do not wish to use the term "professional" because I have seen many professionals who have taken advantage of their organizations. I would like to see banks select competent management of high moral standing and integrity to manage the institution. The board of directors must also conduct themselves as role model by exercising restraint and minimizing their exposure to potential conflicts of interest. They must not give special treatment to their relatives and friends, which could potentially lead to losses to the bank. The board of directors must provide the leadership and protection to the management when faced with request from influential powers. Thai society places virtue on kindness; people in influential position are often approached for special help and favours. Often time such requests are being entertained without prejudice and without the knowledge that such actions can result in the bank's financial losses later on. The duty of the management is to exercise diligence and care in considering such requests. If the loan application meets the bank's criteria, the bank could extend the loans as the case with ordinary customers. Otherwise, management should make an effort to explain the case to the influential party. Such communication will avoid problems and promote mutual understanding. I have done this before when I was working at the EXIM Bank and the requesting party also understood our point. In general commerce or businesses, the practice of giving special favours or treatment to influential people from time to time through special discounts or complimentary offers do not pose unnecessary risk. But in the business of financial institutions, the losses that ensue are far too great and may lead to the collapse of the financial institutions or the financial system at large. Therefore, it is imperative that board members exercise great care and prudence. In some instances, board members might consider it a minor issue, but as a board member, one cannot afford to undermine one's integrity and reputation. It board members overlook small matters, then management may take the opportunity to do the same but this time with bigger cases, and other finance officers may also do the same until the practice becomes widespread and pose a risk to the bank. Board members should therefore recognize the critical importance of their office. Board members of banks are not merely board members of a company. They are board members of a financial institution that is part of the financial system of the country. Their responsibility is far-reaching. The bank is responsible for the efficient allocation of resources or the scarce public savings for investment in economically viable projects to enhance the country's potential growth and development. The board should ensure adequate oversight on the allocation of funds to unproductive projects. This is especially so if the board member is the board of a bank which is owned by the slate. More important than their oversight role on management, the Board member must not put themselves in a position that would compromise their integrity by accommodating the requests of friends and families, or by cultivating the favours of influential powers. If board members are in it themselves, there is not stopping others from doing the same. Unethical behaviour in the management of a bank, also touches on issues other than lending activities, there is also the issue of excessive expenses. Here the management of some banks has been practicing without undue regard for what I would call decent practices. If left unchecked, this practice could be widespread throughout the bank and ultimately affect bank's cost and profitability. Here too, the board must also exercise oversight to safeguard the interests of the organization. To do this effectively, the boards must exercise restraint not to reap undue benefits from the bank even in small matters. For if board members are tempted by the benefits from the institutions, they would immediately undermine their authority to manage their subordinates. Let me give an example of what I see as taking undue benefits. Lately, I noticed that the remuneration of Board members in some banks have been set at a unreasonably high level. Some banks pay meeting allowances at a relatively fair rate and pay no bonus (which seems appropriate). Some banks pay relatively less meeting allowances but also pay fixed bonus for the heavy responsibilities (which is still considered acceptable). Some banks both pay high meeting allowances and high bonus. And, interestingly the bonus is also paid out at a flexible rate based on yearly profit, which is inherently risky as a scheme of compensation payment. The point here is that if the remuneration of board members varies with the profits of the bank, then this could create a disincentive for board members to exercise their oversight responsibility to ensure BIS Review 15/2005 3 
the prudence and soundness of the bank through adequate provisioning, or prevent management from undertaking excessive risks for greater prospects of profits. Typically, a bank that runs its operations in a normal course of business without special efforts is already expected to generate returns on their business or normal profits. If the entire profit is taken as base to calculate bonus for their board members, would that seem fair to the institution? Furthermore, how would board members explain to their employees that the basis of computation of their bonus is the individual employees' salary, while that used for board members are calculated based on total profits? I am bringing up this topic today with no intention of being disrespectful to the many senior board of directors of our financial community. I merely noticed the rapid escalation of certain benefits of board members of some banks rising to the point of "excessive". My only concern is that such practices may be brought up by your subordinates, which may undermine your authorities to lead, and to supervise a business that is so vital to the financial system of the country. However, I do not intend to issue guidelines on this matter. But, I believe that what has been brought up today will lead to significant improvements at your own initiatives. There is a saying from Venerable Phra Dhammapitaka (a highly respected venerable, the master of "Buddhist Economics") that "the righteous path for a business is one which it does right for its customers, its employees, its social and environment, its shareholders, its owners and itself”. I subscribe to this principle that an honourable executive is one who does what is right for his employees, his organization (by not excessively taking benefits from the organization), and for himself (by not reducing the benefits he deserves to receive from the organization). In conclusion, I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to the Thai Bankers Association and all its members for bringing back this traditional gathering. I truly hope that my frank and candid remarks will not lead to cancellation of next year's event!! I would like to emphasize that I have no ill intentions other than to see our financial system progress and develop with a sound management and ethical standard. There is a deeper meaning to this than the sense of "Good Governance" of the Western world. Above all, the country would then have a financial system that is sound and robust for years to come. Thank you for your attention. 4 BIS Review 15/2005 
Svein Gjedrem: Dialogue with boundaries Introduction by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the conference “Dialogue without boundaries”, Karlstad, Sweden, 9 March 2005. The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech does not contain new assessments of the economic situation or of current interest rate setting. *      *      * Introduction This year, Norway is commemorating the centenary of the disolution of the union with Sweden. In retrospect, the dissolution was a painless process. Norway’s internal affairs were not affected by the union with Sweden. Historically, a national monetary system and central bank have been an important part of nation-building. The Norwegian Constitution of 17 May 1814 did not provide for a national monetary system. This was first included in the Constitution in November 1814 because of fears that the union with Sweden would bring the work on a national monetary system to a halt1. In 1875, the Storting decided to join the currency union that Denmark and Sweden had established two years earlier. Danish, Swedish and Norwegian notes and coins circulated and were used as legal tender in all three countries.  Open financial markets, close trade ties and a common labour market provided then as now opportunities for high economic growth and prosperity. An example is the Norwegian company Norsk Hydro, which was established the same year as the dissolution of the union. Substantial investments were required and foreign capital was crucial to the company’s establishment. Moreover, it may be worth noting that the kinship between Norway and Sweden was important in this context. Kristian Birkeland and Sam Eyde, together with the Swede Marcus Wallenberg, are considered as the founders of Hydro.  Trade between Norway and Sweden was considerable, with a fairly high degree of labour flows between the two. In the 1800s, a law was enacted providing for a common market for trade in goods, but in 1888 Sweden adopted a more protectionist stance. In 1897, Sweden rescined this law, which led to a severe setback for Norwegian exports.  Close ties between Norway and Sweden have thus been important. They also favour regional development, particularly for regions far from national centres but closer to the economic hub in the neighbouring country. Monetary policy does not give any particular weight to regional considerations. But a monetary policy that safeguards monetary values in the long term and seeks to stabilise economic developments in the short and medium term will also contribute to promoting regional development.  Long-term economic developments Consumer prices and economic growth in Norway and Sweden moved on a fairly similar path during the years around the dissolution of the union and up to the beginning of the 1970s.  There are several reasons for this. First, we have been part of and been influenced by the same international business cycles. Second, we have close trade relations, even if there were setbacks during the interwar period and the two World Wars. Third, both countries participated in various fixed exchange rate systems for long periods. After World War II, we adhered to the international fixed exchange rate system Bretton Woods.  During the period 1900 to 1970, the Norwegian and Swedish economy grew at an average annual rate of 3.2 and 3.3 per cent respectively.  With Norway’s emergence as an oil nation, a change occurred. The Norwegian economy continued to grow at about the same pace. From 1970 to date, the Norwegian economy has expanded by an                                                       1  Report no. 39 (1983): Act on Norges Bank and the Monetary System BIS Review 15/2005 1 
annual average of 3.4 per cent. The development of the petroleum sector and the use of petroleum revenues contributed to relatively high growth also in the mainland economy. In Sweden, however, growth fell to an annual average of 2 per cent.  Business sector competitiveness in Norway After Norway became an oil nation, competitiveness in the business sector in Norway deteriorated in relation to Sweden. First, wage growth in Norway has been somewhat higher than in Sweden. Second, the value of the Norwegian krone against the Swedish krona has appreciated sharply.  The rise in labour costs in local and common currency was particularly high in the mid-1980s and after 1997. Hourly labour costs for a Swedish manufacturing worker were on average 8 per cent higher than for a Norwegian manufacturing worker in 1980 measured in common currency. In 2004, however, hourly labour costs for a Swedish manufacturing worker was almost 20 per cent lower2. Competitiveness in Norway’s manufacturing industry is now close to 20 per cent weaker than the average for the past 30 years.  Norwegians had to pay close to 138 Norwegian kroner for 100 Swedish kronar in 1970. Today, we only have to pay a little more than 90 Norwegian kroner. The appreciation of the Norwegian krone has made it less expensive to buy goods and services in Sweden.  During longer periods, the exchange rate seems to have been influenced by changes in prices for export goods and import goods in the two countries. In the 10 years to 1983, the Norwegian krone showed a particularly strong appreciation against the Swedish krona. This occurred at the same time as Norway experienced far more favourable developments in prices for its export goods relative to import goods than was the case for Sweden. Norway’s terms of trade improved. In the 1970s, the sharp rise in oil prices contributed to this.  In practice, the appreciation of the Norwegian krone against the Swedish krona occurred when the Swedish authorities devalued their currency more than the Norwegian authorities. The authorities devalued against a basket of currencies. In Sweden, the Palme government’s devaluation of 16 per cent in October 1982 was particularly strong. Finland responded by devaluing its currency by 6 per cent. In Norway, industrial leaders and industry organisations also pressed in favour of a devaluation of the Norwegian krone. Norway’s finance minister Rolf Presthus characterised the Swedish decision as a serious setback for Nordic cooperation3, and chose not to change the value of the Norwegian krone.  In much of the 1970s and 1980s, economic policy in Norway and Sweden lacked a long-term approach and credibility. This contributed to wide swings in production and employment. With a policy of low interest rates and devaluation, inflation became entrenched at a high level. Frequent devaluations in the period following 1976 could not prevent a weakening of the manufacturing sector in the long run. On the contrary, they proved to be self-reinforcing. The wide fluctuations culminated in a borrowing spree that started in the mid-1980s, first in Norway and then in Sweden. The borrowing spree was succeeded by deep economic crises.  Both Norway and Sweden had to abandon their fixed exchange rate policy in 1992. Important reasons were freer capital flows, deeper financial markets and hence a surge in cross-border capital movements.  Sweden switched to inflation targeting in 1993 and was among the first countries to introduce a system that would later become the norm for small and medium-sized economies. The Riksbank succeeded fairly quickly in anchoring inflation expectations and keeping inflation low and stable in Sweden. Norway followed suit in March 2001.  With floating exchange rates, the exchange rate may adapt to changes in growth prospects and changes in the terms of trade. Since the end of the 1990s the Swedish krona has depreciated against the Norwegian krone. During this period, Norway has experienced a considerable rise in prices for                                                       2  Source: The Technical Reporting Committee on Income Settlements, Report no. 1, 2005, preliminary version. The estimates take account of both actual hourly wages and indirect costs. 3  Aftenposten, October 1982 2 BIS Review 15/2005 
export products such as oil and aluminium, partly owing to high demand in China. Sweden, on the other hand, has been influenced by a slower rise in prices for goods such as ICT products.  The close trade relations between Norway and Sweden are of benefit to both countries. Even if petroleum exports to Sweden rose sharply in the 1970s, Norway still ran a trade deficit with Sweden.  We have needed goods from Sweden to build up our petroleum sector, and increased wealth has enabled us to increase goods imports from Sweden. Norway has thus maintained its import share of traditional goods from Sweden while our export share to Sweden has declined. Weaker business sector competitiveness in Norway in relation to that of Sweden is probably one important factor.  Looking ahead, some of the features we have observed over the past 30 years may change. There is an imbalance between the cost level in Norway and in Sweden. The cost differential cannot be sustained in the longer term. The high cost level in the Norwegian business sector is adapted to a situation where we are developing the petroleum sector and phasing in the use of petroleum revenues into the mainland economy. After a period, we will be able to cover a smaller share of our imports using current petroleum revenues and by drawing on capital in the Petroleum Fund. The Norwegian cost level will then have to be dampened, also compared with that of Sweden. Competitiveness may in the longer run be brought back to the level prevailing at the end of the 1960s before Norway became an oil nation. During such a period of adaptation, which may start in 5 or 10 or 15 years, a flexible exchange rate, with a fall in the Norwegian krone against the Swedish krona, will have to play an important role.  Where do we stand today? Tariff barriers for trade in goods are low. The EU/EEA agreement also provides for increased trade in services. During the 1990s, capital mobility has increased to a level that is higher than 100 year ago. Free capital flows and free trade pave the way for high economic growth and prosperity, but also entail challenges.  Competition has increased in many industries. Labour-intensive processes are being transferred to new EU member states such as the Baltic countries. Some multinational companies have streamlined various production processes and distribution and centralised them in the same location. Saab has been acquired by General Motors and Volvo by Ford. In periods, this has given rise to unrest among local authorities and employees, for example in the traditional manufacturing city of Trollhättan. In Norway, many large multinational companies have closed down operations at home and established their main offices and warehouses in the Stockholm or Malmö/Copenhagen area. Both the Norwegian costs level and population density have been of disadvantage to use with regard to these structural developments.  Sweden has partly responded to strong international competition by continuing to develop new and improving existing products and processes. The country has also become a Nordic financial centre by being the home country to four large financial conglomerates. As mentioned the Norwegian economy has benefited from good prices for our export products and proximity to petroleum activities provide Norwegian manufacturing with advantages. However, our oil dependence and a lack of diversification in our industry structure are a source of concern as regard long-term developments  Conclusion Monetary policy’s most important contribution is to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. Today, inflation targeting is the norm for small and medium-sized economies. Exchange rates fluctuate, but there are several ways of hedging against fluctuations. After Sweden switched to inflation targeting, the country has experienced solid output growth and low and stable inflation compared with the previous decades.  Since 2002, inflation has fallen sharply both in Norway and Sweden. Between December 2002 and March 2004, the key rate was reduced by a total of 5.25 percentage points in Norway. During the same period, the key rate in Sweden was lowered by 2.25 percentage points, but from a lower level.  Two years after we started lowering interest rates in Norway, there are signs that inflation is moving up, albeit slowly. The interest rate cuts have had a pronounced impact on demand, output and employment.  BIS Review 15/2005 3 
We cannot expect the interest rate to have the same impact from one period to the next. The economy is also exposed to unexpected disturbances. As a result, we cannot fine-tune economic developments using the interest rate, but avoid the largest effects when the economy is exposed to disturbances. The experience of Norway and Sweden may indicate that inflation expectations remain stable even if inflation varies somewhat, as long as the interest rate is used actively to moderate the effects. With our highly open economies, we may have to accept somewhat wider swings than some countries.  4 BIS Review 15/2005 
Zamani Abdul Ghani: Malaysia - an investment destination Speech by Mr Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Investors’ Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 22 June 2005. *      *      * Bismillahirrahmanirrahim  Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Assalamualaikum warahmatullah hiwabarakatuh and good morning, First of all, allow me to welcome all of you to this conference on "Malaysia: An Investment Destination" held in conjunction with the 30th IDB Board of Governors' Meeting. We are most heartened that there are representatives here this morning from more than one hundred global financial institutions and from over thirty countries. I would like to welcome all of you to Malaysia especially those who are here for the first time. I hope you have had a good rest after a journey from your respective countries because we have a very special program waiting for you. Indeed it is a great honour to be given the privilege to host this historic conference. The theme for the conference "Malaysia: An Investment Destination" is a fitting choice as we would highlight to you a wide range of investment opportunities available for you in Malaysia. This theme is most appropriate given a fast changing global and regional financial landscape, driven by financial liberalization and consolidation, economic transformation and more discerning and demanding investors.  Ladies and gentlemen,  We will do our best to ensure that this conference will be rewarding and useful for you. Over this two-day period, we have lined up a panel of distinguished speakers, including the Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia himself as well as Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia. The invited speakers are from various prestigious institutions, domestic and international with unique expertise and experiences. You can be rest assured that the speakers we are bringing to you are renowned in their own field and their views are well sought after by global investors and the financial fraternity. The major highlight of this conference is the keynote address by the Honourable Dato' Seri Abdullah bin Haji Ahmad Badawi, the Prime Minister of Malaysia who is also the Finance Minister. His address will offer invaluable insights into Malaysia's policy and strategies to sustain its strong growth performance. The next significant highlight of this conference is a speech by Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, the Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, who will touch on investment opportunities in Malaysia in an evolving global environment. This speech is timely given so much interest shown by both domestic and international investors in the Malaysian economy. Both the Prime Minister and Governor will offer invaluable insights into strategic orientation of important policies that will chart the Malaysian economy going forward. Therefore, these are the main events not to be missed.  Of course you should not miss other speakers too! They will touch on various topics according to their areas of expertise. More importantly, you will get to hear investment opportunities in Malaysia with a special focus on conventional and Islamic financial institutions products. For selected topis, there will be workshops for in depth discussions with panel members who are prominent speakers from industries as well as regulatory bodies. It will be interesting to find out what will transpire in the workshops that await you.  Ladies and gentlemen, This Investors Conference is also a gathering of investors, bankers, fund managers, regulators and industry leaders from Malaysia and the world over. This is an excellent opportunity for you to capitalize on their presence by networking with them. I am sure you have a lot to gain from their experiences and first-hand knowledge in their own fields. Furthermore, for information on investment opportunities in Malaysia, there are 15 exhibition booths from major financial institutions and regulators set up in this convention centre specifically for you. Please make a point to visit the exhibition booths, which showcase financial products and services in Malaysia. I am sure these booths have informative brochures to give out and are more than happy to answer any queries you may have. BIS Review 49/2005 1 
There will be a very special event at the end of the second day. Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia will launch two new indices - the Citigroup Malaysian Government Bond Index and Dow Jones - RHB Islamic Malaysia Index. The launching of these indices marks yet another milestone in the development of the Malaysian capital market. As you are well aware, credible and transparent indices are very significant market infrastructure to raise the awareness and interest of investors. This will bode well for our aspiration to broaden and deepen the bond market in Malaysia. Ladies and gentlemen,  I would like to remind you that both the Day One and Day Two programs promise to be eventful. I know the very conducive environment for shopping at the Kuala Lumpur City Center or KLCC can be very tempting for some of us. But please resist that temptation for a while and wait until the conference is over. Then please, by all means savour the sights and sounds of Malaysia. On this note, I wish you all a rewarding and productive conference. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
Ardian Fullani: The fight against money laundering Luncheon speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at an Anti Money Laundering workshop, Tirana, 22 June 2005. *      *      * Dear participants, The subject of today’s workshop is, as you well know, a matter of great concern worldwide. The way we fight money laundering (ML) and counter the financing of terrorism (FT), does not have an impact on us only, but also on our neighbours and any other country with which our citizens and companies perform trade and financial relations. In these last years, to this issue has been devoted considerable time and efforts by you, by Albanian authorities and by international organisations. Besides meeting each other again and exchanging opinions on general issues, I want to use this opportunity to share with you some thoughts about the importance of the existence of a culture against ML in the institutions we represent. I will refer in this case to banks, meaning non-bank financial institutions as well. Following that, any consideration about ML will be valid also for the FT, for which I am convinced that our awareness and that of the public, is complete.  With the term “culture” on anti-money laundering (AML), I refer not only to the existence in the bank of structures responsible for AML and its related procedures. I am aiming at the need for the existence in any bank, of a real concern and of a positive pressure to make sure that those structures and procedures are applied to their real meaning, throughout the institution and down to any single employee. At the same time, I mean the real willingness of the bank for a careful and proactive role in the inter-institutional relationships, with the aim of leaving away the formalism and qualitatively improving the process of AML. I will be focusing in more details on these issues, as I proceed. Prior to proceeding with more details, allow me to put myself in each of your’s position. I feel I can do this, since I was one of you, as the executive director a commercial bank and head of the Association of banks. We have shared common concerns about the speed and about the quality with which the legal requirements on AML were approved and implemented in practice. I still believe that a law is good when its requirements are applicable in practice and when they represent affordable costs for its subjects. I must say that the existing law on AML, needs to be revised under these considerations. At the same time, we have often discussed about the concern that the way this process is being implemented is endangering to go in the opposite direction to our major objective of reducing the informal economy and bringing down the cash in circulation. While banks, as regulated, transparent and supervised institutions, play an important role in this objective, they are not the sole institutions. A no less important role play other institutions, especially those of tax collection or other institutions of services. Special attention should be paid to the supervision of market segments out of the banking system but within the scope of law. The terms of executing different payments, on a household or company level, should favour the usage of bank instruments (like electronic cards, wires, etc.) and in some transactions (where involved big amounts) payments in cash should be completely forbidden. There are exactly these transactions that may represent the biggest risk of money that is laundered from illegal activities, including fraud and tax evasion. I believe that the preference of holding cash money is deep in our society’s mentality and is also linked to a relatively low level of the average salary in the country. As a result, one can say with an appropriate level of confidence that most of the money that circulates in cash, is in the hands of many people, hence it represents a relatively low level of ML risk. We have also discussed about costs that are encountered when adopting full compliance with the requirements of the regulatory and the legal framework. An effective system of AML, means advanced systems of information technology, especially on those parts that deal with the database of the clients, the aggregation of the information from any single point in the network, and those that enable the continuous monitoring and filtering of any bank transaction. For our institutions, especially for those that are not branches or subsidiaries of any stronger financial institution, those costs can be substantial and difficult to be absorbed. BIS Review 49/2005 1 
Furthermore, we have been witnesses of a somehow difficult dialogue with the institutions that implement the law. I must say though that such a problem exists almost in any jurisdiction, including the most developed countries. But their attitude toward the abidance to the law, of constructive discussion of problems and of quick reactions in implementing changes, facilitates the solution of different problems. Dear bank directors, I do like though to consider the issue from what we as bankers, can contribute more in this process, in spite of above-mentioned difficulties. Furthermore, history shows that the cost of dealing with those difficulties, whatever their size in normal times, can be easily exceeded in instances of unusual events that are linked with scandals on ML. Firstly, I want to say that we must be very careful not to allow such difficulties to distract our focus from the heart of the issue, that of being ensured at any time that our banks are clean and that they do not represent a place where dirty money and its creators or benefitors can not enter. If we do not act like this, the negative consequences can be unimaginable. We put in danger the reputation of single financial institutions and of the entire financial system; unwillingly, we have become instrumental of crime in reaching their goal of using the money generated from illegal activities; we have placed the reputation of our sound clients in a very difficult position; we have lost confidence in front of the honest market players and have darkened our positive image in front of our international partners and partners of our clients; we are going to face in the future a higher cost on doing the bank business, represented not only from the loss of clients (which can prove to be fatal), but also from difficulties in expanding our activities; we can also expect to be subjects of penal actions triggered by the regulatory framework. The damage is multifold and exceeds any quantitative advantage in the volume of business we may have had from “outright” acceptance of any business offer. In the end, through rigorous application of AML requirements, we have protected our institution from a potentially very large damage. This is the key element of our duty, the feature of a good banker. By being active in AML, we are simply doing our job. Any negligence on this means we are not up to the requirements of our job. We need to emphasize that the key element in the process, is the strong commitment to understand and implement it. It is very important for such commitment to come from the highest management structures of the bank. If such commitment is missing, this will be immediately shown at the structures of the bank that are directly involved in the AML process, whose functioning will be negligible and full of formalism. Within the institution, this commitment should be shown: in the preparation and approval of the internal procedures on AML (including those of knowing the client), in setting up the proper entities and appointing the responsible persons (on monitoring the AML implementation process) with the proper professional and hierarchical qualities, in rightly defining their rights and responsibilities, in giving them moral and material support, in providing qualitative and continuous training for the staff, especially for those that have direct contact with the client and analyse its ML risk profile and in keeping up a positive pressure in the institution for such process to be implemented and be continuously functioning. In one word, the climate that should exist within the institution for such issue (but not only) should favour in any instance the responsible actions being taken from the bank staff on AML.   In an inter-institutional level, the commitment to be active on AML goes beyond full compliance with the regulatory requirements. We must be mindful of the role we have in the mosaic of the institutions that are relevant on implementing the AML program in the society. Furthermore, we should be sensitive and helpful toward such institutions, especially when we know the difficulties they face in performing their functions. More concretely, I do not believe that the banking industry and other non-bank financial institutions, are giving their maximum contribution, if they suffice with fulfilling rigorously some quantitative mandatory requirements of the law, and not focusing also on some non-mandatory but very important requirements. For example, a very low number of suspicious transactions is currently reported at Anti Money Laundering Directorate (FIU), while the number of reports about transactions above the threshold required by law, is huge. In this instance banks are acting in accordance with the law requirements, but are not in compliance with spirit of the law. As we all agree that it is impossible for the banks to totally know and guarantee for the cleanness of each of their clients, then we must accept the fact that the lacking of suspicious transactions reports means that the bank: • has difficulties in setting up its structures to ensure the real analysis of the risk profile of its client; 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
• doesn’t have a good understanding of the problem and has been adopting formalism in fulfilling the law requirements; • is not taking a proactive role, to understand other relevant institutions difficulties and to come forward with reasonable and acceptable solutions, in accordance with the spirit of the law. If a bank has chosen to act in formalism and if this gets a widespread adoption in the entire financial system, I think we really risk that this approach be counterproductive to the financial industry firstly. It would be somehow normal in this instance to think about lowering the minimum threshold required by law, as a possible solution to avoid formalism and to capture potential cases of ML that lie below the current threshold. Hence, we risk imposing on ourselves a development with a much higher cost of compliance and potentially more formalism, when we consider the difficulties that exist in analysing the reported information in AML Directorate. In this context, I would like to highlight that formalism in terms of law implementation is unacceptable and harmful. In this case formalism is based on task performance and makes the control structures become dormant or inhibits their positive progress. So it is crucial that the law itself and regulations be as clear and implementable as possible in order to establish confidentiality and facilities in their implementation process.    Passing in the definition of the risk profile of the client, is the only way that would permit the compliance with the spirit of the law. This approach is based on a sound “know your client” policy of the bank, which should be a standard requirement nowadays. This approach has several advantages, where one could mention improved capabilities on tightening the system to prevent or detect cases of ML. Furthermore, it allows better distribution and focus of financial and human resources, resulting in a lowering of compliance costs. At the same time, it allows those institutions responsible for implementing the law and analysing the information, to focus on the full investigation of those transactions that represent higher risk of being ML. Another delicate issue that I would to stress on in my speech is keeping and protecting the confidentiality on giving and managing the information on suspicious transactions. Our practice has shown that problems with this issue are complex. We have had cases of confidential information being public in the press, the next day they were filed. In another case, the employees of a bank that reported a suspicious transaction, were called and probed in the prosecutor office as being those the persons of actually being involved in ML. The reporting subjects and the institutions that implement the law, must define among each other certain procedures that would eliminate the occurrence of such case and that ensure the protection of confidentiality of the persons that have filed the suspicious reports. As long as this element is not totally ensured, any other discussion on the matter risks being a purely theoretical one, without much practical values. In conclusion, as a Governor, I must say that I would encourage a better cooperation among the institutions that are subject or that implement the law on AML. At the same time, Bank of Albania as the supervisory institution of its licensees will promote a stronger contribution by banks in Anti Money Laundering requirements implementation. In exerting our function, we shall not be limited to the verification of the existence and the functioning of the internal structures and procedures, but will deepen further on assessing the support the management structures of the banks, give to the real implementation of the AML internal policies. The position of a central bank is, according to the law, very comfortable, but playing the proactive role of a responsible central bank, showing the concrete implementation of this responsibility, we will intensify our efforts together with the other actors of interest to enable a better implementation of the law on money laundering prevention.  Allow me to close this speech, thanking the co-organisers of this workshop, the Tirana office of FSVC and the Albanian Association of Banks. I thank in particular all the specialists of the commercial banks and of the non-bank financial institutions that took part in this seminar, for their valuable contribution on preventing money laundering in their institutions. I thank particularly the foreign experts, Mr. Farrell and Mr. Burnside, that accepted to share with us their valuable experience. I wish this workshop has also been for them an interesting event. Thank you.  BIS Review 49/2005 3 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Benchmark market indices - milestones in financial market progress  Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the launch of Citigroup Malaysian Government Bond Index & Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Malaysia Index, “Benchmark Market Indices - Milestones in Financial Market Progress”, Kuala Lumpur, 23 June 2005. *      *      * Yang Berbahagia Dato' Sri Sulaiman Abdul Rahman Taib, Executive Chairman, RHB Capital,  Dr. Zaha Rina Zahari, Chief Executive Officer, RHB Securities, Mr. Piyush Gupta, Country Officer and Chief Executive of Citibank Berhad,  Distinguished Guests, Members of the media and Ladies and Gentlemen,  "The use of benchmark market indices emerged on the financial scene as early as in the 1880's. In 1884, Charles Dow, journalist and founder of Dow Jones & Company produced the first Dow Jones Index, published in the company's 'Customer Afternoon Letter' which was later to become the Wall Street Journal. Of what we know, Charles Dow had always been a keen market observer. The haphazard idiosyncratic price movements of shares of individual or group of companies indeed did not lend itself to a coherent assessment of the performance of the market nor enable any meaningful analysis of market direction and investors' inclinations. This gave rise to the need for an index that reflects the broad market performance and investors' interest.  This first market index was simple. Prices of 11 stocks, the most actively traded on the New York Stock Exchange, were averaged. Charles Dow himself chose these stocks, nine of them being railroad companies, the key growth industry at the time. Over time, he would revise the index as he saw appropriate to be reflective of ongoing market and industry developments.  Ladies and Gentlemen, The construction and use of benchmark market indices today has undergone much advancement since then. Indeed, financial markets have undergone dramatic transformation. Economic, industry, and corporate expansion; the sophistication, proliferation and diversity of instruments; the expanding investment communities are all factors that have led to an increase in the number of benchmark indices and their greater use. Benchmark committees deliberate over the construction of the index and determine the rules of the benchmark. Investors need the benchmark indices to be used as performance indicators of the broad market and for an indication of the market direction and investors' sentiment on the corporate sector and economy. The representative stocks within a benchmark index need to be highly liquid and reflective of the key corporate sectors that drive growth in the economy. At the same time the index should also reflect the underlying changes in the economy incorporating the emergence of new industries. Thus, for an index to be a useful benchmark and to be used as a reference by investors and market players, the index needs to be regularly reviewed and adjusted accordingly in line with market developments and the transformations taking place in the economy. Indeed, benchmark market indices would reflect the broader investor participation and growing maturity of a markets.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  Today's launching of the Citigroup Malaysian Government Securities Index and the Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Malaysia Index, marks another step forward in the development of Malaysia's capital markets. The importance of these two indices should not be underestimated. This initiative by the Citigroup and RHB and Dow Jones is an important contribution to the development of our domestic markets.  With globalization, increased connectivity and rapid financial market integration, investors are no longer restricted to investing within their own domestic borders. Indeed the 'home bias' or tendency of investors to invest almost all their assets domestically, has been rapidly dissipating. Investors look abroad for enhanced returns and diversification opportunities. For more than a decade now, the pace of diversification across borders by pension and insurance funds, asset management companies, hedge funds and high net worth individuals has increased dramatically. A region that has emerged strongly in the international investors radar screen is the East Asian region. Strong, sustainable economic growth, rapid expansion in intra-regional trade and investment have led to a correspondingly accelerated pace of development of the capital markets and to an increase in the BIS Review 49/2005 1 
pace of financial liberalization and integration. In this environment, it becomes important to promote well-developed, deep and liquid capital markets.  Today's launch of the Malaysian Government Securities index will assist investors who have increasingly been attracted to Malaysian fixed income securities as an important asset class.  As I understand, the Citigroup MGS Index will potentially be part of their global bond index, an inclusion that would indeed contribute to increasing the significance of the MGS market in the global bond markets. The Citigroup's global bond index, previously known as the Salomon World Bond Index, has been one of the most referenced benchmark market index by the international investment community. It would promote Malaysia in the investors' investment horizon, whether as a long-term benchmark holding in their portfolio or as a tactical investment in seeking market out-performance. When this becomes a reality, the Citigroup Global Bond Index will be the first benchmark that has Malaysia as a component.  The index could also serve to facilitate enhanced trading or liquidity in the market, with the commitment to make market or provide prices for the bonds comprised within the index. Besides enhancing the trading volume and related business prospects, it would also spur competition among dealers and the growth of derivative products. Increased market activity and continuous availability of prices in a benchmark government debt market would, in turn, enable other markets; namely private debt securities and asset backed securities to be appropriately priced relative to the degree of risks, and for such securities to be further developed.  The Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Equity Index heralds another milestone in the growing Islamic financial markets. The merger of the Dow Jones Islamic Index for Malaysia and the existing RHB Islamic Index, besides achieving some form of economies of scale with reduced duplication of efforts, will have the significant added advantage of both international and domestic recognition. Moreover, as one of the leading countries that support the growth and development of Islamic financial markets, it is most appropriate for the development of the index to be part of the Dow Jones Islamic World Index.  Within a global index such as the Dow Jones Islamic World Index, the inclusion of the Dow Jones-RHB Islamic index will increase the potential for further investments into Malaysian Islamic equities. Malaysia is well positioned to benefit greatly from this as the infrastructure and marketplace for Islamic financial instruments and investment has long been developed. Indeed, in our equity market, more than 80% of the counters in Bursa Malaysia or previously known as the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, are Syariah compliant.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  Certainly, the development of benchmark market indices is an important part and parcel of the continued progress, contributing to the further deepening of capital markets. Two particular areas of heightened focus are in the regional bond market and international Sukuk market.  In the region, the Asian Bond Fund 2, launched by the EMEAP central banks in December 2004, is aimed at promoting the further integration of the regional countries' bond markets and the creation of a new asset class for Asia and global investors. One of the important pillars of this development has been the construction of benchmark indices. Indeed the launch of Asian Bond Fund 2 is accompanied by the development of benchmark indices that are fully replicated by the fund manager of each individual country sub fund, as well as in the umbrella Pan Asian Index Fund.  Meanwhile, the Islamic Sukuk international market's expansion is gaining momentum. Wider acceptance by investors and greater awareness of issuers of this alternative structure has seen increased issuances over the past few years. In the sovereign markets; Malaysia, Qatar and Bahrain have come to the market with Sukuks. Supranational institutions such as the Islamic Development Bank, World Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) have also ventured into issuing Sukuks, with the latter two institutions issuing the ringgit-denominated instruments in our domestic bond market. The first USD1 billion-issue size was launched in 2004 by the Government of Dubai. In 2005, it is estimated that a total of more than USD5 billion of Sukuk is in the pipeline globally in a range of currencies. The market is indeed growing. Ladies and Gentlemen, The introduction of a benchmark index can act as a catalyst for a more rapid pace of development of the financial market and the recognition of a new asset class. The conditions are timely for the crafting of a benchmark index to further spur the growth of the Islamic financial and capital market to meet the needs of a larger pool of Muslim savers and investors. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
On the domestic front, the ringgit denominated Islamic debt market continues to grow encouragingly. In the private debt securities market, a total of 42% of securities outstanding as at end 2004 were Islamic securities. For the debt markets as a whole, Islamic securities comprised 25.7% of total outstanding bond issues at the conclusion of 2004. Coupled with increased turnover volume, the size and liquidity of the Islamic debt markets are improving, possibly paving the way for even greater demand for Islamic financial products. The formulation of a benchmark index to reflect the ringgit Islamic debt market could well be a strategic opportunity for market players to take up as the next step forward.  Ladies and Gentlemen,  The future growth and development of the Malaysian capital market, including a dynamic Islamic financial market with breadth and depth, has never been brighter. As we witness in the current environment, cross-border flows, joint ventures and partnerships with global players have become the norm. New growth markets, enhanced integration and liberalization of economies and financial markets are the themes that will increasingly dominate our business activities. Positioning ourselves for these developments is imperative in these highly competitive markets. Part of that positioning is certainly transpiring before us today, right here. With that, it is with great pleasure that I officially launch the Citigroup Malaysian Government Securities Index and the Dow Jones-RHB Islamic Index. Thank you. BIS Review 49/2005 3 
Y V Reddy: Overcoming challenges in a globalising economy - managing India’s external sector Lecture by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the India Programme of The Foreign Policy Centre, London, 23 June 2005. *      *      * Dear Friends, I am thankful to the Foreign Policy Centre for giving me this opportunity to be with you this evening and share India’s experience in regard to managing its progressive integration with the world economy. I would like to confine myself to the issues relating to the external sector. Perhaps one of the most successful aspects of India’s structural reforms is the strength and dynamism in the external sector. The memories of June 1991, when the foreign exchange reserves fell to a level equal to barely a week’s imports, are way behind us. Our journey from these problems to the position of comfort that we enjoy today has been exciting.  Today, I propose to dwell on how we have been benefiting from a globalising economy while minimising the attendant risks. The focus is on specific areas relating to the balance of payments and financial integration which transformed a hitherto inward-looking nation into a vibrant, internationally competitive economy, gradually integrating with the rest of the world. Merchandise trade A key objective of structural reforms instituted in the aftermath of the crisis of 1991 was to correct for the implicit anti-export bias built up during the first three and a half decades of planning and to reap the competitiveness and efficiency gains for the economy from a more open trade regime. What were the major elements of the reforms? First, arrangements were put in place for the move towards a market-determined exchange rate. Second, since 1992 the trade policy imbibed a medium-term perspective. Third, a key aspect of the trade reforms has been a substantial reduction in import tariff rates and a drastic rationalisation of the tariff structure, including their dispersion. Fourth, concerted efforts have been made to dismantle the panoply of non-tariff barriers that was predicated upon the balance of payments reasons under the GATT. Fifth, the Reserve Bank of India has undertaken several measures to ensure adequate and timely availability of bank credit for trade finance at competitive interest rates. Sixth, there has been a policy thrust for creating appropriate institutional arrangements for supporting a vigorous export drive. These include export processing zones, special economic zones, overseas banking units and technology parks.  India has engaged herself constructively in multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO. Within its multilateral commitments, India has forcefully articulated its position which reflects the concerns of the developing countries. In tune with the worldwide spread of regional trading arrangements and our belief that such arrangements act as prelude to progressive multilateral trade liberalisation, India has entered into several preferential trade agreements. These reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurial energies. India’s merchandise exports have been rising at a rate of over 20 per cent per annum, in US dollar terms, in recent years. As a result, the secular decline in India’s share in world exports from two per cent in 1950 to 0.5 per cent in the 1980s has been halted. This share began rising in the 1990s and is currently at 0.8 per cent. The export strategy envisages a doubling of India’s share in the world merchandise trade by 2008-09.  Services Trade policy reforms undertaken since the 1990s have shed their traditional focus on merchandise trade and encompassed a wide range of tradable services, reflecting India’s competitive advantage in business services, technical and professional services. The EXIM policies of recent years have selected services for special focus. India accepted the obligations under Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement and instituted current account convertibility in 1994. Besides, there has been a BIS Review 49/2005 1 
progressive liberalisation of the exchange control regime. Foreign direct investment (FDI) has been permitted in a host of services in order to take advantage of modern technology, with some restrictions on financial services, taking into account the current stage of development and openness. Further, increasing availability of speedier and cost-effective money transfer arrangements through the banking channels and post offices has resulted in significant increase in the use of formal channels for remittance transfers.  Exports of services have risen consistently by over 20 per cent per annum in recent years. Within services exports, software and IT-enabled services have been growing at an average rate of 46 per cent annually since the mid-1990s. Over the years, skill content of Indian labour has been rising and the traditional markets of the Middle East have given way to the US, Europe and other industrialised countries. For the external sector, this natural advantage has translated into significant inflows in the form of remittances from Indians working abroad. Workers’ remittances are nearly four per cent of India’s GDP now and have provided considerable and sustained support to India’s balance of payments.  Trade and current account  A discussion on the recent trends in trade and current account will perhaps be in order. A distinguishing feature of India’s external sector developments during the fiscal year 2004-05 was the expansion of the merchandise trade deficit to more than five per cent of GDP from an average of a little below three per cent of GDP during 1990-2004. Underlying this expansion in the trade deficit was a surge in oil imports on the back of the soaring international crude oil prices and the pick up in investment demand as well as the growing strength of domestic industrial activity. This trend in imports may continue in view of the possible strengthening of upturn of activity in the economy. However, an intrinsic link between merchandise imports and exports has emerged and become entrenched so that the large expansion in imports is also spurring vigorous export growth. Given the recent experience, this order of the trade deficit appears to be manageable at this stage and is consistent with our growth aspirations.  Despite the large trade deficit, the current account recorded only a modest deficit of less than one per cent of GDP in 2004-05 after a continuous run of surpluses over the three-year period, 2001-2004. The high trade deficit during 2004-05 was to a large extent accommodated by the net invisible surplus at five per cent of GDP, supported by buoyant services exports and sustained remittances from migrant workers overseas. In fact, invisible surpluses have traditionally provided valuable support to India’ s balance of payments and in recent years, they have taken on the character of a permanent component in the current account. It is in this context that we believe that the current account deficit is sustainable with enough headroom available for accommodating even higher levels of investment activity.  From a cross-country perspective, the Indian experience with managing the current account reveals some unique features. First, the lessons of the 1991 crisis brought forth policies which ensured a low current account deficit in the ensuing years. This approach stood us in good stead in warding off the contagion from the Asian crisis of 1997-98. Second, the sustainability of the current account was ensured by a policy choice for non-debt flows and emphasis on the consolidation and reduction of external debt. Third, the low current account deficit was underpinned by shifts in international competitiveness favouring software, IT exports and workers’ remittances over traditional exports. Fourth, although the fiscal deficit remained somewhat inflexible, it was not allowed to spill over into the current account. Finally, the current account deficit being the mirror image of the absorptive capacity, it is best assessed over the business cycle rather than at discrete points. Capital account Since the initiation of gradual liberalisation of the capital account in 1991, capital flows have been in excess of current account deficit (CAD) except, in 1992-93 and 1995-96, adding to the reserves. It is interesting to note that the stock of external debt came down steeply from 28.7 per cent of GDP at the end of March 1991 to 17.4 per cent by March 2005. The decline in debt reflected the policy-induced shift in the composition of the capital account in favour of non-debt flows. The level of short-term debt continues to be low at US$ 7.5 billion as at the end of March 2005. As regards the composition of capital flows, there is, of late, almost a total shift in favour of private flows. The foreign direct investment increased from less than one per cent of net capital flows in the 1980s to 20 per cent of net 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
capital flows in 2004-05. Total portfolio investment flows on account of FIIs, GDRs and others were US$ 8.9 billion in 2004-05 on top of net inflows of US$ 11.4 billion in the preceding year.  In brief, given the adverse international experience with unfettered capital account liberalisation, we have been risk averse and have adopted a policy of active management of the capital account. The compositional shifts in the capital account have been consistent with the policy framework, imparting stability to the balance of payments. The sustainability of the current account is increasingly viewed as consistent with the volume of normal capital flows. The substitution of debt by non-debt flows also gives us room for manoeuvre since debt levels, particularly, external commercial borrowings, have been moderate and can be raised in the event of a sustained pick up in the demand for external resources. There is also the cushion available from the foreign exchange reserves.  Since non-debt creating flows are dominating, the emphasis is on encouraging inflows through foreign direct investment, and enhancing the quality of portfolio flows by strict adherence to what may be described as ‘Know Your Investor’ principle. Further, in view of entrepreneurial skills in India and evolving synergies in a global economy, overseas investment by Indian corporates has been receiving a positive response. Further, prudential regulations over financial intermediaries, especially over banks, in respect of their foreign exchange exposures and transactions are a dynamic component of management of capital account as well as financial supervision.  Reserve management The adequacy of foreign exchange reserves is a relevant consideration in the management of the capital account. First, adequacy has to be viewed not only in terms of trade needs but also other short-term liabilities. Second, it is not merely the long-term or short-term debt in terms of original maturity that is relevant for reserves, but the profile of external debt in terms of residual maturity. A trade-related debt which is in the nature of collateralised debt may be less severe on reserve requirements. Third, any addition to portfolio flows may warrant comfort through some additions to reserves. In fact, there is merit in presuming that the flows are temporary till there is reason to judge them to be permanent. Fourth, it is necessary to recognise that reserves provide cushion to manage real and external sector shocks like oil prices. Fifth, there is usually an opportunity cost of maintaining foreign exchange reserves, but this must be weighed against the financial and non-financial costs associated with volatile and adverse exchange rate movements. Finally, while the optimal level of reserves is difficult to quantify, attention to level of reserves as a means of self-insurance is essential. In the final analysis, the adequacy of reserves needs to be assessed in terms of a medium-term perspective taking into account the possible levels of the current account deficits, the composition of capital flows, the level of international confidence in the ability of the country’s payment position and pace and quality of growth. Viewed from all these perspectives, the current level of reserves continues to be comfortable.  The essence of portfolio management of reserves by the RBI is to ensure safety, liquidity and optimisation of returns. The reserve management strategies are periodically reviewed by the RBI in consultation with the Government. In deploying reserves, attention is paid to the currency composition, duration and selection of instruments. While there is no set formula to meet all situations, the RBI applies sound portfolio management principles and risk management.  Exchange rate management A major success in external sector management has been the transition from an administered exchange rate regime to a more flexible, market-based system. Under the new arrangements instituted in early 1993, the day-to-day movements in exchange rates are market determined. India’s current exchange rate policy focuses on management of volatility without a fixed target, while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange rate movements over a period, in an orderly way. To this end, the RBI monitors closely the developments in the financial markets at home and abroad, and takes such monetary, regulatory and other measures as considered necessary from time to time.  The conduct of exchange rate policy is guided by three major purposes: first, to reduce excessive volatility in exchange rates, while ensuring that the movements are orderly; second, to help maintain an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves and third, to help eliminate market constraints with a view to developing a deep and liquid foreign exchange market. The policy is aimed at preventing BIS Review 49/2005 3 
destabilising speculation in the market while facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates for all permissible purposes.  There is a wide consensus that India’s exchange rate policy has stood the test of time, despite several domestic and external developments, including the severe currency crises which characterised the 1990s. Recent international research on viable exchange rate strategies in emerging markets has lent considerable support to the exchange rate policy followed by India. Global economy and India The debate in India has customarily been on the contours of the public policy in the context of increasing global economic integration. More recently, however, a debate in the rest of the world has been in evidence on the challenges likely to be faced by the global economy on account of progressively increasing global integration of the Indian economy. Hence, there is merit in looking at, perhaps illustratively, some of the global challenges of our integration while we move forward in this regard.  Over the next half-century, the population of the world will age faster than during the past half-century as fertility rates decline and life expectancy rises. In Europe, the demographic profile is already tilted towards the higher age group and by 2050, this is projected to accelerate. Projections suggest a turning point between 2010 and 2030 when the European Union, North America and Japan will experience a substantial decline in savings rate relative to investment which may be reflected in large current account deficits. Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in the second stage of the demographic cycle. Elderly dependency is expected to double in these countries by 2025. Their working age populations will increase modestly first and then shrink. These projections suggest that East Asia could increasingly become an important supplier of global savings up to 2025; however, rapid population ageing thereafter would reinforce rather than mitigate the inexorable decline of global savings. India is entering the second stage of demographic cycle and over the next half-century, a significant increase in both savings rate and share of working age population is expected. The share of the labour force in population in India is expected to overtake the rest of Asia, including China, by 2030. Looking ahead, the rest of the world may increasingly rely on China and India for supplies of both labour and capital and this could significantly influence the evolution of the global economy. It is evident that China and India will have to give high priority to generating employment and both are poised for substantial increases in productivity.  The global economy will have to contend with the implications of these developments on prices, exchange rates, wages and structures of employment in industrialised countries. Over the medium term, it is felt that outsourcing will grow rapidly and may also cover high-end research and development activities. In manufacturing, China has emerged as a leader and India is catching up rapidly. Though agriculture is heavily subsidised in major industrialised countries, such subsidisation would be difficult to sustain from a fiscal point of view, since many of the countries concerned are poised to meet the mounting pension liabilities not to speak of burgeoning health care costs of maintaining the deteriorating demographics. One sector where the industrialised economies continue to show considerable strength and dominance is the financial sector, partly attributable to the confidence factor in financial markets that favours the industrialised economies and traditional international financial centres. It is essential for India to carefully monitor the developments in both real and financial sectors, and to frame the policies in tandem with the global developments so that global integration continues to be a positive sum game for all countries.  Financial integration On the path of integrating the Indian financial markets with the global financial system, we have chosen to proceed cautiously and in a gradual manner, calibrating the pace of capital account liberalisation with underlying macroeconomic developments, the state of readiness of the domestic financial system and the dynamics of international financial markets.  Unlike in the case of trade integration, where benefits to all countries are demonstrable, in case of financial integration, a "threshold" in terms of preparedness and resilience of the economy is important for a country to get full benefits. A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and when a country has reached the “threshold” and the financial integration should be approached cautiously, preferably within the framework of a plausible roadmap that is drawn up by embodying the country-specific 4 BIS Review 49/2005 
context and institutional features. In India, we have been adhering to a cautious and sure-footed approach in our reforms so far and there is merit in doing so since it enables us to avoid policy reversals on the one hand and build on the past strengths on the other. The experience of the 1990s has shown that our approach to financial integration has stood the test of time. Even as we have embarked on a measured pace of financial liberalisation, we have ensured that we have a well-capitalised financial system by international standards, with low levels of loan delinquency. Our financial markets are orderly and smoothly functioning and the ability of our financial intermediaries to deal in various segments of the financial market spectrum is improving almost continuously.  The optimism generated by the recent gains in macroeconomic performance warrants a balanced consideration of further financial liberalisation. Undoubtedly, it contributes to growth through enhancement of allocative efficiency in the use of resources, by promoting financial deepening and by expanding the volume of resource flow to the economy. At the same time it is important to recognise the risks to the financial system emanating from stressed macroeconomic fundamentals such as those associated with fiscal deficit, inflation and uncertainties in international financial markets. Turbulence in the domestic financial systems tends to amplify related distortions and generates undesirable fluctuations in economic activities. Further, it also exposes the economy to external shocks and fluctuations in international business cycles. There could, therefore, be a trade-off in the initial stages while considering financial liberalisation and in policy terms, the trade-off takes the form of a choice between measured and premature financial liberalisation as also appropriate sequencing, the choice being contextual and often judgmental. In general, the downside of a premature financial liberalisation would be in the form of financial instability and associated social costs of disruption which are significantly higher for a developing economy like India. India has made significant progress in financial liberalisation since the institution of financial sector reforms in 1992 and this has been recognised internationally. External financial liberalisation, in particular, has expanded at a fairly rapid pace. At this stage, the optimism generated by impressive macroeconomic performance accompanied with stability has given rise to pressures for significantly accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is essential to take into account the risks associated with it while resetting an accelerated pace of a gradualist approach.  First, India’s public debt and fiscal deficit as a proportion of GDP is currently among the highest in the world, but it has been financed almost entirely from domestic savings. There is a commitment to fiscal consolidation in the medium term with the implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003. In the interim, however, before embarking on any faster pace of external financial liberalisation, the possible spill-over effects of fiscal deficits into external sector need to be carefully evaluated.  Second, it is widely recognised that financial instability can lead to high variability in real activity and, as the Asian financial crisis has tellingly demonstrated, even cause interruptions in the growth process. Financial distress has resulted in macroeconomic and welfare losses. Resilience and flexibility in the real sector of the economy are essential to deal with surges of capital flows, large reversals and associated fluctuations in financial prices that become inevitable with accelerated liberalisation of financial sector. At present, some inflexibilities in pricing policies and restrictions on domestic trade constrain the response of the real sector. In general, therefore, low level of system flexibility at the current juncture is a major constraint on economic agents and financial market participants in responding to highly accelerated financial liberalisation and dealing with its downside risks.  Third, the adequacy of foreign exchange reserves is often cited as a consideration for significantly accelerating the pace of financial liberalisation. Foreign exchange reserves are, in the final analysis, a cushion to withstand both cyclical and unanticipated shocks. Therefore, reserve adequacy may be a necessary condition but not a sufficient one for speeding up financial liberalisation. There is a clearer recognition today that the net benefits from financial liberalisation in respect of any developing country would be enhanced only if complementary policies in non-financial sectors are followed.  Finally, the existing international financial architecture is not adequate to prevent or mitigate the domestic and external effects of financial crisis in large economies like India. The impact of instability in times of crisis appears largely to be borne by the home or domestic public sector rather than the global private sector. The issue of setting the pace of financial liberalisation revisits the issue of trade-off between sustained growth and a growth rate that could potentially turn volatile and unstable. While it is necessary to add to the pace of growth, it is also equally important to minimise the risks of BIS Review 49/2005 5 
instability and experience shows that more than desirable pace of financial liberalisation was often followed by financial instability and crises.  Thus, the recent experience in many countries shows that periods of impressive macroeconomic performance generate pressures for speedier financial liberalisation since everyone appears to be a gainer from further liberalisation, but the costs of instability that may get generated are borne by the country, the government and the poorer sections. Avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The approach to managing the external sector, the choice of instruments and the timing and sequencing of policies are matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables.  Conclusion Over the years, India’s commercial and financial linkages with the rest of the world have been increasing with trade liberalisation and openness on the capital account. This is reflected in the transmission of international impulses to the real sector and domestic financial markets. Trends in international prices have now significant influence on domestic prices. Indian corporates and institutions are increasingly accessing international markets with consequent diversification benefits. While this process has provided important opportunities, it has also brought in new challenges and risks, necessitating fine-tuning of macro policies in a much broader canvass and context. India is, thus, moving from a focus on managing external sector to implementing an optimal integration of domestic and external sectors, with the global economy. Thank you. 6 BIS Review 49/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in EMU - views and challenges Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung (ZEW), Mannheim, 24 June 2005. *      *      * Introduction The subject which the organisers have chosen for this conference, namely “Competition in Europe - Europe facing international competition” is not only very topical, but also very challenging. While my presentation today will not focus directly on these issues, I will address them both in my discussion of economic differentials within the euro area and in my concluding remarks.  My main message today is that Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is beneficial to all of the individual countries which comprise the euro area. I will begin by presenting some key macroeconomic developments which show the great success of the EMU project, not only in terms of price stability and low inflation expectations, but also with respect to the low macroeconomic volatility in the euro area. I will argue that a high degree of credibility, transparency and predictability on the part of monetary policy are key conditions for this success. Nevertheless, it is not the stability-oriented monetary policy of the ECB alone that has made the success of the euro possible. During the transition to the euro fiscal policies have been more disciplined than before. Moreover, some structural reforms have been implemented and social partners have contributed via wage moderation. One should not overlook these contributions to macroeconomic stability and job creation simply because their positive effects have been diminished by uncertainties and hesitation regarding further reform projects and fiscal policy soundness. Major adverse supply shocks in recent years have also to be taken into account. Finally, I will discuss the issue of inflation and growth differentials within the euro area. I will explain that these divergences are of a similar size to those observed within the United States. Moreover, inflation differentials are often a normal and welcome equilibrating mechanism within a large currency area. Similarly, persistent real growth differentials may reflect a normal and healthy catching-up process. However, they may also be caused by cross-country differences in economic structures and in the design of economic policies. The first years of the euro - price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations … When taking a closer look at those developments that can be influenced by monetary policy, there can be little doubt that the EMU project has been a great success, which is particularly remarkable against the background of the many and sizeable economic shocks that have hit the euro area since the introduction of the euro.  When looking at the euro area as a whole, a regime shift towards greater monetary stability took place during the second half of the 1990s. This was associated with the EMU project enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, and in particular with the convergence process and the introduction of the euro.  Since the ECB became responsible for monetary policy in the euro area in 1999, HICP inflation has averaged 2%. This is very near to the “below and close to 2%” at which the ECB aims over the medium term. Let me remind you that during the 1980s and 1990s, the average inflation rate was 4%. Inflation expectations have also been remarkably stable in recent years. Average long-term consensus inflation expectations have fallen from 2.8% in the 1990s (1990 to 1998) to 1.8% over the past six years. This is fully in line with our definition of price stability.  The very low levels of short-term and long-term interest rates which we are currently observing are providing substantial support to favourable financial conditions. These low levels would be unthinkable without the successful stabilisation of inflation expectations. … have also contributed to low macroeconomic volatility A further remarkable feature of the change in economic performance is the strong decline in nominal macroeconomic volatility. With the convergence process during the 1990s, inflation volatility fell BIS Review 49/2005 1 
strongly. The volatility of quarterly HICP inflation in the euro area (measured as the standard deviation over the previous six years) fell from around 0.6 percentage point during the late 1980s to less than 0.3 percentage point in the mid-1990s. Since then, inflation volatility has stabilised at this very low level, in spite of major inflationary shocks. And the average volatility of long-term consensus inflation expectations has also declined substantially, by four-fifths, from almost 0.5 percentage point in the 1990s to around 0.1 percentage point in recent years. Lower volatility of actual and expected inflation reduces consumer and investor uncertainty and thereby enhances welfare. Stable inflation expectations and a high degree of confidence on the part of financial market participants in monetary policy should, over time, also lead to a reduction in the volatility of longer-term interest rates, and thus also to lower risk premia. Indeed, over the past six years, there has been a substantial decline in the volatility of long-term interest rates as compared with that recorded in the past decade. In the 1990s, for example, the standard deviation of long-term interest rates (monthly data) was around 2 percentage points; in the past six years, this measure has fallen to a little more than ½ a percentage point. It is striking that, while the volatility of long-term interest rates in the euro area was still around twice as high as that in the United States in the 1990s, the situation has reversed in the last six years, with euro area interest rate volatility now being below that observed in the United States. Anchoring inflation expectations is not only important for low medium- and long-term market interest rates. It is also crucial for reducing macroeconomic fluctuations in response to economic shocks. There are some hints that the persistence of inflation in recent years has been lower than before. It is likely that this has resulted, at least partly, from the improved anchoring of inflation expectations which may, in turn, have led to a more forward-looking behaviour on the part of those setting prices and wages. Less indexation of wages and prices to current and past inflation would tend to contribute to lower volatility of employment and output in response to macroeconomic shocks. Importantly, the achievements in the area of monetary stability have not come at the cost of higher unemployment. On the contrary, the unemployment rate has averaged around 8½% over the past six years and has therefore been more than one percentage point lower, on average, than in the 1990s. Annual employment growth (in terms of persons employed) has doubled from an average of around ½% in the 1980s and 1990s to slightly above 1% since the start of the single monetary policy. Average real GDP growth has been 1.9% in the past six years, which is close to the average of 2.0% in the 1990s (1990-1998). Moreover, there are no visible signs of costs in terms of higher real macroeconomic volatility; on the contrary, in recent years the volatility of some real variables has also declined relative to the averages observed during the 1980s and 1990s. For example, the standard deviation of quarter-on-quarter percentage changes of real GDP growth has fallen from around 0.5 percentage point in the 1990s to around 0.4 percentage point in the last six years. The volatility of employment growth has also fallen from over 0.3 percentage point to 0.2 percentage point.  All in all, however, some encouraging structural reforms notwithstanding, the high degree of monetary stability achieved stands in contrast to the as yet insufficient flexibility and dynamism of some euro area economies. The latter phenomenon explains why the success of EMU has not been accompanied by higher real growth. In particular labour productivity growth has been weak since the mid-1990s, and unemployment in many euro area countries is still far too high. These problems need to be addressed by stepping up structural reforms. An inflationary monetary policy would certainly not be of help - on the contrary, it would make things worse. The preconditions for credibility and anchoring of inflation expectations  Let me now turn to the question of why we have been able to stabilise inflation expectations, and thus interest rates, at low levels. I discussed the convergence of long-term interest rates to very low levels in the late 1990s in a recent presentation1, in which I attributed this success to a shift to a more credible policy regime. Several institutional provisions enshrined in the Treaty as well as strategic                                                       1  See J.-C. Trichet, " Monetary Policy and Private Expectations”, Zolotas Lecture at the Bank of Greece, Athens, 25 February 2005. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB have been necessary preconditions for a credible monetary policy and a successful anchoring of inflation expectations. With regard to the key institutional provisions, the ECB has been given a clear mandate, namely to pursue the primary objective of maintaining price stability, and its independence is fully guaranteed by the Treaty. Furthermore, rules for pursuing sound fiscal policies are enshrined in the Treaty in the form of the Maastricht criteria; the Stability and Growth Pact implements these principles via regulations. As regards the key strategic decisions, the Governing Council of the ECB has designed a stability-oriented monetary policy strategy. This monetary policy concept is based on an arithmetic definition of price stability and on a two-pillar approach involving not only an economic pillar, but also a monetary pillar. Our commitment to monitoring monetary developments provides powerful support to anchoring long-term inflation expectations. The precise definition of price stability for the euro area showed full continuity with the national central banks’ earlier core definitions of price stability and thus ensured that inflation expectations for the new currency would be the same as for the most credible national currencies immediately before the setting up of the euro.  Finally, the ECB has opted for a high degree of transparency. From the very beginning, key features of the monetary policy strategy have been published. Moreover, almost in real time, the monthly assessment of the Governing Council and the reasons for the interest rate decisions taken are presented to the public at the press conferences immediately following the first Governing Council meeting of each month. All of these factors have contributed to the high degree of credibility enjoyed by the ECB’s monetary policy and thus to price stability and the successful anchoring of inflation expectations. But credibility is never gained once and for all. It has to be permanently preserved and enhanced. That is why, for central bankers, vigilance is always of the essence and why the ECB pays the utmost attention to monitoring inflation expectations. Inflation and growth differentials among countries in the euro area are moderate … In recent months there has been a renewed interest in the issue of economic differentials between euro area countries. Regional differentials in growth and inflation are a standard feature of all large currency areas around the world. In the euro area these differentials are of a similar size to those observed within the United States. Let me provide some figures. The degree of inflation dispersion across the euro area countries was characterised by a strong downward trend in the 1980s and 1990s and has broadly stabilised since the inception of the euro. Inflation dispersion among the euro area countries (measured as the unweighted standard deviation of annual HICP inflation rates) was around 6 percentage points in late 1990, while it amounted to slightly less than 1 percentage point in spring 2005. The average inflation dispersion across the euro area countries has been 1 percentage point since the launch of the euro. This figure is very close to the dispersion observed across the 14 US metropolitan statistical areas. The dispersion of real GDP growth rates in the euro area has, since 1999, remained very close to its historic average, without any signs of increased divergence having emerged so far. In the period from 1999 to 2004, the average dispersion of annual real GDP growth (measured as the unweighted standard deviation) was around 2 percentage points, and thus very close to the average dispersion of real growth rates since the 1980s. By comparison, the dispersion of real growth across the US States fluctuated around an average of 2½ percentage points between 1990 and 2002, while the average dispersion of the real growth rates was around 1½ percentage points across the eight US statistical regions. … and may reflect welcome adjustment processes  In a monetary union, inflation and labour cost differentials across regions or countries are the natural means of adjusting relative prices in the face of asymmetric demand or supply developments.  The fact that the single monetary policy cannot address specific circumstances in individual countries implies that flexible wages and prices are needed in order to deal with regional shocks or disparities in relative demand across regions. For example, regions facing a shortfall in demand relative to potential supply or a loss in cost competitiveness need to exhibit lower prices and costs for domestically produced services and goods. If wages and prices are flexible and respond quickly, this will support BIS Review 49/2005 3 
employment and purchasing power and thus contribute to closing the demand shortfall. In addition, price and wage changes below the euro area average imply that the competitiveness of the country would increase vis-à-vis the other regions and, as a result, that external demand would also contribute to closing the gap between actual and potential output. If labour and product markets are rigid, however, the shortfall in demand will not lead to a swift and adequate decline in relative wages and prices, unemployment in the region will increase and the related regional disparities could persist for some time.  In this context, I should like to make three remarks concerning the euro area.  First, changes in relative prices within the single currency area have been larger and more frequent than anticipated. The idea that the euro area is an area in which the single currency prevents adjustment of relative prices has been clearly refuted. For instance, the capacity of the German economy to catch up rapidly with the average of the euro area in terms of cost competitiveness after the loss of competitiveness associated with German reunification has been very impressive. Strong increases in relative unit labour costs during the first half of the 1990s contributed, with some lag, to higher unemployment. For example, between 1992 and 1998, unemployment in Germany increased by almost 2½ percentage points. In recent years, however, increases in unit labour costs have been very moderate, so that the conditions for job creation have clearly improved. This development also shows that wages and prices are more flexible than sometimes thought. From that point of view, the euro area is more flexible and adaptable than was anticipated by a number of observers.  Second, the aforementioned process is symmetric. In some cases the existence of positive inflation differentials is the natural consequence for an economy that has been outperforming the average in terms of cost competitiveness and reached rather low levels of unemployment. For such economies inflation above the euro area average may be the natural way to adust towards a more normal price level in line with the average. This problem had been observed, for instance, in the case of the Netherlands and is possibly still relevant for Ireland.  Third, inflation differentials are not only the necessary means of achieving relative price adjustments within the euro area, as in the case of Germany, they are also a natural feature of some economies in the euro area in view of their gradual convergence and catching-up process with regard to the average European GDP per capita. Real growth differentials may be welcome if they reflect such a healthy catching-up process on the part of less advanced economies. Indeed, since the mid-1990s, most of the countries which previously had GDP per capita levels significantly below the euro area average have experienced above-average real GDP growth rates. This is particularly true for Ireland, Spain and Greece. A healthy catching-up process is not a zero sum game, it is a win-win situation, as those countries which are already more productive can benefit from increased trade and investment opportunities. Crucially, EMU increases the chances of achieving such a welcome outcome.  A credible monetary policy anchors inflation expectations and increases market transparency, thereby facilitating the necessary adjustment of relative prices across different countries or sectors in the presence of economic shocks. In addition to the positive effects of monetary stability, a single currency enhances the processes of financial and trade integration within the euro area. And we have also observed increased risk-sharing between euro area countries. Thus, the euro and the single monetary policy contribute not only to the competitiveness of the euro area and to job creation, but also to real convergence.  Cross-country differences may also signal the need for changes in national economic policies  I have just given three economic reasons why cross-country differentials in price and labour cost changes reflect welcome adjustments in relative prices within a single currency area. However, there is one case in which such differentials are not advisable in terms of national economic policies: this is when an economy with an already relatively low level of cost competitiveness and high unemployment faces further deterioration on account of higher price and cost inflation. In that case, additional attention must be given to increasing the flexibility and adaptability of the institutions and market structures in the national economy concerned in order to allow the appropriate adjustment mechanism to function, and to redress the relative deterioration of cost competitiveness.  There are cases where lasting real growth differentials do not reflect welcome catching-up processes, but rather structural deficiencies in some countries, leading to low trend output growth and persistently high unemployment rates. Such divergences between different countries are independent of whether or not these countries share the same currency, and in any case cannot be addressed by monetary 4 BIS Review 49/2005 
policy. Countries that show a relatively poor performance in terms of longer-term trends of real growth and job creation are often also those whose domestic economy has been less flexible. For these countries structural reforms are highly advisable. Measures aimed at strengthening product market competition, labour market flexibility and thus job creation would certainly be welcome. They would enhance the incentives for firms to both invest in real and human capital and offer new jobs. Close monitoring of unit labour cost and wage moderation are also, in such cases, essential to reduce excessively high unemployment.  The more successful the structural measures are, the more jobs will be created at current wage levels and the less wage moderation will thus be needed in the long run. However, for those sectors and areas of qualification in which unemployment is high and/or the competitiveness of domestic workers is threatened, wage moderation, will be important to support job creation, and thus consumption demand. Let me stress that both types of measure - reforms and wage moderation - support employment even in a rather closed economy. Of course, both measures would tend also to enhance external competitiveness, but their positive effects do not depend on this latter channel.  Sometimes a radically different equilibrating mechanism is suggested. It has been argued that a euro area country that experiences relatively weak aggregate demand should increase wages more strongly in order to ensure higher demand for domestic goods. This would, however, be counterproductive. Higher real wage and unit labour costs in areas where unemployment is too high would undermine job creation and thus reduce demand and supply even further. Of course, once full employment has been reached, real wages can and should grow in line with productivity increases.  All countries and economies benefit substantially from EMU As I am speaking here in Mannheim, let me emphasise that the economies that had a very credible currency before the euro such as Germany are benefiting substantially from their integration into the euro area. The euro is as credible and stable as the Deutsche Mark before it. The purchasing power of German workers and consumers has been enhanced by relatively cheap imports from countries within Europe and beyond. Employment has been supported by strong export growth, not least to euro area and EU trading partners. Market interest rates and thus financing costs have not only been maintained at the previous low levels but they are at historically very low levels. The fact that in some economies inflation has been somewhat lower than the euro area average for some time should not be seen as a disadvantage. It supports the purchasing power of consumers, and it is a reflection of the increasing cost competitiveness of the production of these economies. The success of German exports offers a good illustration of that phenomenon. Some observers have argued that traditionally low interest rate economies are suffering as a result of EMU, as their interest rate comparative advantage relative to other countries was removed with the convergence process and the introduction of the euro. However, the fact that all euro area countries now enjoy stable prices, low inflation expectations and thus low financing costs is also beneficial for economies such as Germany, not least by enhancing trade and financial integration. On top of that the elimination of any exchange risk within the euro area is also beneficial for all euro area countries including for the traditionally low interest rate economies which have in the past suffered a lot from the materialisation of such risks. Conclusion Let me conclude my presentation by coming back to the subject of this conference. I have explained today how EMU and a credible monetary policy benefit all euro area countries and create great opportunities for a dynamic economy and job creation. A good monetary policy is necessary and can achieve a lot - but cannot, alone, guarantee full success. Other conditions are also necessary. One cannot stress enough that a high degree of competition and a functioning market economy are crucial preconditions for job creation, high real wages and, more generally, high living standards.  Laws or institutions that hinder competition between existing firms and the entry of new competitors and thus the effective working of market mechanisms tend to support excess prices, incomes and profits in those sectors that are protected. Of course, the costs of such protection have to be borne by consumers in the form of overly high prices and by the unemployed in the form of fewer opportunities for new jobs. However, it is not only the competitiveness of firms that is of great importance in our economies. In addition, we need to enhance the functioning of labour markets and to provide incentives for investing in human capital in order to ensure the “competitiveness of labour”. BIS Review 49/2005 5 
A single currency and identical policy rates across the euro area in a certain sense also enhance the possibility to better compare economic performances between Member States and to draw lessons from national experiences in terms of economic structures and policies. A single monetary policy implies that lasting divergences in unemployment levels and real growth trends are caused predominantly by different economic structures and economic policies in individual countries. Moreover, income levels can more easily be compared across countries which use the same currency. Monetary Union thus makes it easier for citizens to identify best practices in other countries. This benchmarking benefits all the citizens of the euro area - in much the same way as consumers benefit from increased competition between firms in the form of higher quality and/or less expensive products. Good and promising practices or policies can be better identified and more widely implemented, while less successful or ill-designed economic policies are easier to recognise. I am fully aware that it is not easy to implement structural reforms and consolidate government budgets because of the fact that the public opinion is sometimes not fully convinced that everybody would benefit from these reforms. The ECB, for its part, is not lecturing anybody, but considers itself part of the necessary process of awareness raising, of tireless explanation. We all need to explain to the citizens of Europe that policies which enhance competition, competitiveness and flexibility contribute to higher employment and will ultimately improve prospects for real wage developments, growth and consolidation of government budgets.  6 BIS Review 49/2005 
Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Building financial bridges between Asia and the Middle East Luncheon address by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Minister for Education and Deputy Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Inaugural Asia-Middle East Dialogue, Singapore, 21 June 2005. *      *      * Your Excellencies Distinguished Guests Friends, it is a privilege to address you here today at this important gathering, as we discuss ways to strengthen ties between our two regions, Asia and the Middle East - two regions of the world that not only have immense potential in themselves but have the potential to shape each other’s futures for the better. Let me use this opportunity to talk about the bridges we can build in financial services, and how financial flows can help shape this inter-dependence between the Middle East and Asia. I will also touch on what we can do in education together, because it is in education that we build trust and lasting relationships between our peoples. Financial bridges between Asia and the Middle East - the economic underpinnings The economic underpinnings for financial flows between our two regions are in many ways obvious. Both the Asia and the Middle East regions are on an upward trajectory of economic growth. The economies of Asia and the Middle East are growing at a trend rate of 7.5% and 5% respectively. To put this in historical perspective - no region of the world saw sustained growth exceeding 5% for any period before the middle of the last century, except for Australia and New Zealand in the 19th century. No one expects growth to be linear or to continue unbroken, in either Asia or the Middle East. There will be bumps along the journey, sometimes flash floods, and sometimes a cave-in. But the basic trajectory is upward. The growth story that we are seeing is not an aberration, or a flash in the pan before growth in Asia or the Middle East recedes to the very modest norms that were seen for much of economic history before World War II. Growth is being propelled by fundamentals. First, both our regions have an abundance of natural resources, and are benefiting from the natural interplay between industrialization and demand for natural resources. Asia’s industrialization alone is driving an unprecedented global demand for raw materials, energy and other commodities. China and India alone have contributed over 35% of the increase in global oil demand over the last 15 years. Yes, there are huge inefficiencies in energy use, and concerns over the environment, that have to be addressed before long. But the basic interplay between industrialization and natural resources will continue for many years to come. Further, both our regions are not just opening up to global markets, but developing domestic demand in our own economies. They are diversifying, and growth is becoming more balanced. Asia is reducing its dependence on manufactured exports as the main driver of growth, and Middle East is seeking to reduce its dependence on energy exports. Both regions are strengthening their social, transport and economic infrastructures as they diversify their economies. The examples are all around us, like India and Indonesia’s major energy and transport infrastructure plans, Bahrain’s Financial Harbour project, and Qatar’s Education City. Finally, the appetite for prosperity is unshakeable among our younger generations. Young people all across our regions can see what economic growth brings, for their families and themselves, and for their communities. Whether their quest is for material or spiritual fulfilment, young people know instinctively that economic growth and better jobs will help them fulfil their needs. They want to move ahead, to educate themselves, and to give whole communities pride in what they can achieve - in science, in business and in culture. These aspirations of our young are probably the biggest positive for our regions. They will also bring us together over the long haul. BIS Review 47/2005 1 
High savings will be increasingly intermediated within Asia and the Middle East On the financial side of things, the fundamentals are also solid in both our regions. First, the supply of savings in Asia and the Middle East is higher than in any other region of the world. Savings rates in Asia are expected to remain in the region of 35-40% of GDP for some years to come. Likewise savings in the Middle East have been rising over the past decade and are expected to average about 32% of GDP in coming years. (In 2004, the current account surpluses as percentage of GDP for Asia and the Middle East were about 6% and 14% respectively.) With Asian official foreign currency reserves exceeding US$ 2 trillion, and Middle East oil revenues topping US$ 180 billion in 2004 alone, the management of surplus savings and reserves in both regions will offer large business opportunities. It will also offer scope for sharing of experience between government investment agencies and central banks in both regions. Besides official savings, there is also a growing number of wealthy individuals in the two regions. Asia alone now has an estimated 2.3 million high net worth individuals (HNWI; people with at least US$ 1 million in financial assets), not far behind the US with 2.7 million and Europe with 2.6 million. Asian HNWIs control an estimated US$ 7.2 trillion in financial assets. The size of this group in Asia is growing at 7% per year, second only to the Middle Eastern HNWI, now 300,000 which is growing at 9% per year. Traditionally, Asian and Middle Eastern investors have looked to the developed, Western markets to meet their investment needs. But increasingly, they are looking to diversifying their assets globally. It is a interesting new story, that is only beginning to unfold in Asian markets. This is not just a post-9/11 story. Increasingly, wealthy investors the world over are looking to spread the risks and enhance the overall returns on their investment portfolios. We are seeing this search for diversification and improved returns on investment amongst sophisticated investors from the Middle East and Asia. It provides an opportunity for markets in Asia and the Middle East which can offer wealthy investors with higher expected returns at acceptable risk. The demand side of the financial equation in our two regions is equally compelling. First, there are unprecedented demand for funds to finance infrastructure projects, across the region. In Southeast Asia alone, about US$ 461 billion is expected to be spent over the next 15 years to upgrade infrastructure. This is not even looking at China and India. Likewise in the Middle East - the reconstruction of Iraq and Qatar’s infrastructural plans are each expected to cost US$ 100 billion. Second, besides infrastructure finance, we are seeing huge growth potential in the consumer finance sector in our two regions. It is driven by a rapidly expanding middle-class, who want better housing, cars and other big-ticket items like middle classes anywhere else in the world. For instance, India’s “consuming class” will rise from the current 30% of households to 40% by 2010. Similarly in China, the “middle class” is set to double over the next 5 years. Facilitating greater financial flows between Asia and Middle East Financial services are therefore growing rapidly in Asia and the Middle East. And there is scope for greater deployment of our savings within our two regions, as investors in both regions look for improved returns. We are seeing the beginnings of a fruitful and meaningful relationship in financial sector cooperation. There is much scope for regional financial centres like Singapore and Kuala Lumpur to provide a gateway for fund flows between the Middle East and Asia. Singapore can by no means be a complete financial centre for the Middle East. That role will be played by financial centres in the Middle East. But we can and will complement and work in partnership with financial centres in the Middle East, and other Asian centres like KL. We can provide a gateway to take Middle Eastern investors into Southeast Asia and China, and to take investors from the region into the Middle East. What can we do to facilitate and spur on these financial ties and build sturdy bridges? Allow me to make three observations. First, the wealth management industry can play a pro-active role in helping investors to diversify their portfolios by introducing them to opportunities in Asia and the Middle East. In so doing, we will also help Asian and Middle Eastern capital markets grow and become deeper and more liquid. We are already seeing asset managers based in Singapore receiving investment mandates from investment agencies in the Middle East. And Singapore’s CapitaLand and the Middle Eastern-owned Arcapital Bank have recently set up a property fund aimed at investing in Japanese real estate, with a target asset size of US$ 300 million. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
Second, similarly for the banking sector. I expect to see more Middle East banks and financial institutions set up in Singapore and Asia going forward, and a counter-flow into the Middle East over time. Some Middle East banks are already planning to scale up their presence in Singapore to service Middle Eastern entities interested to operate in Asia, as well as to help Asian corporates to operate in the Middle East. There are similar plans by Singapore-based financial institutions to step up their profile in the Middle East as they seek to tap into Middle Eastern financial flows. Such plans may give added impetus as Singapore concludes FTAs with more Middle Eastern countries, including those which are currently ongoing with Qatar and Kuwait. Third, Islamic finance is an area that shows considerable promise globally. We know the size of the market - around US$ 200 to US$ 300 billion globally, and growing at about 15% per annum. Efforts are being made in Asian markets, to grow Islamic financial services. For example, Malaysia has been awarding Islamic banking licences to foreign players and encouraging the subsidiarisation of Islamic banking windows. It aims to have 20% of total banking assets to be Islamic by 2010. Singapore, as an international financial centre, is also keen to offer Islamic financial services. We must, as part of the comprehensive suite of financial services that we offer to global investors and borrowers. Shariah-compliant financial instruments allow issuers to tap a new source of funds and liquidity. But the development of an Islamic financial services market does not just serve indigenous Muslim populations. Malaysia, for instance, has successfully launched global sukuk, or Islamic bonds, to tap liquidity from investors in both Asia and the Middle East. Other issuers of global sukuks have also stopped by Singapore on their road shows to tap Singapore’s investor pool. It may not be too long before we have a Singapore corporate issuing a sukuk to raise funds from global investors. We are also seeing already private fund managers in Asia and the Middle East working together. Recently, for instance, ARA Asset Management based in Singapore had worked in partnership with Dubai Islamic Bank to launch a US$ 450 million Islamic Far Eastern Real Estate Fund with underlying assets located in Asia. Fourth and finally, we can do more to foster people-to-people interaction in the financial sector. For instance, Asian central banks including the Monetary Authority of Singapore have participated actively in Middle East finance and central banking seminars to share our perspectives on issues of mutual interest. Tomorrow there will be a seminar organised jointly by the Islamic Financial Services Board and Islamic Development Bank tomorrow in Kuala Lumpur on developing a 10-year master plan for the Islamic financial services industry globally. In Singapore, the MAS conducts courses in banking supervision and capital markets which we have extended invitations to both our Asian and Middle Eastern counterparts to participate in. We must think of many other platforms and vehicles which could facilitate people-to-people interactions, including those involving think-tanks, universities, training institutes, and private sector financial bodies like the Association of Banks for example. There is also a financial stability dimension to these networks. As cross-border financial transactions increase, effective supervision will require countries to foster greater cooperation with their regulatory counterparts. The Monetary Authority of Singapore, for example, is in discussions to conclude MOUs with the UAE’s Emirates Securities and Commodities Authority and Qatar’s Financial Centre Regulatory Authority to provide for training and supervisory cooperation. I have highlighted earlier that investment agencies in our two regions are now managing sizeable foreign reserves. There is much scope for our investment agencies to touch base with each other, exchange knowledge of global markets, share the latest in reserve management techniques, and help each other navigate in one another’s regional hinterlands where appropriate. We could even co-invest in specific investment opportunities when they arise. Building educational bridges Finally, a few remarks on education, and how we can bring our young people together. We all know how much education matters, for all our societies. It is the bedrock for human development, and the means for whole societies to realise their potential. But there is further significance in education as we address the issue of strengthening ties between Asia and the Middle East. Our long historical ties, going back to the 2nd century B.C., are an asset. Singapore’s Arab lineages run through our veins. But to build bridges between our peoples in the 21st century, we have to not only look back to our historical ties and roots, or rekindle and reinvigorate our ties in trade. We have to work with our young. Our young today grow up knowing very little of each BIS Review 47/2005 3 
other. We have to give them opportunities to meet, to find resonance in each other, and to strike up friendships. If we do this when our people are young, we build up trust for the future. And trust is what makes economic and business relationships last. Singapore, Kuala Lumpur and other Asian cities can play a growing role in this regard. For some years now, we have been creating what we call a “global schoolhouse” here in Singapore. Today, Singapore has some 66,000 international students pursuing different levels of education. At the university level, we have today some 16 of the best global institutions providing programmes in diverse areas. Top business schools such as INSEAD and University of Chicago have established their own campuses in Singapore. At our Singapore universities, there is already a small Middle Eastern presence, with 10 undergraduate and 16 postgraduate students from Middle Eastern countries (including Turkey, Jordan and the UAE). For the coming academic year, 31 Iranian graduate students have been offered A*STAR International Graduate Scholarships, to pursue Master’s degree studies at NUS and NTU in the areas of Biomedical Sciences, Physical Sciences and Engineering. (The scholars were selected from top Iranian Universities, including Sharif University of Technology, University of Tehran, Shiraz University and Isfahan University of Technology.) Recently, Al-Azhar University, the Harvard equivalent of Islamic education, announced that it will be helping Singapore develop a centre of Islamic learning. Established in 988 AD, Al-Azhar is the oldest operating university in the world. It is collaborating with the Islamic Religious Council of Singapore (MUIS) to run programmes that are likely to range from introductory to post-graduate courses in Islamic studies. We can bring students together not just for formal degree courses, but for summer schools. Middle Eastern families can come to Singapore for holidays and health services, while the young go to school. Middle Eastern youth will find Singapore a friendly, multicultural and multi-religious city. They will find an English language environment and educational programmes that combine the best of East and West. They will find friends from Singapore, Southeast Asia, China and India. A further area of potential collaboration is in teacher training and education research. For example, the National Institute of Education has been appointed by the Abu Dhabi Educational Zone in the UAE to advise on the setting up of a teacher training institute. We will be able to exchange training materials and officials, as well as collaborate on innovative projects in education. Each of these initiatives may be small. But they all add to the soft infrastructure and networks that we have to create between Asia and the Middle East, to build enduring economic and business ties. Conclusion To conclude, let me just say that the financial centres of both our regions can play an important role in catalysing cross-regional flows of savings, and creating a multiplier effect on Asia and Middle East growth and investment. We must also establish and strengthen people-to-people links, and contribute to each others’ efforts to develop financial sector skills and build management capacity. And we must start with our young, bring them together, and help them dispel stereotypes of each other, not just by understanding their differences but finding what they share in common. I suspect they share far more in common than the generations before them. AMED provides a vehicle to jumpstart this process. I hope that the potential areas of cooperation that I have highlighted will throw up more ideas, for the financial sector panel session later today as well as in the field of education. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 47/2005 
Mark W Olson: Revisiting traditional paths to ownership Remarks by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Community Development Policy Summit: Exploring the Benefits and Challenges of an Ownership Society, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio, 23 June 2005. *      *      * I’m pleased to be here today to discuss the benefits and challenges of the ownership society. Meetings such as this policy summit are extremely useful forums for exchanging ideas and working toward common goals. And, the goals of those of us involved in community development have not changed over the years. We all want to create healthy, sustainable local economies that provide good jobs, decent housing, and educational opportunities for everyone. At the core of all community development activity is the understanding that individual ownership is one of the most important components of economic and social success, whether in the form of the purchase of a home or an investment in education or a small business. Immigrants instinctively understand that America is an ownership society and, in fact, come here in search of the ownership opportunities that increase the well-being of family members both here and at home. Immigrant communities often create their own economies, establishing the relationships necessary to support one another in finding work, starting small businesses, pursuing education, and purchasing homes. This model has worked for generations of newcomers to the United States. It exemplifies how each group finds its own formula for success based on its skills, culture, and community norms. For many years, community development efforts were stymied by federal policies that provided one-size-fits-all programs - most of which focused on housing - to communities with very different needs. Over the last thirty years we have learned from our missteps. We now understand that effective community development involves a comprehensive approach focused not only on providing housing, but also on creating programs that increase residents’ capacities to make economic contributions to the community. Such programs would support entrepreneurs, provide job training, and facilitate services such as transportation and child care. Federal policies are now designed to recognize the importance of local participation in formulating neighborhood development strategies. Successful strategies take into account the unique attributes of each neighborhood, including the skills of its labor force, existing businesses, economic synergies, and the culture and norms of the community. As federal policy has evolved, its role has shifted from being the sole source of funding through direct appropriation to providing tax incentives and credit enhancements that encourage private investment by offsetting risk. The federal government also plays an important role in creating incentives for private investment, encouraging innovation, and protecting consumers. Federal policy, when properly implemented, can smooth the path to ownership by ensuring that markets operate efficiently. In my remarks, I will discuss two of the most traditional and reliable paths to ownership in our society: homeownership and entrepreneurial pursuits. I will offer my views on why each is critical to the establishment of an ownership society and how changes in federal regulation and policy over time have kept these paths to ownership open to minorities and lower-income individuals. Homeownership Owning a home is one of the most tried-and-true paths to wealth accumulation in our economy. The purchase of a home can be a transforming experience for individuals and families. However, it takes more than a down payment to put people on the path that leads to ownership. Borrowers must be able to sustain their loans over the long term. Part of sustaining a loan is picking the right loan. Over the past several years, there has been an explosion of new and novel mortgage products, including mortgages that allow homeowners to skip mortgage payments (which results in increasing the size of their mortgage balance) and mortgages that allow homeowners to pay only the interest on a loan, and not the principal, for a preset period at the beginning of the life of their mortgage loan. Many of these products can be useful financial tools for homebuyers and, indeed, may have helped make homeownership more accessible for some households. But to the extent that these new mortgage products promote homebuying decisions that BIS Review 47/2005 1 
are premised on unrealistic rates of home appreciation, they raise concerns. Some borrowers may not be able to sustain such a loan over a long time horizon if the pace of home price growth moderates. In particular, when the payments on these novel mortgages adjust upward, the homebuyer may not be able to refinance such mortgages unless the home has increased in value. Homebuyers need to understand these risks and thus financial education, as well as a down payment, is a key ingredient for creating solid footing on the path to homeownership. Federal tax policy has long promoted homeownership by offering homeowners the mortgage interest deduction. Studies have shown that the benefits of homeownership are worth the investment. Homeowners are stakeholders in their communities. They become involved citizens and create the quality of life and character that define a neighborhood.1 Because of these benefits, federal policy in recent years has focused on increasing the homeownership rate among segments of society, such as minorities and low-income individuals, where homeownership had previously been low. In the late 1970s, Congress passed two laws that, together, changed market dynamics for home mortgage lenders and expanded access to home loans for minorities and lower-income individuals. These laws, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) have increased access to homeownership by making the mortgage market more transparent. Congress enacted HMDA under two assumptions. One was that the mortgage market works more efficiently when more information about it is publicly available. Indeed, the data have been used to identify credit demand in underserved areas with unmet credit needs that might otherwise have been overlooked. The analysis and conclusions drawn from the data have also encouraged the establishment of partnerships between lenders and community organizations to meet credit needs. The second, perhaps more familiar assumption upon which HMDA is based is that regulators need data in order to improve compliance and enforcement of fair lending and consumer protection laws. Accordingly, HMDA data are the first reference points for fair lending examinations conducted by the Federal Reserve and other banking regulators. The data help identify potential fair lending issues in the institutions regulated by the Federal Reserve and other supervisory agencies. The recent amendments of Regulation C, HMDA’s implementing regulation, build on the theme that transparency breeds efficiency in markets. The amendments require public disclosure of price information in the form of spreads between the annual percentage rate on a loan and the rate on Treasury securities of comparable maturity. This rule is designed to ensure that the data continues to provide a means for improving market efficiency, as well as for monitoring legal compliance with fair lending laws. The new data offer the public and the supervisory agencies charged with enforcing the fair lending laws a better screening tool than what was previously available. Thus, examination resources can be deployed more strategically because the data will allow the agencies to determine, in advance, which lenders and loan products may require more scrutiny. But, more important, the new data will ensure that as the marketplace develops and changes, interested parties will have the information needed to ensure comprehensive fair lending reviews. In addition to statutes that require the collection of public data on mortgage lending, Congress has seen fit to promote market efficiency by enacting a statute, the CRA, that requires federal regulators to evaluate how depository institutions help meet the credit needs of their communities. The statute was amended in 1989 to require that those evaluations be made public. The public evaluations of CRA performance, together with the fact that the performance evaluations are considered by regulators in connection with a bank or thrift’s application to merge or acquire another institution, have provided incentives for depository institutions to lend in all parts of the neighborhoods they serve, including low- and moderate-income areas. The CRA regulations were amended in 1995 to make the evaluation standards more performance-oriented while still taking into account the diversity of business strategies among depository institutions and the variety of economic and demographic characteristics of neighborhoods. As a result, four different evaluation methods were established, and each method considers the context in which the institution operates. In other words, no matter what type of evaluation an institution receives - a streamlined examination for small institutions; a lending, investment, and service test for large institutions; a community development test for wholesale or limited-purpose institutions; or a strategic                                                       1 See William M. Rohe, Shannon Van Zandt, and George McCarthy (2001), The Social Benefits and Costs of Homeownership: A Critical Assessment of the Research,(170 KB PDF) (Cambridge: Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University). 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
plan - the characteristics of the institution and the neighborhoods it serves are considered in assigning a performance rating. When CRA rules were revised in 1995, the agencies committed to reviewing them again in 2002 to ensure their continued effectiveness. The review process has taken much longer than anticipated, but some progress has been made. The Federal Reserve, together with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, is currently reviewing comments on our joint proposal to amend the CRA regulations. These amendments would eliminate data-reporting burdens for institutions under $1 billion in assets, provide for a new evaluation method for institutions between $250 million and $1 billion in assets, and more effectively define community development in rural areas. In proposing these changes to the CRA, the agencies were attempting to balance the compliance burdens being placed on small community banks against community development needs in the geographic areas they serve. The proposal was designed to relieve data-collection burdens on the smaller, large banks while retaining incentives for these institutions to participate in community development activities. The proposed community development test was intended to promote substance over form and give smaller institutions recognition for activities that meet community development needs without dictating whether the activity should be in the form of a loan, an investment, or a service. This flexibility was intended to help institutions in this size category that do not have the resources to engage in a wide range of investment activities, compete more fairly with larger financial institutions. The proposal also attempts to resolve a persistent problem for banks that operate in rural areas where census tracts tend to be middle-income but may contain distinct pockets of lower-income individuals. Although financial institutions receive credit under the CRA for activities that primarily serve low- and moderate-income individuals or geographies, the homogeneous nature of rural census tracts makes crediting such activities difficult. In fact, only 15 percent of rural census tracts are classified as low- or moderate-income tracts, and almost 60 percent of rural counties do not have a single low- or moderate-income tract. The proposal suggested several alternatives for defining what constitutes an underserved rural area and the agencies are still reviewing comments and working to determine which of these alternatives would best define the types of community development activity that should earn CRA credit. Anyone who has been involved in community development recognizes the importance of both HMDA and the CRA. These laws were designed to make the mortgage market more transparent, and they have largely succeeded. Since their enactment, lenders have found lines of business that had not been previously tapped. New partnerships have been established between lenders and community organizations to meet the credit needs that have been identified through the use of HMDA data. In general, the story has been positive for communities and lenders alike. Still, challenges remain. At the same time that regulatory policy encouraged lenders to serve previously underserved individuals, technological advances in the loan-underwriting process allowed lenders to price for risk more efficiently, expanding access to mortgage credit. This expansion has occurred largely in the subprime market and has had both positive and negative effects. Today, data show record high homeownership rates among low-income and minority borrowers, yet the reports of lending abuses and increased foreclosure rates loom as dark clouds on an otherwise bright horizon. Even though subprime mortgage delinquencies generally are falling, default and foreclosures associated with such mortgages may have adversely affected some neighborhoods. Thus, while it is encouraging that technology has increased the efficiency of the mortgage market, the small yet significant segment of the market in which problems persist cannot be ignored. Foreclosure rates in some areas have increased dramatically since the early 1990s - the same time frame in which the subprime market experienced its most rapid growth. As we all know, foreclosures do not affect just the borrower who loses his home; they affect the entire community. Multiple foreclosures in one neighborhood will bring down the property value for all homeowners in the neighborhood. In addition, foreclosures cause other negative consequences that will eventually affect even qualified borrowers approved for good loans from responsible lenders. This phenomenon threatens the continued viability of homeownership as a path to the ownership society we seek to establish for lower-income individuals. As a regulator, I believe it is important that we tread lightly in response to market inefficiencies. Predatory lending is a serious problem that needs to be addressed in a way that preserves incentives for responsible subprime lenders so that worthy borrowers with imperfect credit can become BIS Review 47/2005 3 
homeowners. Constricting the market by pinpointing what might be considered predatory lending and returning to a situation where some borrowers have very limited access to credit is not an ideal solution. We want to encourage, not limit, mortgage lending by responsible lenders in low- and moderate-income markets. In an effort to provide the proper incentives while still protecting consumers in the high-cost mortgage market, in 1994 Congress enacted the Home Owners Equity Protection Act (HOEPA). HOEPA helps curb predatory lending by requiring disclosures and limitations on loan terms for home mortgage loans with rates or fees above a certain percentage or amount. After a series of hearings, the Board in 2002 extended the scope of the HOEPA regulations. By not making high-cost loans illegal, but rather mandating special consumer protections for such loans, the market can continue to meet the credit needs of higher-risk borrowers. Periodic reviews of regulations such as HOEPA, HMDA, and the CRA are essential to maintain a regulatory framework that is relevant to a dynamic marketplace. I believe that the changes to the HOEPA thresholds, together with the new HMDA pricing data and CRA adjustments - whatever their final form - will continue to provide depository institutions with the incentive to serve their markets as fully as possible and build opportunities for homeownership. Entrepreneurship Federal policy has evolved not only in the area of housing, but also in the area of economic development. I was struck by the remarks of Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs-Jones at the Small Business Development Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in May 2002. She described her mission in Congress as creating jobs. Having worked on Capital Hill for many years, I can tell you that this outlook was not common among elected officials thirty years ago. The understanding that sustainable communities are as dependent on the creation of good jobs as they are on the availability of decent, affordable housing is, I believe, a relatively new construct in our political discourse. Economic development is now commonly understood to be an essential component of successful community development strategies. As the role of large industrial and manufacturing firms in the overall economy declines, small businesses have become critical to creating jobs and economic growth. In fact, the Small Business Administration reports that small businesses employ half of all private-sector employees and, more importantly, have generated 60 to 80 percent of new jobs annually over the last decade. In Ohio, small business proprietors’ income in 2003 increased by just over 10 percent, from $22.3 billion in 2002 to $24.5 billion in 2003. With numbers like these, it is easy to understand how economic development and small business growth also open the doors to the ownership society. Good jobs with decent wages and benefits provide the basis upon which individuals can begin to save and invest. An essential building block of all economic development is investment, and when private investment does not provide enough capital to stimulate economic growth in a community, public/private partnerships become necessary. Federal policies also help set the stage for lasting economic development by establishing a fair and transparent regulatory system. Federal, state, and local governments promote economic development by providing access to capital and offering various financing options for new and emerging businesses. In addition, financial institutions and community-based organizations provide capital to firms that qualify for their programs. Federal, state, and local governments also provide valuable technical assistance to small businesses. Providers of advisory services offer business owners a wide array of programs, including business plan development, market strategy design, and management strategies for growth. At the federal level, the SBA cosponsors Small Business Development Centers and offers several other programs that provide valuable resources for small businesses as they develop and grow. The SBA reports that last year 2.44 million entrepreneurs received business counseling and technical assistance through one or more of the agency’s advisory training programs. The Department of Commerce’s Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) is another example of a federal initiative supporting economic development. It was created specifically to foster the establishment and growth of minority businesses by providing funding for a network of business development and resource centers throughout the country that provide minority entrepreneurs with one-on-one assistance. MBDA recognizes that the minority-owned business sector presents a huge growth opportunity, as the minority population is expected to grow from 30 percent of the current 4 BIS Review 47/2005 
population to more than 50 percent by the year 2050. Nonetheless, MBDA recognizes that while minorities account for 30 percent of the population, minority firms constitute only 15 percent of all businesses and employ only 4 percent of the nation’s employees, generating 3 percent of U.S. business revenues. These numbers reflect the fact that minority-owned businesses tend to be in non-asset-based industries, such as service, construction, finance, real estate, and insurance. MBDA believes that minorities continue to face systemic barriers to accessing the capital markets, and the agency is dedicated to removing these impediments. The Federal Reserve also recognizes the importance of information sharing and creating infrastructures that support information flow. Consistent with its mission of promoting economic growth, the Federal Reserve promotes small-business development, particularly in underserved markets, through its Community Affairs Offices. These offices, located in Federal Reserve Districts around the country, provide technical assistance, host workshops and conferences, publish newsletters and reports, and sponsor research to help educate market participants. For example, last fall the Community Affairs Office here at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland partnered with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, state and local government, and financial institutions to convene a conference titled “Big Ideas for Small Businesses.” Conferences in Ohio and Pennsylvania provided important information on establishing and developing businesses as well as demystifying the lending experience for entrepreneurs. All of these efforts on the part of government agencies - whether federal, state, or local - have the goal of stimulating a self-sustaining process of economic development that will create good jobs and lead to upward mobility. Most successful entrepreneurs see opportunity in the context of their own skills and a particular need in their community or market with which they identify. The exact recipe for success in any one place will not be determined by a government agency, but by the community itself, with the government acting as a supportive partner. Conclusion In closing, I believe the progress that has been made by policymakers in the field of community development over the last thirty years has been remarkable. Community development practitioners have always understood the value of ownership in building sustainable communities; however, public policy designed with flexibility and nuance better achieves the goals of homeownership and small-business ownership. Community development strategies that plant a seed from the community and grow with the help of government and private-sector providers of capital promise to be even more successful over the long term. I look forward to hearing the ideas and suggestions that come out of this conference as we continue to refine policies to meet the challenges ahead. BIS Review 47/2005 5 
T T Mboweni: South Africa - a land of hope and opportunity Remarks by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at an ANC breakfast meeting, Johannesburg, 22 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen Distinguished guests Thank you for inviting me here this morning to say a word or two about the South African economy. When I received this invitation to be here this morning, a number of questions arose in my mind. The primary one being whether a governor of a central bank should speak at occasions such as this which are organised by political organisations. It was a vexing question which required of me a serious answer. Central bank governors have to demonstrate at all times their commitment to the independence of central banks from political influence. In fact central bank independence also means rebutting any attempt by anyone including market participants to influence their decisions or interfere in their operational work. At the same time, central bank governors have to engage in extensive communications with the markets, the general population, governments and parliaments. So any opportunity to communicate should be seriously considered and if time permits, should be entertained whether from a political party, market participants or any other organisation which is reputable. So any political organisations wishing to invite me to their functions are welcome to do so. We just have to negotiate time. It is against this background that I accepted your invitation to be here this morning. South Africa is still very much a country in transition. It is a country of many hopes and opportunities. Firstly, the political system is maturing. Most certainly, the political system is entrenching democratic values and systems. People stand for elections within their parties - sometimes squabbling very badly privately and in the media in their endeavours to be elected, they avail themselves as candidates for local council chambers, provincial legislatures and the national parliament. Debate is generally developing in its robustness. More often than not acrimoniously so. Not a place for the weak! Secondly the media - the fourth estate - is lively and maturing too. Public officials and private executives are closely scrutinised to check on their performances and good corporate governance standing in order to move the country forward. The media questions and exposes. Sometimes their approach is certainly questionable but on the whole they are making a good contribution to our society. There is room for improvement particularly in financial journalism - a matter being attended to by some journalism schools. But an open and democratic society by definition requires a vigorous, investigative and independent media. Thirdly, the judiciary, despite its many weaknesses given where we come from, is independent and is making its contribution towards the respect for the law by all of us. Issues are being attended to as far as the transformation of the judiciary both in terms of form and content is concerned. Progress in this regard is promising as the government and the judiciary are hard at work to achieve this historically fundamental objective. The respect for the judiciary really demands that the authorities must not keep their eyes off the transformation ball. But whatever the outcomes of this process, the end result must be to protect and enhance the independence and respect for the judiciary. Fourthly, we have in South Africa policies and laws that respect, protect and understand the fundamental role of private property rights in the economic development of our society. Those who a couple of years ago doubted the positive role of private property in society and its role in the economy are slowly coming to the conclusion that people’s rights in private property are prerequisites for promoting investment and certainty that one’s investment today can be protected by law, with the courts available to enforce it and thus confident to grow businesses whether industrial or agricultural. There are still many countries on our continent which should still need to improve private property rights in order to give surety and confidence to investors. Fifthly, there is in this land of hope and opportunity a vibrant culture and entertainment industry which is vital in any society. Music, dance, theatre, museums and other places to visit and enjoy. We are even beginning to see the entry by black dancers into the ballet schools and companies. Even I, BIS Review 47/2005 1 
coming all the way from rural Limpopo, now appreciate La Traviata! So it is not just about soccer and rugby. Sixthly, this is a normalising society where challenging issues are looked straight in the eye, in particular race, gender and the development of a black business class. Finally, the population expects and demands to be heard at every turn. Expectations are justifiably high for housing, clean water, good public schools, good health services, good roads and streets, including traffic lights that work, safety and security, employment opportunities, the fairness of the justice system and the rest. There is demand for delivery everywhere. The public authorities and private companies are kept in check all the time. Our society is moving ahead indeed. Of course with demands for socio-economic needs also come responsibility to care and look after that which has been “delivered”. How are we doing then as far as the economy is concerned? How has globalisation affected the South African economy and society? As we know, the South African economy was primarily dependent on gold and diamond mining together with agriculture for many years. Many African people were driven from the land where they lived as peasants and pastoralists to the mines, emerging factories, agriculture and domestic service through the combination of political repression, land dispossession and yes, taxation. In the 1960s, the South African economy increasingly became industrialised and services oriented. Of course the scourge of the colour bar in our society and the workplace was used as a major instrument to racialise everything. Agriculture and mining together contributed about 20.4% to Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In the 1990s this declined to 11.3%. Today mining contributes about 7.8% and agriculture 3.6%. This is a major change in the structural make up of the economy. The secondary sector contributed about 27.8% to GDP in the 1960s. Although this has declined somewhat to 24% currently, this is nevertheless testimony that our economy remains highly industrialised. Another major change in our economy occurred in the services sector. In the 1960s, this sector contributed about 51.8% to GDP and today it accounts for 64%. Again this is a major structural change in our economy. Clearly, mining and agriculture have been the major “losers” in these developments. But let us not make the mistake of abandoning these sectors for we still have two-thirds of our gold in the ground and there are still many viable mineral deposits in this country and we still have to feed ourselves from agricultural activities. Oh by the way: food does not come from Pick ‘n Pay but from agriculture! Sometimes people forget this. The structural change from mining, agriculture and some extent manufacturing to an economy heavily dominated by the services sector has major implications for the jobs market. It means that the skills required for the services sector are much higher than was the case previously. Many people have made the observation that the consequences of the Bantu education system are being more severely felt now than at any time in the past. There is no doubt that one of the most critical areas of focus in South Africa at the moment and for the foreseeable future is education and broadly human resources development. This has to be strategic in nature. We have to focus and provide resources for training people in those areas of extreme need side by side with general education. We need engineers, accountants, pilots, of course lawyers, actuaries, doctors, nurses, scientists and other specialised technical skills for a an increasingly services sector driven economy. And how can I forget economists! Mathematics education is fundamental to this. Alongside these structural changes in our economy has been the process of global integration of the South African economy. Whilst in the 1960s we were mainly an extractive economy, by the 1990s the South African economy was fairly integrating broadly into the world economy. With sanctions out of the way, imports and exports of goods and services amounted to about 44% of the economy. Currently this has increased to 55.6%. The manufacturing sector, despite its challenges from time to time saw its exports rise to 29.6% in the 1990s to about 37.9% in the period 2000-2004. One of the most notable features about the globalisation of the South African economy is to be found in the banking sector. South African banks as a percentage of GDP averaged 77% during the period 1965-1994. In 2004, this share of GDP by South African banks was 109%. The equity market averaged R2 billion in the period 1970 to 1985., R21 billion per year for the period 1986-1993, the annual turnover in the equity market was R62 billion in 1994 and in 2004, the annual turnover was about a R1 trillion. Market capitalisation on the JSE increased from an annual average of R40 billion for the period 1970-1980 to R2 trillion in 2004. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
Further more compelling evidence of globalisation is to be found in the performance of the bond market. Between 1970 and 1985, turnover in this market was about R8 billion, in 1995 this had increased to R2.3 trillion and in the year 2004 turnover was R8.4 trillion. Finally the foreign exchange market which interests so many people has also seen some remarkable evidence of globalisation. To cut a long story short, in 1987 the average daily turnover in this market was 1.1 billion US dollars and during the course of 2005 the average daily turnover in this market in some 12 billion US dollars. So there is a lot of activity going on there. The only conclusion I can come to is that we are coping well with globalisation. We have seen some benefits but yes there has also been some costs such as the impact of globalisation on the gold mining sector. Let me conclude by saying that there has been a remarkable achievement in the two areas that I closely focus on as part of my job. This is inflation and budget management in South Africa. Inflation has so far been contained within the inflation target. The government’s budget management is an example to many countries throughout the world recording budget deficits before borrowing of less than three percent of GDP consistently. Progress has indeed been made. The hope and opportunities that characterise South Africa make me happy to be a South African at this historic juncture in the development of humankind. President Mandela remarked somewhere that ‘the sun will never set on such a glorious human achievement’ I agree with that. I thank you. BIS Review 47/2005 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on the international financial system Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, 21 June 2005. *      *      * It is an honour for me to be invited to give this year’s Bundesbank lecture and address such a distinguished audience. It is a particular pleasure for me to speak in Berlin, which symbolises more than any other city the historic peaceful re-integration of Europe. I would therefore like to extend my warm gratitude to President Axel Weber and the Board of the Bundesbank for the invitation to Berlin this evening. In my lecture, I will try to take stock and look ahead at the challenges our economy is facing today, focusing on the challenges from global financial integration for the international financial system, its architecture and its functioning. In my view, international financial integration and the state of the international financial system are far less abstract topics than one might think at first glance. They reflect one of the most complex, intriguing and powerful aspects of the phenomenon that is generally referred to as globalisation. This phenomenon represents a key issue that policy-makers in Europe and beyond have to deal with. It is therefore of utmost importance that we understand the significance of this issue for our role as economic policy-makers, and it is against this background that I would like to reflect on international financial integration and the international financial system today. Policy-makers often face very specific concerns about economic uncertainty and the risk of instability, and we need to address these concerns. Monetary policy also has to play its part. We have created a stable currency for 307 million people. We have created confidence in this currency. We have anchored inflation expectations below, but close to, 2%. We have ensured monetary stability on our continent. In the same way, other policies have to contribute to addressing the challenges of the future. They have to boost confidence and ensure that the opening-up of borders turns into something that is ultimately worthwhile in terms of economic development and institutional cooperation. In my reflections today I will describe the recent developments in the international financial system and how they have shaped the institutional setup of this system in recent years. I will then turn to the current challenges facing both the international community and Europe, and the implications of those challenges. International financial integration The clearest example of global economic integration is trade, and this is certainly true for this country. The label “Made in Germany” is recognised the world over as standing for high quality. But international trade is not a process in which only one party gains. Each export corresponds to an import, and economies benefit mutually from each other. Many goods that are bought in the euro area are made in other countries, far away from their consumers. Transport costs have decreased, technology has become universal, information is readily available at low cost, and tastes have been converging. During the last three decades tariffs have halved and over 230 trade agreements between various countries have entered into force. All these developments have resulted in a steady opening of markets in Europe and worldwide. In the early 1970s global exports accounted for only one tenth of world GDP, but they have increased to one quarter of world GDP today. This is a reflection of the dramatic deepening of global economic interlinkages in recent years. In my view, it is important to bear in mind that regional trade integration does not hinder global integration, but is in fact one efficient way of fostering it. There is also a more recent phenomenon that is less visible, but even more dynamic, namely global financial integration. By this I mean the integration of local and national financial markets into a more unified international financial market. Only a few decades ago, the realisation of an investment project was largely contingent on the availability of capital in the local economy. Today the opportunities to raise finance as well as to invest capital are truly global. The substantial number of bilateral investment BIS Review 47/2005 1 
treaties and the liberalisation of capital accounts have further encouraged cross-border investment.1 While in the 1970s over 80% of all countries restricted access to foreign capital, today only 60% of developing countries and no industrialised countries have capital accounts which are still more or less closed.2 In the 1970s, worldwide cross-border holdings of assets amounted to only one tenth of world GDP. Since then, cross-border capital flows have steadily increased, and countries have now accumulated foreign assets in an amount equivalent to the annual GDP of the entire world. In 2003, euro area residents held foreign capital with a total value of 7.6 trillion euro, a figure that is somewhat higher than the euro area’s annual GDP. But financial integration is also intrinsically linked to the real economy. Over the past 30 years, annual foreign direct investment (or FDI) worldwide grew from around 8.5 billion euro (10 billion US dollars) to almost one thousand billion euro (about 1200 billion US dollars). The value of foreign-owned companies around the world - the stock of FDI - is equal to the annual GDP of the euro area. Taken together, these companies would make up an economy approximately one third of the size of the euro area. Each year they produce goods and services of a value equivalent to German GDP and employ one and a half times the German workforce. For Europe, these international linkages are of particular importance. European corporate businesses are among the most dynamic in the world, as they provide half of world FDI. At the same time, half of world FDI is invested in Europe.3 Foreign-owned companies contribute between 10% and 20% of euro area GDP.4 As a consequence, the relationship between the euro area and the global economy is today characterised more by financial linkages than by trade. We as policy-makers have to be aware of these linkages because they can be a very powerful and fast transmission mechanism for shocks. The benefits of this integration are obvious - a greater variety of goods and downward pressure on prices benefiting consumers and households. But the benefits are even more substantial, as production requires both human and financial capital. A skilled workforce cannot unleash its full potential without financial capital. Europe’s impressive economic recovery after World War II would have been inconceivable without its integration into the global economy and its concentration on high-quality exports. Today, many Asian economies are benefiting from global economic integration. Investment in the appropriate technologies enables these countries to compete on the world market and increase welfare substantially. This is by no means a phenomenon which only appears in national accounts. Income disparities across the world have declined significantly.5 Not surprisingly, the benefits of this financial integration are particularly clear for open economies, which have recorded higher average growth rates in recent years.6 How should we assess these recent developments in the international financial system? We realise that the benefits outweigh the costs. But there are costs of adjustment, often front-loaded and concentrated on specific regions and sectors, which need to be taken into consideration. The change in the structure of the global economy also requires structural adjustments to be made in local economies. We know that the ability of a country to benefit from global financial integration very much depends on the quality of its institutional and structural environment. All economies, including advanced ones, such as the euro area, have to adapt to the changing needs of the world economy. The European economy has undergone and will continue to undergo substantial structural changes, which are necessary and beneficial because they will secure Europe’s place in the global economy. This structural adjustment has been and will continue to be a major phenomenon in the coming years.                                                       1 According to the United Nations Commission for Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Bilateral Investment Treaties Database, the number of bilateral investment treaties rose during the 1990s from around 500 to over 2000. 2 See: M. Ayhan Kose and Eswar Prasad: “Liberalizing Capital”, International Monetary Fund, Finance and Development, September 2004. 3 For a thorough report on the role of foreign direct investment in the global economy, see the UNCTAD World Investment Report 2004. 4 Jos Jensen and Ad Stockman: “Foreign Direct Investment and International Business Cycle Comovement”, European Central Bank, Working Paper No 401, 2004. 5 Xavier Sala-i-Martin: “The Disturbing ‘Rise’ of Global Income Inequality”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No 8904, 2002. 6 Jeffrey Sachs and Andrew Warner: “Fundamental sources of long-run growth”, American Economic Review, papers and proceedings, 1997. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
As the world’s largest exporter, Europe clearly has a major interest in global economic integration and is well placed to benefit from it. Sceptics are concerned about the sustainability of global financial integration. They argue that financial integration has gone too far, that market turnover has reached levels that are unhealthy. Each day, foreign exchange transactions are carried out to a value equivalent to the annual GDP of France. Financial integration is regarded by some as having the potential to destabilise the global economy. But there is also an opposing view. This view states that global financial integration not only contributes to higher growth but also reduces the risks to the global economy. It states that the availability of finance and opportunities to invest are crucial for the stabilisation of economic outcomes. Let me give you just two examples. The preference of investors for investing in local assets rather than diversifying internationally, known in the economic literature as “home bias”, has not yet disappeared. In a world without transaction and information costs, all countries should hold the same portfolio. Each country should diversify its investment in all other countries relative to the size of their financial markets. This would provide the best insurance against shocks to any economy in the world, including the economy of the country in question, and at the same time it would increase the returns for all countries. During the last decade countries have indeed been reducing their risk positions through this mechanism. However, the world economy is still far away from a theoretically optimal portfolio and, as yet, there is no strong empirical evidence for economic stabilisation resulting from risk-sharing. This should be taken as an indication that there is still scope for further reduction of risk and stabilisation of income.7] The second example relates to the fact that most developing countries cannot yet borrow internationally in their local currencies, and have to resort to foreign currency. Foreign currency debt makes these countries more vulnerable to exchange rate movements. For example, the positive effect of depreciation on international competitiveness may be outweighed by the government’s higher debt service on foreign currency bonds and by deteriorating economic conditions.8 Recent trends in domestic and international financial markets point to developing countries also having improved access to different types of finance. Therefore, further development and integration of financial markets may contribute to a stabilisation of economic outcomes in these countries, which would also benefit the industrial economies as their trading partners. Overall, I consider the recent developments in international financial integration to be welcome, because they reflect trends towards an efficient allocation of resources and, in this way, support growth and promote welfare in the global economy. They do not only benefit the recipient economies, but also the countries of origin, where they facilitate international risk sharing and participation in returns abroad. However, the rapid integration of financial markets across borders is not without new risks. These risks include adverse market dynamics, unwarranted spillovers, and challenges for international financial stability. And this brings me to the second part of my reflections, which concerns the institutional governance of the international financial system. The international financial architecture: is it up to the task? Potential risks stemming from international financial integration should be addressed with firm governance, requiring solid institutional foundations and policies. These institutional foundations, often referred to as the international financial architecture of the system, will help prevent adverse financial pressure and deal with it when it arises.9 Therefore, the key questions for policy-makers are whether the international financial architecture is at present sufficiently well-equipped to deal with this task, and whether it is adjusting sufficiently fast to the ongoing changes in international financial integration.                                                       7 Bent E. Sørensen, Yi-Tsung Wu, Oved Yosha and Yu Zhu: “Home bias and international risk sharing: Twin Puzzles Separated at Birth”, 2005. 8 Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann: “Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies”, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2005. 9  With regards to the international financial architecture, see for example P. Kenen, The International Financial Architecture: What’s new? What’s missing?, November 2001. BIS Review 47/2005 3 
These are clearly not trivial questions, and definite answers can be given only with the benefit of hindsight. It is easy to count the crises that have occurred, but impossible to count those that have been averted. However, without forgetting the necessary note of caution, I consider the adjustments implemented in the international financial system in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis altogether sufficiently important that they now constitute a system that is significantly different from the one prevailing before the crisis. Indeed, I would classify some of the changes implemented in the international financial architecture since the Asian crisis as major ones. Let me expand on this hypothesis. The Asian crisis was indeed severe. It is estimated that 600 billion dollars’ worth of national income was lost within the first year of the crisis (1997-98).10 It is important to realise that significant weaknesses in the various national financial systems and a lack of market orientation were at the roots of the crisis. These weaknesses included balance sheet mismatches, banking sector vulnerabilities, and inadequate supervision. The Asian crisis was triggered by a shift in market sentiment which led to massive reversals of capital flows.11 This change in market sentiment spread rapidly across the region, and then into other regions, making contagion a major factor in the development of the crisis. With hindsight it turned out that both national authorities and international institutions were insufficiently aware of the risks and perhaps also insufficiently equipped to deal with them once they had materialised. The subsequent diagnosis of the origins of the crisis exposed three major shortcomings: first, considerable information gaps between the authorities, financial market participants and the international community; second, insufficient attention to financial sector issues in macroeconomic surveillance; and third, the inadequate involvement of emerging countries in international fora. These shortcomings have been addressed in recent years, which has led to important changes in the approach of international financial institutions, national authorities and market participants. The main thrust of these changes has been to strengthen market orientation through an improved international financial architecture. Let me briefly discuss these three sets of changes in turn. First, concerning the provision of information, the IMF has made large strides towards increased transparency in recent years. The bulk of its bilateral consultation reports are now published and the Fund has pushed for greater dissemination of key economic and financial data. The fact that, nowadays, data on foreign exchange reserves, external debt, and balance of payments flows as well as other key data are reliable and available with little lag has been an important part of the transition towards a more market-led international financial system.12 It has allowed market participants to price value and risk regarding each particular borrower in a reliable and effective fashion and to help stem spillovers across markets. National authorities have also made considerable progress in increasing transparency, including in displaying their fiscal policies and data. All major central banks have made great efforts to increase the transparency of their monetary policy frameworks and they consider clear communication essential for effective monetary policy-making. Nowadays, more than 15 of the 20 major central banks publish bulletins or inflation reports, often with detailed explanations of policy decisions and background data. Importantly, many countries that have been hit by a crisis in recent years are now publishing their inflation reports, including Mexico, Korea, Thailand and Brazil. This too leads to a more informed decision-making process in the markets, reducing adverse market dynamics and contagion. Market participants themselves also embarked on a process aimed at strengthening the international financial system, including through the provision of information. In my view, an important recent milestone has been the agreement between sovereign bond issuers and private market participants on a voluntary code of behaviour to keep channels of communication open in good times and to facilitate collaborative solutions in cases of distress for a sovereign issuer, and a possible restructuring of its debt. I myself launched this idea in a speech in Washington in September 2001. This agreement has resulted in the “Principles for stable capital flows and fair debt restructuring in emerging markets”, previously known as the “Code of Conduct”, and it was endorsed at the end of last year by the G20                                                       10  Javad K. Shirazi: The East Asian Crisis: Origins, Policy Challenges, and Prospects, June 1998. 11 In 1997 net private capital flows to Asia declined by almost 100 billion dollars compared with 1996. The 1996-97 swing in flows to the Asian countries represented about 11% of their GDP. 12 See T. Padoa-Schioppa and F. Saccomanni: Managing a market-led global financial system, in P. Kenen (ed.): Managing the World Economy: Fifty Years After Bretton Woods, 1994. 4 BIS Review 47/2005 
ministers and governors, when we met here in Berlin.13 We welcomed the fact that sovereign issuers and market participants have developed a pragmatic and voluntary approach to reinforce the international financial system and have in that way taken ownership of an important strengthening of the present financial system. The second important change since the Asian crisis concerns the focus of the international community on financial issues, as it was felt that not enough attention was given to financial sector surveillance. In the meantime, the IMF has brought financial sector issues to the forefront of its work, and they are now regularly included in consultations. Global market surveillance has been established, and analytical tools for the understanding of crisis detection have been strengthened. The IMF has also established the so-called Financial Sector Assessment Program, which aims to promote the soundness of financial systems in the IMF’s member countries. An important part of the Program is the IMF’s assessment of observance of financial sector standards and codes, which have been endorsed by the international community. In fact, the IMF is producing separate reports on Observance of Standards and Codes as a by-product of the Program. The IMF’s nearly universal membership makes it well-placed to carry on this important work, and I think the fact that around 120 countries have already participated in the Financial Sector Assessment Program since its launch in 1999, or are planning to participate in it, is clear evidence of this. In order to further examine the linkages between financial and macroeconomic stability and across sectors of the financial system on a global scale, the Financial Stability Forum was created in 1999. The purpose of the FSF is to promote international financial stability and reduce the risks stemming from the international financial system. The FSF is uniquely positioned to fulfil this task, as its members include, in particular, the major international financial institutions, the international groupings setting standards for accounting and for the regulation and supervision of financial institutions (by which I mean banks, securities firms and insurance companies), the international committees of central bank experts in the fields of financial markets and payment and settlement systems, as well as the executive, monetary and supervisory authorities of the major financial centres. In my view, it has been the first serious attempt to consider the global financial system as a truly single system, an integrated structural entity where it is of major importance for each institution or authority - whether the IMF or the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision or the International Accounting Standards Board, for instance - to be fully aware of the systemic implications of its own orientations and decisions. From that standpoint, I consider the Financial Stability Forum as a global conceptual clearing house, whose role is likely to be more and more important to the extent that the global financial system itself - driven by technology and globalisation - is more and more complex, universal and integrated. The third shortcoming that was detected in the international financial architecture during the Asian crisis was the inadequate involvement of emerging countries in international fora. During the development of the Asian crisis, emerging market participation was addressed by the setting up of the G20, which saw its inaugural meeting here in Berlin in December 1999. The G20 was established in order to fully reflect the new nature of the global economy, an economy in which emerging economies were playing a very important role from a systemic standpoint. The G20 is a truly global forum. It enhances the dissemination of information by bringing together key industrial and emerging countries in an informal setting with the aim of reaching a consensus on a number of topical issues related to the international financial architecture. Since its establishment in 1999, the G20 has been instrumental in implementing standards and codes that are applied at the global level, as it has led by an example by carrying out the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Programs and Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes at an early stage. By now, two thirds of the IMF membership has participated in these reports, assessing their compliance with internationally recognised standards and codes. The G20 also contributed to the identification of 12 major standards, on which global efforts are now concentrating. These major standards include banking supervision, corporate governance, fiscal transparency, monetary and financial policy transparency, and securities regulation. Without the kind of global ownership of new concepts of the best practices, without reinforced transparency and voluntary implementation of the Principles for stable capital flows and fair debt restructuring in emerging markets that the G20 has delivered, our present financial architecture would not be as strong as it is today.                                                       13 See the Institute of International Finance (IIF) et al., Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets, November 2004. BIS Review 47/2005 5 
These three major improvements - namely fostering transparency as a major strategic driver, focusing on a more systemic conceptual approach, in particular, through the Financial Stability Forum, and developing improved global ownership, in particular, through the establishment of the G20 - have contributed to an international financial system which is more resilient than before. The international financial system is today better equipped to detect vulnerabilities and deal with shocks than it was in 1997 or 1998. Although the success of crisis prevention can only be assessed with hindsight, the absence of international financial contagion over the past few years is an important observation. One important lesson from the recent crises has been that the private sector needs to play its role in crisis management. Private sector involvement is needed in order to avoid the moral hazard problem that is inherent in large financial assistance provided by the official sector.14 Furthermore, the role of the private sector in crisis management is essential because official support is likely to be insufficient to cover the financing needs of a crisis country at a time of increasing capital flows. There have been some concrete achievements in the area of private sector involvement, most notably the increased use of collective action clauses in sovereign bonds. There remain a number of open issues in the international financial system that need further reflection. One such issue is the role of the official sector in crisis resolution. Here, the international community started to emphasise the importance of clearer rules for official sector support. This was done in order to strengthen incentives for prudent risk management on the part of both policy-makers and private sector investors. The IMF has established a framework, which is called the exceptional access policy, for large financial assistance programmes that sets guidelines in order to make IMF lending more predictable. It is now up to the international community to follow these rules. Another open issue is the lack of clear guidelines for IMF involvement in the process of sovereign debt restructuring in the event of a country facing an unsustainable debt situation. The case of Argentina is an example of a very difficult debt restructuring process, which has taken a long time to complete and which has caused uncertainty for all parties concerned. Argentina’s debt restructuring process has shown that the international community still needs a better framework for crisis resolution. Authorities have to cooperate with the IMF and international creditors. The IMF, for its part, has to remain closely involved in the process, and it needs to take an active role in providing information. The IMF is currently undertaking a strategic review of its activities, which should set a roadmap for the Fund for the coming years. In this strategic review, the IMF is contemplating measures to make its surveillance more effective. I support the recent efforts to put more emphasis on regional surveillance, in order to reflect the strong regional focus of trade patterns that is visible not only in Europe and Asia, but also in other parts of the world. I also support attempts to review the functioning of the international monetary system and the Fund’s role in it. Specifically in this context, the IMF is well-placed to analyse issues like reserve accumulation and the evolution of exchange rate regimes in emerging markets, to take due account of their global implication. Finally, it is important to review the financial position of the IMF and the implications of lower lending activities on the Fund’s operational budget. Current macroeconomic challenges My reflections on the current state of the international financial system would be incomplete without putting them into the context of the current global economic situation. First of all, I have to note that this is no time for complacency and that we currently find ourselves in a challenging situation. The global economy is expanding at a comfortable pace, but there are large global imbalances, which have actually widened in recent years. These imbalances involve the industrialised countries as a whole, which have a large aggregate current account deficit and amongst them, more particularly, the United States, whose current account deficit has reached levels not seen before. The increase in the current account in recent years has occurred against the background of a decline in national savings, in turn attributable to rising budget deficits and a household savings rate that has fallen to levels not far above zero. The financing of the current account deficit, which calls for inflows of the magnitude of around two billion US dollars every working day, takes place largely through Asia. Central banks in the region have been intervening heavily for various reasons, such as to prevent their currencies from                                                       14 See “Managing Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies: Experience with the Involvement of Private Sector Creditors”, ECB Occasional Paper 32, 2005, for an overview of the instruments for private sector involvement and of recent experience. 6 BIS Review 47/2005 
appreciating, and they have become large-scale purchasers of US debt securities in recent years. While the current situation is rationalised by some observers, in particular as it supports strong growth in both regions and smoothes the adjustment path, it clearly raises questions regarding the sustainability of recent developments and associated policies. Japan and Europe are also in the picture, Japan because it is posting a large current account surplus and is growing slowly, and Europe because, although it has a balanced current account, it should also contribute to increasing global growth - through raising its potential rate of growth - thereby alleviating global imbalances. The orderly and effective correction of global imbalances is one of the major goals for the international community. These imbalances represent a major risk to financial stability around the world and, therefore, to global growth. There is no individual national or continental solution to that issue. I trust that there is an absolute need to embark on a cooperative strategy comprising all four major partners. The United States has to tackle its structural lack of savings both by reducing public dissaving and by increasing household savings. Europe has to augment its growth potential through structural reforms in order to deliver growth, contributing more effectively to global growth. Japan should also increase its growth potential by implementing structural reforms. And, as a fully-fledged member of this collective, cooperative, global endeavour, the emerging Asian economies would need to accept an orderly realignment of their currencies. I would underline that all four partners together would not only have a winning strategy for tackling global imbalances but they would also individually, each of them, do what is in their best interest. This is true for China and emerging Asia, this is true for America, this is true for Japan. This is also true for Europe. We have to convince people that structural reforms are necessary to revitalise our economies and make them fit for global competition. Moreover, they can enhance resilience to the shocks inherent in open economies. Structural reforms are essential for Europe’s ability to respond to the challenges arising from the ongoing deepening in the global division of labour, the rapid pace of technological change, and the ageing of the population. In my view, all the conditions to benefit from such integration are there, and we should make the necessary structural adjustments with full confidence in their long-term benefits for our economy. Conclusion In conclusion I would like to stress three points. First, in my view it is remarkable that the current global imbalances have again brought to the fore the importance of monetary and exchange rate issues in the global economy, namely issues of exchange rate configurations, reserve accumulation and global liquidity. This underscores the fact that the focus on financial sector and market institution issues should not be at the expense of macroeconomic and exchange rate surveillance. This is particularly true for IMF surveillance. Second, the scientific and technological revolution, the phenomenon of globalisation and the structural changes that are ongoing on all continents, not the least in Europe, are calling for utmost vigilance and for a permanent adaptation of the international financial architecture. We must keep a constant check on whether we have taken the systemic interactions between the various pillars of the international financial architecture into consideration in an appropriate manner. Much remains to be done in this regard and, as I already said, this is no time for complacency. The ECB is keen to play its role fully in this respect, not only by participating actively in the G7, the G20 and the Financial Stability Forum, and by being fully dedicated to the G10 group of governors, but also by calling, when necessary, for a larger, more comprehensive, more systemic view in a number of important fields. For instance, we suggested additional considerations of financial stability in the context of the International Accounting Standards Board, and these have now been done to our satisfaction. Third, further work also remains to be done to achieve full inclusiveness of emerging economies and economies in transition in the international financial architecture. The G20, as I said, is an emblematic illustration of this new feature, which was overdue. In the field of central banking, the global economy meeting gathering central bank governors of systemic industrialised and emerging economies all over the world is another major example of the new inclusive handling of issues that are both systemic and global. Thank you for your attention. BIS Review 47/2005 7 
Caleb M Fundanga: Investment opportunities in the Zambian real estate business - the role of the Bank of Zambia Paper presented by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, to the International Conference on Investment Opportunities in Zambia - Integrating African Property Markets, Lusaka, 15 June 2005. *      *      * • The Chairperson  • Distinguished Guests  • Ladies and Gentlemen  I feel greatly honoured to have been invited to talk to you on the theme, “Investment Opportunities in the Zambian Real Estate Business: The role of the Bank of Zambia.”  From the outset I wish to express my sincere gratitude to Business Week for organising such an important Conference. You will agree with me that this Conference is, perhaps, the first of its kind to have been solely organised by the private sector to look specifically at the issue of investment in the Zambian real estate sector. As you may be aware, investment in the real estate sector is critical to the economic well being of any country, since economic growth alone is insufficient if it does not translate into development, as reflected through better living standards that includes provision of quality and adequate infrastructure, such as, real estate.  Real estate can be defined to include physical property and bare land owned by an individual or organisation under freehold or non-freehold tenure. However, for purposes of my discussion this afternoon, I will use the term real estate to mean physical property.  My discussion therefore, is structured as follows:  i. First, I will look at the contribution of the Zambian real estate sector to gross domestic product (GDP) in Zambia. During the discussion of this issue, I will also look at the characteristics of the Zambian real estate finance sector; and  ii. Secondly, I will explain the role of the Bank of Zambia in the real estate sector.  Ladies and Gentlemen  In Zambia, the share of the real estate sector has increased from an average of 6.8% between 1995 and 1999 to 9.4% between 2000 and 2004. This is a welcome development, as it shows that real estate business has been contributing positively to real GDP growth over the last six years.  However, I strongly believe that the sector can perform even better than this, especially that most of our people have no good and affordable accommodation, as evidenced by emergence of large unplanned residential areas. This is a challenge for you experts in the real estate business to facilitate the building of more houses and office accommodation to reduce rentals for these facilities to affordable levels and stem the expansion of unplanned residential areas.  In spite of the growth in the share of real estate to GDP, the Zambian real estate finance sector is still characterized by inadequate long-term finance. Prior to 1990, the sector was dominated by the Zambia National Building Society (ZNBS), which following the liberalisation of the economy in the 1990s, is unable to meet the demand for real estate finance. Much as there are other building societies now, their impact on real estate finance is still minimal. Consequently, most of the people who are constructing nowadays are doing so out of their own funds. Since they are building using their own meagre resources, the quality of their structures leaves much to be desired and the projects take long to complete. This, in part, explains the mushrooming of shanty compounds I have alluded to earlier. What I have said clearly shows that there is need for new players in the real estate financing sector. To this effect, I wish to challenge the private sector to invest in the real estate financing business.  Having said that, what is the role of the Bank of Zambia in enhancing investment opportunities in the real estate business? As you may be aware, the primary mission of the Bank of Zambia is to formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies that will ensure price and financial system stability.  BIS Review 46/2005 1 
How does this tie in with real estate business? The relationship between real estate business and monetary policy and financial system stability is a much debated issue among academics and policy-makers, alike. The relationship brings to the fore important challenges involving policy design, financial regulation and risk management. In Zambia, however, like most other developing countries, we have had difficulties in quantifying the relationship due to paucity of reliable information on property markets, thereby limiting the scope for meaningful analysis as an input into policy formulation. It is therefore, critical that improvements are made in the quality of real estate sector data to enhance analysis and policy response to developments in this sector.  There is no doubt that the rate of inflation is still too high in Zambia compared to some of our neighbours, like Tanzania, Botswana, and Mozambique. However, I wish to assure you that lower rates of inflation are within reach given Government commitment to fiscal discipline and macroeconomic stability.  It is a well established that high inflation (that is, above ten percent) is a cost to economic activities. This happens through:  1. Increased investment costs. High and persistent inflation adversely affects savings mobilization in the economy because savers would opt to hedge against inflation. Ultimately, this leads to a reduction in the availability of loanable funds and investments. In addition, high inflation is normally associated with high interest rates and high interest rates inhibit borrowing for investment purposes, thereby slowing down economic growth and the development process;  2. Rising prices erode the public and investors’ confidence in the economy and contribute to rapid exchange rate depreciation. This leads to currency substitution or dollarisation, which in turn, reduces the effectiveness of monetary policy;  3. Rising prices also undermine the country’s external competitiveness, which may lead to a decline in export earnings, thus, worsening the balance of payments position of the country; and  4. Rising prices entrench poverty through the erosion of peoples’ incomes, particularly those on fixed incomes.  Therefore, high inflation is a major source of concern to the Central Bank as it poses a threat to general economic development. With regard to the real estate sector, high inflation will affect the cost of property. In the case of the low income group, high inflation will make real estate prices unaffordable.  Apart from inflation, there are other financial prices which are of great concern to the Bank of Zambia, especially in our efforts to stabilise the macro-economy. One such financial price is the level of interest rates. Interest rates, being the cost of funds, can inhibit borrowing for investment in real estate if they are too high. Inflation also affects the level of interest rates.  To this effect, lowering of interest rates requires that all key stakeholders play their respective roles effectively and consistently. The Government, by reducing domestic borrowing, contributes to the lowering of yield rates on Government securities, which are often used as anchors by commercial banks in setting their interest rates. Commercial banks are, on their part, also expected to respond favourably to improving macroeconomic conditions consistent with low interest rates, while borrowers need to improve their credit culture. As for the Bank of Zambia, the greatest contribution we can make to the lowering of interest rates is reduction of inflation to single digit levels. In this regard, the Bank will continue monitoring financial conditions and take appropriate actions to contribute to the lowering of lending interest rates.  Exchange rates are yet another financial price that should be stabilised to effectively contribute to the promotion of the growth of the real estate industry, particularly that a substantial amount of building materials, such as, steel are imported. An unpredictable behaviour of the exchange rate can make investment in real estate unattractive.  However, following the introduction of the Broad-based Interbank Foreign Exchange System (IFES) in July 2003, the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major foreign currencies, particularly the US dollar, has been relatively stable. The Kwacha appreciated by 2.6% against the US dollar in 2004, after depreciating by 7.2% in 2003. Other factors contributing to the relative stability of the Kwacha include strong performance of the external sector, prudent fiscal management, and the broad weakness of the US dollar in the international market. From the behaviour of the exchange rate of the 2 BIS Review 46/2005 
Kwacha against major currencies, it is clear that, supported by effective supervision, foreign exchange market participants are able to police themselves and instil discipline in the market. Ladies and Gentlemen  Allow me, at this juncture, to turn to the other function of the Bank of Zambia – that of ensuring financial system stability. As you may be aware, financial system stability is very critical to the maintenance of macroeconomic stability. As a matter of fact, monetary policy would not be effective in pursuing the inflation objective if the financial system were not stable, for monetary policy actions are transmitted through financial institutions.  In this regard, a stable financial system plays a catalytic role for financial institutions to provide the financial products that will contribute to the development of the real estate business.  Therefore, to enhance the capacity of the financial institutions to meet the challenges of financing, among others, the real estate sector, the Bank has undertaken a lot of reforms. For instance, the Bank’s legislative and supervisory powers have been strengthened to conform to a liberalised financial sector.   However, the development of a more active secondary financial market to enhance efficiency in the financial system remains a key challenge to us. To address these and other challenges, the Government approved the Financial Sector Development Plan (FSDP) in 2004. In coming up with the FSDP, the Government recognised, among other weaknesses, that public financial institutions that were established to facilitate the provision of various financial services to the majority of the people in the country were insolvent, and therefore ineffective, or have closed down. e.g., mortgages (ZNBS); agriculture lending (LIMA Bank, Co-operative Bank and EXIM Bank in the past) and; banking services for the rural populace (NSCB). In addition, long-term project finance has remained difficult to access for many years. In this vein, the FSDP is aimed at enhancing financial intermediation and efficiency of the financial sector, and it is anticipated that problems related to real estate finance would be resolved once the FSDP is fully functional.  Ladies and Gentlemen  In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance of the real estate sector in economic and social development in the country. With your contribution, and that of other stakeholders Zambia could easily achieve the national socio-economic goals in the medium term. Every economic unit needs the services of a booming real estate and construction sectors for them to contribute more to economic growth and development. In this regard, I trust that the various institutions represented here will continue to facilitate and promote investments in the real estate sector in Zambia. On our part as the Bank of Zambia, we will continue to facilitate real sector economic activity by continuing to improve the macroeconomic conditions in the country that are critical to the mobilisation and expansion of business. In turn, it is expected that other sectors of the economy will benefit and contribute to accelerated economic growth and development.  I THANK YOU. BIS Review 46/2005 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries (closing remarks) Closing remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Workshop “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries”, Frankfurt, 17 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen,  It is a great pleasure to make the closing remarks at the end of this very stimulating conference. Let me first thank the organisers of the conference for their excellent handling of a workshop which has been extraordinary successful in giving a lot of food for thought for all of us. Today and yesterday you have debated very intensively the economic effects of creating a single currency – the euro – for an increasingly integrated European single market. I have no doubt you all agree with me that the achievements in terms of integration and convergence have been very impressive. The introduction of the euro has not only helped consolidating the tremendous gains that have been made in the process of European economic integration since the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1951. These gains have been both deep (covering an increasing number of markets) and wide (covering an increasing number of countries). I also strongly believe the euro is and will continue to be a key catalyst for further integration. One prominent example is the effect the introduction of the euro has had on accelerating financial integration. Notably, the elimination of exchange rate risk among euro area countries has fostered very significantly the depth and breadth of financial markets and boosted financial innovation. There is also evidence on much closer integration of stock markets in the euro area. Another important example is its effect on trade integration: evidence suggests that the euro has stimulated trade not only across the euro area, but also with the rest of the world. The export share with countries outside the euro area rose to almost 20% of GDP in 2003 from around 17% in 1997 (a similar development is recorded for imports). It is also remarkable that, possibly as a consequence of trade and financial integration, as well as the increasing degree of convergence of macroeconomic policies, dispersion of real GDP growth rates in the euro area has remained very close to its historical average and no signs of increased divergence in growth rates have emerged so far. Today, I will not try to comprehensively review each and every of these important achievements. I would rather like to highlight one of them: the truly impressive process of inflation convergence in the euro area. In this context, I shall address the issue of inflation differentials within the area, in particular their size and recent evolution. I shall then focus on two particular issues. First, it has been argued that monetary union may contribute to a larger specialisation in production in the euro area. In this case, the need for relative price adjustments and inflation differentials to deal with sectoral developments may increase. I will briefly discuss the current evidence on sectoral specialisation. Second, I will elaborate on the function of the inflation differentials and emphasize the importance of monitoring relative unit labour cost. Inflation convergence in the euro area Let me remind you that in the run-up to the formation of EMU, the dispersion of national inflation rates has been lastingly reduced. In 1992 the difference between the highest and lowest inflation rate in terms of HIPC across the euro area countries was 13.5 percentage points. The dispersion steadily declined throughout the 90s, triggered by the preparations for EMU, and broadly stabilised at the beginning of Stage Three of EMU at around 3.3 percentage points. Since then, with the exception of a modest increase over the period 2000-02, the level of inflation dispersion across the euro area has changed very little, with the average standard deviation of inflation differentials being around 1. Current inflation differentials within the euro area are not unusually large. Rather, their magnitude is similar to those differentials seen in the United States among the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas, namely 3.2 percentage points, with an average standard deviation of about 0.9. It should be emphasised that in a monetary union inflation differentials across regions or countries are the natural way of adjusting relative prices in the face of asymmetric demand or supply developments. I would like to make 4 remarks in this respect. BIS Review 46/2005 1 
First, changes in relative prices within the single currency area have been larger and more frequent than anticipated. The idea that the euro area is an area where the single currency prevents adjustment of relative prices is clearly refuted. For instance, the capacity of the German economy to catch up rapidly with the average of the euro area in terms of cost competitiveness after the loss of competitiveness associated with German reunification is very impressive. From that viewpoint the euro area is more flexible and adaptable than had been anticipated by many observers. Second, the previous process is symmetric. In some cases the existence of inflation differentials is the natural consequence for an economy that has been outperforming the average in terms of cost competitiveness in order to progressively adjust towards a more normal level in line with the average. This problem had been observed, for instance, in the case of the Netherlands and is possibly still relevant for Ireland. Third, inflation differentials are not only the necessary means of achieving relative price adjustments within the euro area, like in the case of Germany, but they are also a natural feature of the euro area in view of the gradual convergence or catching-up process regarding GDP per-capita. Fourth, there is one case where persistent inflation differentials are not advisable in terms of national economic policies: this is when an economy having an already relatively low level of cost competitiveness continues to face further deterioration due to higher inflation. In that case additional attention must be given to increasing the flexibility and adaptability of both institutions and market structures in the national economy concerned in order for the appropriate adjustment mechanism to function. Sectoral specialisation in the euro area  An interesting issue that has been touched upon in the last two days is whether the European integration process will result in higher sectoral specialisation across countries. As mentioned above, this is potentially important because a higher degree of specialisation might imply a greater vulnerability to asymmetric shocks and a greater need for relative price adjustments. As to the relevance of this argument, there are two lines of reasoning in the economic literature. The first, supported by Krugman (1991, 1993) and the new economic geography models, suggests that, as trade barriers are reduced, inter-industry trade increases and opportunities for exploiting economies of scale and specialisation in production should arise whenever countries have a comparative advantage. Consequently, countries’ production structures would become less diversified and thus increasingly vulnerable to asymmetric shocks while business cycles would become less synchronised. The second, and opposite, line of reasoning, developed by Frankel and Rose (1998), suggests that European integration would instead lead to greater intra-industry trade integration and more similar economic structures. In this case, business cycles would become more strongly synchronised through the convergence of factor endowments and technology, as well as reduced exchange rate variability, which otherwise would tend to weaken intra-industry trade.  The evidence on whether EMU has favoured or prevented specialisation in the euro area is not clear yet. According to an overview published by the European Commission, there have so far only been modest changes in the pattern of industrial concentration and geographical specialisation within the euro area. While production specialisation has gradually increased since the 1970s, export specialisation appears to have decreased, which could be partly explained by the increased importance of intra-industry trade. Similarly, a study of sectoral specialisation carried out by the European System of Central Banks in 2004 found the production structure of euro area countries to be relatively similar. Indeed, it appears more homogeneous than in the United States and relatively stable over time. In contrast, a host of studies have highlighted agglomeration or clustering effects. They suggest that the agglomeration of production factors (by generating an environment that creates positive externalities, the presence of competitors and informal links with complementary businesses, the supply of qualified labour and investment capital, and the proximity of research capacity) is increasingly important and could indeed increase specialisation and reduce cross-border trade within industries.  At the same time, some recent research (for example, Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2003, and Giannone and Reichlin, 2005) documents that risk sharing tends to increase in a currency union, bolstering the case for higher specialisation in production. The peculiarity of this channel is that any resulting asymmetries in GDP fluctuations would not translate in income volatility because ownership is diversified. This 2 BIS Review 46/2005 
essentially will help to smooth consumption across countries and, therefore, limit the welfare cost of GDP fluctuations.  Overall, the time span since the start of the EMU is too short for strong empirical conclusions and a view of the effects of EMU on specialisation is consequently still difficult to obtain.  Determinants of inflation differentials Let me turn now to the determinants of inflation dispersion in the euro area. A first insight into the possible causes of inflation differentials in the euro area can be gained by performing an inflation accounting exercise, which breaks down the euro area inflation differentials, measured in terms of the GDP deflator, into their underlying determinants, namely internal factors – such as unit labour costs, profit margins and net indirect taxes – and external factors – such as import prices. This kind of analysis suggests that during the period 1999-2003 internal factors were the most important contributors to inflation differentials relative to the euro area average in the case of 9 member countries, while import costs played a major role in the case of only 3 countries: Belgium, France and Luxembourg.  As regards the internal sources of inflation differentials, the most important component explaining the dynamics of GDP inflation has been the dispersion in unit labour costs. Looking at the unit labour cost developments in more detail, the compensation-per-employee component was generally the most important in explaining inflation differentials. At the same time, productivity growth showed a relatively low level of dispersion across the euro area. This points to relatively significant differences across countries in those components of labour compensation that do not reflect productivity growth. In this regard, part of the differences in price developments may stem then from differences in wage developments, including inertial components of wage-setting rules, such as those caused by automatic indexation clauses of wages to prices, which exist in some euro area countries. To the extent that historical inflation differentials within the euro area seem to largely reflect differences in cost developments across euro area countries, I would like to stress here that the relative evolution of cost competitiveness, as measured for instance by unit labour cost, is a key equilibrating mechanism in the single currency area.  Concluding remarks Ladies and gentlemen, let me make three remarks in conclusion. First, there is no doubt in my mind that the full benefits of the European common market could not be realised without the single currency. I propose to you the simple thought experiment: What would be, today, the US market if we would have had different currencies in California and Texas, Massachusetts and Wyoming? Would we call it an “achieved single market”? In that perspective, the single currency offers us all the economic benefits associated with an “achieved single market”. In this respect, as regards interest rates and exchange -rate risk for each particular economy, there are no “winners” and “losers”. It is a “win-win” game …. All economies, without exception, are benefiting from the very low market interest rates that reflect the credibility of the currency: it is true that this is a considerable additional advantage given to those countries that had previously very high interest rates. At the same time, all economies, without exception, are benefiting from the elimination of exchange risk within the single currency area, which is a considerable improvement, including for those economies that had already very low interest rates, so that not only each economy is benefiting from a much better functioning of the single market itself, but also from a significant improvement of its own monetary situation. It is equally true for Germany, for Spain, for Italy. It is true for the 12 countries forming the euro area. The single currency area is, in my view, a solid and coherent economy with all partners having strong advantages. Second, I have associated myself with the strategic concept of “competitive disinflation” during all the period during which a previously high inflation economy, namely the French economy, was looking for being more effective in reinforcing its competitiveness through lower production cost and lower inflation rather than through monetary devaluation. Now we are in an area where monetary stability is fully ensured. This does not mean that our preoccupation with competitiveness should disappear. In this new environment of “competitive stability” the careful examination of national competitiveness indicators, like the relative evolution of unit labour costs, reemains important. The ECB has set up a BIS Review 46/2005 3 
benchmark of price stability in a medium and long term perspective - according to its definition - but a large part of economic policy remains national. In this respect I said, before the setting up of the single currency, that in the new monetary regime economic policy makers would substitute competitiveness indicators to previous indicators like exchange rates and market interest rates. Third, let me say to which extent we rely on research to analyse the structural transformation ongoing in the single currency area by the virtue of a fully achieved single market with a single currency. My intuition is that this phenomenon is extremely complex. That explains why trends are so difficult to substantiate, and conjectures not easily proved or rejected: the two effects underlined by Krugman on the one hand and by Frankel and Rose on the other hand, are probably operating simultaneously in the euro area, together with the universal phenomenon of agglomeration or clusterisation. All my experience tells me that in such a rapidly changing world, where the progress of sciences and technology, the globalisation process and the very profound structural changes in Europe are simultaneous, we have to be humble in front of facts and figures and be ready to take on board, as soon as it is produced, the good research you are delivering I thank you for your attention. 4 BIS Review 46/2005 
Philipp M Hildebrand: Developing countries and international capital markets Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, to economiesuisse, Zurich, 14 June 2005. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * After having plummeted on the back of the Asian crisis, capital flows to developing countries have risen considerably again in the last three years. In 2005, they are likely to reach the approximate level at which they stood shortly before the Asian crisis. Capital flows are channelled mostly to a few emerging markets, notably China. China’s monetary order is currently undergoing profound changes, with the country gradually liberalising capital movements. The concept of the “impossible trinity”, which was developed by the Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell, asserts that this will inevitably lead either to a loss in monetary autonomy or to a flexibilisation of the exchange rate regime. Both trends can be clearly observed: the pressure on the fixed exchange rate on the one hand, and the rapid expansion of the monetary and credit aggregates on the other. In the longer term, China’s monetary order will probably move towards floating exchange rates. This transition will hopefully be successful. As China’s monetary policy of gradual change has so far proved its worth, it is likely to serve as an example to other developing countries. 
Niklaus Blattner: Developments in the Swiss banking sector  Introductory remarks by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. *      *      * With its Financial Stability Report, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) informs the public of the state of the financial system and presents its assessment of system stability. Moreover, the Bank provides indicators that may be used for an in-depth analysis. The SNB tracks developments in the banking sector from a macroprudential, i.e. a system-wide perspective. In so doing, it complements the task of the Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC), which is responsible for microprudential oversight, i.e. for individual institutions. The part of the report that focuses on the banking sector mainly highlights strains or imbalances which could pose a threat to system stability in the short or longer term. In addition, the SNB reports on its activities in connection with the oversight of payment and securities settlement systems. This year it also provides information on the “Business Continuity Planning” (BCP) project, i.e. on preventive measures to overcome disruptions, thus strengthening the operational resistance of the Swiss financial centre. Banking sector The banking sector is currently stable. The stress index developed by SNB – an indicator which combines comprehensive information on potential stress symptoms in the banking industry – shows that the strains on the Swiss banking industry were extraordinarily low compared with the historical average. This is mainly attributable to three factors. Firstly, the Swiss banking industry found itself in a predominantly positive environment: economic activity and the stock markets exhibited favourable development, interest rates remained low, and the credit standing of borrowers tended to improve. Consequently, profits in the banking sector not only remained high, but in most cases had increased over the previous period. While the satisfactory results achieved already in 2003 were mainly due to cost-cutting measures, the figures during the period under review can be ascribed to higher operative earnings. Secondly, the banks’ reinforced capital resources improved the sector’s resilience. The majority of banks took advantage of the favourable environment to strengthen their capital base. Excess capital at the end of 2004 significantly exceeded the historical average. One exception, however, are the big banks, which – despite better profits – hardly increased their capital base at all. The risk-weighted capital ratio is relevant for regulation. The big banks are quite well placed by international standards in this regard. However, if the unweighted capital ratio is used as a benchmark (in Switzerland, it is not subject to any minimum requirements), the capital levels of the big banks are more modest when viewed internationally. The reasons for this discrepancy are the comparatively low proportion of off-balance-sheet business at the Swiss big banks on the one hand, and the low average weighting of trading and loan books on the other hand. Thirdly, there is no indication – from our perspective – that the risks entered into in the banking industry have risen: market and interest rate risk have only increased slightly on an aggregate level, and credit risk even seems to have fallen. Consequently, the banking sector is in good shape at the moment. As far as prospects for the near future are concerned, we believe that the macroeconomic environment and financial market conditions pose no major threat to the stability of the Swiss banking system. The outlook for 2005 indicates that economic growth in most regions will only slow down at a moderate pace. In addition, the available indicators suggest that there is currently little risk of contagion effects causing a crisis in the Swiss banking sector. Nevertheless, there are still potential sources of risk. They pertain to credit risks in particular. Firstly, an unexpectedly sharp economic downturn could have a serious impact on the quality of the loan portfolios and the stock market. Secondly, should we witness a swift economic recovery, however, a sharp rise in the still very low interest rates could also result in a deterioration of the loan portfolio. This 
is because the growing interest burden would suddenly put considerable pressure on households and companies with mortgages to pay off. Banks would also be directly affected by the steep interest rate hike, as the interest rates on their assets tend to be fixed for a longer period than those on their liabilities. In view of the interest rate risks taken and the now extremely low provisions in the Swiss banking sector, the negative consequences of an unexpectedly sharp interest rate increase could be relatively far-reaching. The Swiss banking sector should nevertheless have sufficient capital to bear up, even under such circumstances. Hedge funds might pose an indirect threat to stability in that their failure affects systemically important banks. In our opinion, this is an unlikely scenario, however. Hedge fund risk management at Swiss big banks is adequate. The SFBC supervises the big banks’ hedge fund activities. Their exposure to hedge funds must be backed by capital as in the case of any other market and credit risks. It is, however, undisputable that, given the rapid developments in the hedge fund industry, activities must be monitored closely. System oversight In December, we reported on the situation with regard to the oversight of systemically important payment and securities settlement systems. In the meantime, the “systemically important” classifications of the interbank payment system Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC), the securities settlement system SECOM, the central counterparty SIS x-clear and the multi-currency payment system Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) have become definitive, and the preparations for the oversight measures stipulated in the National Bank Ordinance are going ahead as scheduled. In particular, detailed guidelines were drawn up in order to examine whether or not the regulatory minimum requirements are complied with. With these guidelines, the different systems can be monitored consistently, while at the same time keeping the administrative effort of the operators at an acceptable level. Business Continuity Planning (BCP) Different experiences in the recent past – from the 9/11 terrorist attacks in the United States to minor local technical difficulties – suggest that measures to strengthen the operational resistance of the Swiss financial sector must be taken. During the past year and a half, the SNB has headed a sectoral working group in cooperation with the SFBC secretariat. The group consists of representatives from infrastructure providers, financial institutions and the authorities and has conducted an in-depth analysis of the business continuity plans of the major players in the financial markets. The Business Continuity Planning (BCP) project focuses on precautionary measures to prevent the likelihood of disruptions. In addition, measures are taken to help cope as efficiently as possible with disruptions, once they have occurred. In its analysis, the working group focused on the two business processes which were considered to be especially critical for system stability and which must be maintained without fail even in exceptional circumstances. Firstly, the supply of liquidity to the financial system with central bank money by means of repos and, secondly, large-value payment transactions between the commercial banks in Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC). The analysis began with the following scenario: a severe disruption causing the failure of an important operational centre and incapacitating its staff. Requirements were defined with regard to the maximum tolerable downtime before the resumption of normal operations. A distinction was made between critical and non-critical business processes, activities and participants. Business processes were deemed to be critical if their functioning is absolutely vital for the system-wide provision of liquidity. • The central infrastructures (SNB, SIS, Telekurs), which are crucial for the critical business processes, must be able to resume critical business activities within two hours without losing any confirmed transactions.  • Critical system participants must be able to resume defined critical business activities within four hours.  • The other system participants must be able to resume operations within 24 hours.  The results of the analysis show that adequate preparations have been made both for central infrastructures and the major system participants. Nevertheless, areas in which there is room for improvement were identified. For instance, existing precautionary measures should not only be 
tailored to cater for the failure of physical components (such as buildings or hardware), but particularly to events that interfere with staff availability. The final report of the working group will be completed in the second half of 2005. It will not be limited to issuing specific recommendations, but also to showing how they can be implemented. Financial Stability Report 2005 (950 kb) 
Jean-Pierre Roth: The population is ageing - we cannot wait any longer! Summary of a speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Association suisse des actuaires, Basel, 17 June 2005. The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * Like other developed countries, Switzerland has been hard hit by the phenomenon of demographic ageing. It is putting our old age pension scheme to a severe test. The ageing of the population is also impacting on our ability to innovate, our potential to achieve productivity gains and our competitive dynamism in a globalised and demographically diversified world.  This is why measures need to be put in place quickly. At the heart of this demographic challenge lies the need to enhance the productivity of our economy as well as our productive capacity. It is all the more important to secure favourable growth conditions because the ageing of the population in itself could impact negatively upon our capacity for growth – which is under strain already now.  Increasing the productivity of our economy and the pace of growth is essential if we wish to maintain our system of social security. At the macroeconomic level, the financing of old age pensions works according to a simple principle. This involves imposing a levy on the incomes of the working population and transferring these funds to pensioners, either through redistribution in the present (pay-as-you-go system) or via a capital funding system which benefits future generations of senior citizens. Thus, demographic ageing means that the working population is obliged to shoulder ever greater levies. If, at the same time, the global creation of wealth progresses slowly, the responsibility of financing old age pensions is going to impose an increasing social burden.  Thus, it is not only necessary to improve our economic efficiency, we also need to be careful not to impede these efforts through inappropriate measures. We must allow the invisible hand of competition to bring about the most efficient allocation of our resources possible in both the domestic and the foreign arenas. Consequently, we need to do more with the resources at our disposal. At the same time, we need to make sure we have access to better quality resources. This means taking a longer-term approach to our system of education. The conditions within which our economy operates also play an important role. Growth in investment activity not only allows us to create new jobs but also, and above all, to accelerate productivity advances – both of these factors encourage growth and help to achieve a better financial basis for our old age pension scheme.  There are three reasons why the Swiss National Bank is concerned about demographic developments and growth. First, because a central bank cannot create wealth above and beyond the income derived from its own investments, and therefore cannot finance old age pensions. Second, there are still people who believe that, in the event of an economic slump, the central bank will bring about a sustained improvement in economic performance. It is an illusion to believe that, in the long term, jobs can be created through monetary stimulation. Over a longer period monetary policy is neutral. The third and final reason relates to the fact that it is possible that the response to the demographic challenges of the future might affect the equilibrium real interest rate of our economy – a variable that always enters into our assessments of a given situation. 
Donald L Kohn: Managing risk in a changing economic and financial landscape  Remarks by Mr Donald L Kohn, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Banker’s Association for Finance and Trade and Institute of International Bankers Conference, New York, 15 June 2005.  *      *      * I am pleased to lead off what promises to be a very interesting conference. As I thought about the conference title - "Charting a Course for the Future" - it struck me that, since one can never really know what the future will bring, charting specific paths to preconceived destinations is of limited value. To be sure, we make our best forecasts and base our actions on them. But perhaps the most important thing we can do - as managers of financial institutions, as regulators, and as monetary policymakers - is to develop systems for our actions and reactions that can accommodate the unexpected - that is, we can become better managers of risk. The evolution of financial markets and institutions has greatly affected the process of risk management. The means of managing risk have broadened dramatically, but the resulting systems could well be challenged by developments over coming years. I would like to take a few minutes this morning to ruminate on the changes in financial systems and their implications for risk management, the possibility that developments in our macroeconomic landscape might test these systems, and the steps you as private participants, and we as public policymakers, have been taking to raise the odds on preserving healthy financial systems and economies when the unexpected inevitably occurs.1 The changing financial landscape Change in financial markets over the past decade or so has been rapid and profound. New computing and telecommunication technologies, along with the removal of legal and regulatory barriers to entry, have resulted in greater competition among a wider variety of institutions, in broader geographic areas, and across an expanding array of instruments. The result has been an increase in the efficiency with which financial markets channel funds from savers to spenders and an improvement in the ability of both savers and spenders to adjust their risk profiles. Among the key technological innovations are those that have enabled the development of databases critical to pricing and managing the risks of financial instruments. The ability to value risky assets laid the foundation for understanding the risks embedded in those assets and managing those risks on a portfolio basis. The evolution of financial markets has meant that more people and institutions have a greater number of alternatives for supplying or acquiring funds. In addition, both lenders and borrowers have a much wider range of instruments from which to choose the risk profile of their financial positions and to adjust that profile in response to changes in their own situations or in the overall financial and economic environment. Innovation and competition have substantially increased the role of markets relative to banks and other traditional providers of financial intermediation services. This has helped reduce the cost of transferring savings from anywhere around the globe into investment anywhere around the globe. It has also reduced the reliance of particular classes of borrowers and lenders on particular types of financial intermediaries. But it has also challenged you as bankers to identify the value you add to the intermediation process, and some of the new instruments and techniques we see have resulted from your attempting to exploit your comparative advantage. These changes have created the potential for more-robust financial markets, but in practice these shifts have not been without difficulties. Some significant disturbances in the past decade have challenged market participants’ and regulators’ understanding of risk and revealed weaknesses in risk-management tools and practices. For example, in 1997 and 1998, capital flows to a number of Asian countries were disrupted, with severe effects on their economies. In 1998, the global financial system was rocked by the Russian debt default and the troubles of Long-Term Capital Management                                                       1  The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board. Pat White, of the Board’s staff, contributed to these remarks. BIS Review 46/2005 1 
and its imitators. Those events were followed by the worst excesses of the stock market bubble, including not only the overvaluation of many stocks, but also the lapses in corporate governance that marked that era. Still, for most industrialized economies the macroeconomic fallout from the sharp decline in equity prices, from the spike in risk premiums and business distress, and from the revelations of corporate wrongdoing of a few years ago has been limited; in the United States, we experienced a mild recession. The effects have been limited in part because the financial system has proven reasonably resilient to these developments. Since the fall of 1998, we have not seen the kind of widespread uncertainty about the health of major players in financial markets that has in the past tended to intensify and spread the economic effect of adverse events. In my view, two basic reasons account for this relatively favorable outcome. First, risks probably are in fact better diversified and better allocated to those who are prepared to absorb them or to those whose financial distress is less likely to have feed-through effects on the economy. Second, monetary policy in the United States responded very aggressively to incipient declines in activity and inflation that resulted from the emerging problems. My message this morning, however, is that this is not a time for complacency. Financial-market innovations, some of which have not yet been rigorously stress tested, along with a macroeconomic environment that, while most likely stable and constructive, contains significant uncertainty, suggest that vigilance and adaptation by both market participants and regulators will be necessary to improve the odds of sustaining this era of damped economic cycles and supporting the orderly evolution of financial markets. The macroeconomic environment Changes in financial intermediation and markets may have helped contain the transmission of shocks from the financial sector to the real economy, but the evolution of financial markets in turn probably has been facilitated by favorable economic conditions. Business cycles have been damped since the early 1980s, and inflation has been low and steady in the United States and many other industrial economies for some time. As I just noted, this pattern has persisted through the past few years despite several major shocks, from the bursting of the tech stock bubble through the terrorist attacks. Stable economic environments encourage innovation; indeed fostering a stable economic environment is an important way in which central banks can contribute to public welfare. I do not anticipate any break in the pattern of generally favorable economic performance over coming years. Most economic forecasts are for moderate growth and low inflation in the United States for the foreseeable future. To be sure, we see a range of views about just how much underlying strength the economy has, about the intensity of any inflation pressures, and about the path of interest rates that will be associated with continued growth and low inflation. But for the most part, that range is narrow relative to the actual fluctuations the U.S. economy experienced in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. The fundamentals, such as growth and inflation expectations and underlying financial conditions, appear to support continued good economic outcomes. Moreover, the flexibility and resilience of markets for finance and for goods and services, together with monetary policy focused on maintaining price stability and high employment, should help damp the economic fallout from unexpected developments.  However, although the most likely outcome for the overall economy is good, a number of characteristics of the current situation suggest some greater-than-usual risks around that central tendency, and, in particular, raise questions about the pattern of asset price movements that might accompany even favorable overall economic performance. That caution flows from the existence of some unusual imbalances in the U.S. economy today. We are buying far more than we produce, and the extra purchases come from importing more than we export, financed by net borrowing from abroad. The resulting current account deficit has risen to a record level, in excess of 6 percent of gross domestic product. The counterpart of the current account deficit is low savings generated here at home; in the past year, household saving out of current income fell to the unusually low level of about 1 percent. Several factors have contributed to the willingness of households to spend most of their income, but an important one has been the rapid and continuing rise in housing prices, which has boosted household net worth. That rise in turn probably reflects several influences, one of which has been low long-term interest rates. These imbalances and unusual asset price configurations have persisted for some time. The current account deficit has grown steadily since the mid-1990s; household saving rates have been on a 2 BIS Review 46/2005 
downward trajectory for even longer; the low level of long-term interest rates and the rapid pace of house price increases have been the subject of much commentary for the past few years. These phenomena could well continue for some time longer, but they are not sustainable indefinitely. At some point, global investors will require higher expected rates of return as their portfolios become increasingly concentrated in dollar assets; house price increases will encounter resistance as they rise relative to income and rents; as housing prices level out, households will recognize that they must increase saving out of income to have adequate resources for retirement; and the Federal Reserve already has been raising short-term interest rates as demand recovers from the shocks of recent years. I expect that the adjustment to more-sustainable patterns of spending and production and saving will occur in an orderly manner. The response of asset markets to changing attitudes and appetites will induce gradual adjustments in spending. But as you think about your risk-management challenges over coming years, you need to keep in mind that our economy is in unexplored territory in many respects. Historic patterns of movements in interest rates, exchange rates, and house prices may not be very good guides to future relationships. Who would have anticipated that the dollar would strengthen in 2001 as the Federal Reserve eased aggressively or that long-term interest rates would fall as we gradually reduced monetary accommodation over the past year? Even orderly adjustments may involve new combinations of market developments. And the risk of rapid adjustments and unusual configurations of asset price movements is higher than normal.  Implications for risk management Financial institutions and public policymakers have demonstrated an ability to respond flexibly to changing circumstances over the past several years. But what does this imply about their ability to adapt to the conditions that they may confront in the future? Financial institutions One of the defining characteristics of financial institutions and markets of late has been a significant expansion in the tools available for managing risk. These tools are tested and refined over time. Importantly, however, they rest on past experience and our understanding of events. Thus, as firms look ahead, they must be cognizant of the challenges that activities or events outside our experience pose for their risk management. New products and new business lines, for example, are an ongoing challenge. Historical data may be limited or not relevant for assessing risk in newly created products. Such data limitations affect even standard risk-management tools such as value-at-risk analysis. Recognizing the need to supplement standard risk-management tools, managers also routinely estimate their exposures under so-called tail events. Tail events, that is, asset price movements that are much more extreme than our usual experience, often appear driven by unique and idiosyncratic circumstances, so their implications are open to question and a challenge to risk managers. Should they be viewed as temporary deviations from a still-valid view of the usual distributions of possible outcomes, or are they a harbinger of a more permanent shift that suggests a need for re-assessment of risk-management models and practices?  Tail events, by their nature, also are likely to be accompanied by heightened uncertainties. During such periods, the reaction of other market participants may become more relevant in the assessment of one’s own risk. Consider the management of market liquidity risk when asset prices are moving in unusual ways. A firm can no longer assume that it will be able to reduce its risk quickly by adjusting positions. Trades may be possible mostly at smaller volumes, and large trades almost surely will have greater price effects than normally observed. Other firms also may be trying to liquidate the same positions, creating further demands on diminished market liquidity. Risk management must take into account the potential for the longer holding periods and more-severe asset price movements likely to be observed in such conditions and the possibility of concentrations of positions in some markets. The challenges posed by tail events are not limited to market liquidity risk. They have broader effects on the measurement and management of market and counterparty credit risk, too. Managers of market risk typically mark positions to market and compute the value of positions under different assumptions about future price changes. During a tail event, wider bid-offer spreads are expected, reducing the accuracy of valuations of existing positions. More importantly, however, the dynamics of prices during tail events for individual assets and for assets in relation to each other likely are different BIS Review 46/2005 3 
from those observed in normal market conditions. This phenomenon raises questions about typical assessments of the likelihood of future changes in values.  Managers of counterparty credit risk face still more challenges when considering tail events. Counterparties may be downgraded in ordinary times, and firms are familiar with the management of this risk. But when contemplating more-unusual movements of asset prices, a firm must also consider the degree of correlation between default probabilities and exposures at default as well as the possibility of multiple, correlated downgrades. The financial landscape of the future will require institutions to continue to refine their risk-management techniques to better manage these and other challenges posed by tail events. As I noted earlier, we are in uncharted territory with respect to many aspects of our macroeconomic environment. Prudent risk managers recognize the potential for tail events and prepare for that possibility. Such preparations involve stress testing, that is, simulating the portfolio’s behavior during extreme yet plausible events to determine if losses are acceptable in those conditions. It is sometimes hard to know what types of events to use in this testing, and the choice of events will, of course, be a function of the underlying portfolio. That said, the current imbalances, along with the unusual asset price movements of recent years and the investor behavior and expectations they reflect, offer clues to some of the extreme but plausible events that management should be considering. Prudent risk management does not stop with stress testing, however. To be meaningful, the results of stress testing should be part of management’s ongoing planning for future contingencies. Policymakers Public policymakers are partners of the private sector in this process to strengthen risk management, and by extension, to strengthen the financial system. A critical role of the policymaker, of course, is to ensure that the plumbing, or infrastructure, of markets is sound. Traded instruments afford the opportunity to assume (or hedge) a growing variety of exposures and are used by a growing variety of investors. In such an environment, it is critically important that the mechanisms for settling trades do not introduce unwarranted risk into the system. The public sector has been active in developing risk-management standards for securities settlement systems. This has been a joint effort of central banks and securities regulators, and it has included representatives of countries with developing financial markets in addition to Group of Ten countries. As cross-border investing has grown, the argument for common minimum standards has become compelling. But standards without implementation are worthless. Critical components of securities settlement systems in many jurisdictions, including the United States, are governed by private-sector users. Realization of the benefit of full implementation of these standards requires a partnership with the private sector. The supervisory process, too, has shifted toward a greater focus on risk management. A key goal of Basel II is to better align regulatory capital requirements with risk. In the process, firms have been given greater incentives to invest in more-sophisticated risk-management systems. The Federal Reserve and other supervisors of financial institutions have embraced a more risk-focused approach in the way they deploy their own resources. Perhaps the most important contribution of the Federal Reserve arises in its conduct of monetary policy. Our responsibility is to work to maintain a stable price level and economic environment. Your problems would be compounded many times over by a surge in inflation and economic instability. In our risk-management approach to monetary policy, we attempt to reduce the odds that our nation will experience damaging macroeconomic tail events. But our capabilities are limited; ultimately, we are working with only the overnight interest rate and we concentrate on the price level more generally, which may not always be compatible with the stability of the prices of particular assets. And, like you, we cannot reliably anticipate what will occur. All the more reason for both private parties and regulators to pay particular attention to possible sources of risk and stress over coming years. 4 BIS Review 46/2005 
V Leeladhar: Value-based professionals - the need of the hour Valedictory address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Western India Regional Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Mumbai, 10 June 2005. *      *      * It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) has been a critical player in the Indian endeavour to develop professionals to protect the interests of the stake holders, to ensure corporate governance and contribute to public good - a topic which is intrinsically linked to the theme of today, viz. value based professionals and the broader theme of corporate governance. These are difficult issues and given today’s audience, we here deal with broad generic issues rather than particulars. In the more innocent days of my youth, perhaps, the term value based professional would have been a tautology. It was then taken for granted that professionals possessed values. The word profession evoked fields that require extensive study and mastery of specialized knowledge, such as law, medicine, engineering, accounting, etc. This contrasted sharply with the more humble term occupation, which referred merely to the nature of a person’s employment. To conduct oneself as a professional - exhibiting “professional behavior” - indicated that the person’s actions remained in accordance with specific rules, written or unwritten, pertaining to the standards of a profession. Indeed, early sociological definitions of professionalism, in particular, involved checklists of perceived or claimed characteristics, which apart from esoteric knowledge or special skills, invariably included ethical behaviour. It also entailed the recognition of a social obligation to apply one’s skill and wisdom for the general benefit or what is termed ‘public good’. One practiced a profession. It was in this context that the word mal-practice evolved. It was taken as the failure to provide professional services with the skill or ethics usually exhibited by responsible and careful members of the profession, resulting in injury, loss, or damage to the party contracting those services. It was with professions such as medics, accountants, lawyers, that mal-practice was associated and one could be charged for the same. While George Bernard Shaw characterized all professions as “conspiracies against the laity”, professionals, nonetheless, were generally deemed to be a group of people who shared not only common knowledge and skills built upon a formalized framework of learning, but also a common and articulate set of values and ethics. It is thus that competence and ethics formed the bedrock of the professional. One did not exhort values in professionals - a professional without values was no professional at all. Today, the world has changed. We no longer live in simple times. The cries for values and ethics in business today - the value based professional - stem essentially from a crisis of confidence. Whether in medicine or in finance, confidence is the linchpin of the professional - confidence in his competence to perform and confidence in his integrity. Till recently, competence was sought to be enforced through jealously guarded barriers to entry. Self regulation by the fraternity laid out codes of ethics and codes of conduct. These codes and standards have evolved over the years influenced, to no small degree, by crises that affect the profession from time to time. The latest round of the crisis of confidence in the corporate sphere has been catalysed by the unexpected corporate failures of the 1980s, the 1990s and indeed the high profile collapses of new millennium. This perhaps added a new dimension in the discourse related to confidence, and this relates to confidence in the integrity of the system as a whole to subserve the needs of the market system, the stake holders and indeed society to provide reliable financial data and information on the ‘full and fair’ picture of a company’s accounts and the changes therein. Post mortem reports of accounts and of administrative lapses of failed companies given by liquidators / regulators / inspectors give us an insight into accounting as well as regulatory lapses and provide a stark contrast between the ‘true and fair’ picture of the organisation at various points of time in its life and what it was reported to be. Often times it has been perceived that practices such as balance date adjustments, deferring expenses, advancing revenue recognition and judicious or indeed creative use of complex business group structures, while conforming to the letter were sometimes intended to obfuscate and subvert the spirit of compliance. The general perception is that accounting statements have failed to inform of the drift of financial affairs of the company towards impending failure. This has catalysed debate on issues like accounting standards BIS Review 45/2005 1 
as well as issues of auditor independence on the one hand and the issues of integrity and personal deviance, on the other. The causal roots of the recent corporate “misdemeanors” are debatable. At one level, they were attributed to a swashbuckling ethos and corporate culture initially spawned and made fashionable by the investment bankers of the 1980s - an era that has oft been alluded to as the ‘decade of greed’. This set in motion a period when dramatic financial success received acclaim, flamboyant star operators were viewed as folk heroes and cautionary words from regulators were viewed with distaste. At another level, they are attributable to the changed business environment of relentless competition in which firms operate. This competition has brought with it pressures on corporate managements to consistently sustain and enhance their financial performance and demonstrably enhance shareholder value. The pressures on management, have in the recent past, also spilled over to auditors and how they conduct their business. These pressures have also brought into focus concepts of earnings management - the quality of earnings and how methods of earnings management may lead to or even constitute fraud. The accounting, regulatory and ethical failures subsuming the system, the cultural ethos and individual deviance have squarely resituated professional values and ethics and the broader governance issues onto the centre stage of boardroom concerns. The general dismay was, in fact, not with insolvencies per se but with unexpected collapses where the financial statements, regulatory warnings did not presage what was to come. The un-serviceability of accounts to give a true and fair picture of what lay in store, the inaction of regulators to gauge the pulse of the forthcoming events and the ethical failures of the organisational culture or of individuals that perpetuated acts of commission or omission painted a picture of a systems failure that often got blurred with the media focus on personalities and on deviant behaviour. This in turn has brought back into focus the quest for codes and standards as well as the issue of values and ethics in business. While the quest for codes and standards, in generic terms is, in some ways, never ending, the endeavour in accounting and finance, nonetheless, is geared to improve the reliability of financial statements. This makes them more credible and increase shareholders’ confidence. Confidence in financial statements reduces the cost of capital and makes the markets more efficient. Thus, in a market economy, quality accounts, audits and the integrity of professionals create an enabling environment for economic efficiency and corporate growth. Historically, the importance of published accounts was brought into focus by the UK’s Companies Act of 1844. This, over time, gave rise to the quest for standards, codes and quality in accounting in market based economies has been to shore up investor confidence by setting strong and binding accounting and auditing standards. It was thus that financial audits were preformed by auditors who were independent of the entities whose financial statements they audited. The purpose was to reduce incentives for conflict of interest which would compromise professional judgement. The early attempts in modern times to build binding standards date back to the early 1930s in the run up to the period when the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was established in the US in 1934. It is interesting to recall some of the issues that arose in the 1930s which are redolent of the debates of today. One was whether audits should be performed by private firms or government auditors and another was whether the rules for the auditing profession would be set by auditors themselves or by outsiders. The first issue of government auditors vs. private firms was resolved 1933 in favour of private firms. The second issue of whether auditing standards and rules should be set by those who laboured in the trenches, viz., the auditors themselves or by outsiders who were essentially the users of the accounting services was more contentious and was settled in the late 1930s - in 1939 to be specific. The issue was resolved narrowly, and not without considerable lobbying, in a 3-2 vote in favour of the auditors themselves setting their own accounting and auditing standards, i.e., regulating themselves, thus formalising the regime of self regulation. This debate has come a full circle today, when the consensus has once again veered in favour of “outsiders” having a prominent, if not dominant, say in the setting of accounting standards in the quest for accounting quality. The recent events - high profile misstated earnings and frauds - have in no small measure helped catalyse this development. The underlying purpose of the endeavour for quality has been to restore the confidence of the stakeholders, the regulators and the society at large in the quality of the attest functions performed by accountants and the integrity of the professional. It is in the context of this background, perhaps, that almost half the members of the Peer Review Board of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India set up in 2002, are drawn from industry, banking, academics, etc. In the international arena, the dominance of outsiders is even more pronounced - the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 in the US envisages that of the 5 members of the Accounting Board only two members can be Certified Public Accountants. In some ways this reflects a movement to resituate the 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
needs of the consumer of accounting services over the compulsions and convenience of the provider of these services. At a fundamental level, this marks a substantial change that has been brought about in the recent times in the governance of the auditing profession. In fact, the move in the 1980s towards ethical behaviour got gradually subsumed under the expanded notion of corporate governance, renewed discussions on which emanated from the Cadbury Report of 1992. Over time, the voluntary nature of self regulation and corporate governance has metamorphosed into an overlay of additional layer of rules and compliances such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Essentially, this is premised on two pillars : (a) the mechanism by which Corporations are directed and controlled; and (b) the mechanism by which those who direct and control a corporation are supervised. In matters relating to Corporate Governance, Secretarial Practices play a critical role. In India Secretarial practices have evolved over a period of time in differing business environments and have had different usages. The need to harmonise and consolidate the diverse Secretarial Practices in use in India, has given rise to the quest for standards and codes in this area too. Towards this end, the Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI) has constituted a Secretarial Standards Board (SSB) with the objective to formulate secretarial standards based on applicable laws, business environment and best secretarial practices. The Establishment of this Board represents a significant step towards harmonization, integration and standardisation of diverse Secretarial Practices prevalent in the corporate sector. These standards lay down the principles’ which companies are expected to adopt and adhere to in discharging their corporate responsibility. It is heartening to note that this has been a collaborative endeavour with consultations across the sector. It is thus that the SSB comprises eminent members of the profession and is represented by the regulatory authorities such as the Department of Company Affairs, the Securities and Exchange Board of India and your institute’s sister professional bodies such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India. We trust that the Guidance Notes developed by SSB and the clarifications given by it on issues arising out of the standards will contribute to better corporate governance. We as regulators at the Reserve Bank, too, have sought to catalyse conditions for good corporate governance. We have been at pains to emphasise that compliance with regulatory requirements is the minimum requirement of good corporate governance and what are required are internal, peer and market pressures to reach higher than minimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies. A critical element of our endeavors has been the transparency aspect that is emphasized by expanding the coverage of information and timeliness of such information and analytical content. Importantly, especially in the post-reforms phase, the central bank has reiterated several times over that deregulation and operational freedom must go hand in hand with operational transparency. This also brings us to the moot question: What does it take to be a value based professional? This is a difficult question. There are, perhaps, qualities that individuals need to possess to make ethical decisions. First, recognising ethical issues and reasoning through ethical consequences of decisions. Second, the ability to look at alternate points of view and deciding what is right or appropriate in a particular set of circumstances. Third, the ability to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty and making a choice on the best information available. The pace of technical change, scientific innovation, and cultural interchange in the global world of today, increasingly confronts us with situations of conflicts and unanticipated ethical challenges where we are forced to make decisions we are not prepared to make but cannot avoid. Often times, the existing moral knowledge and ethical guidelines prove inadequate or simply do not provide answers to modern moral problems. Worse, the pace of change is such that similar situations cannot be replicated in stable and recurrent conditions and it is therefore very difficult to look to or construct ethical guidelines for a fast changing present. What individual professionals, groups and organizations need to do in such situations is to acquire skills and methods that give them the ethical competence and confidence to handle ethical issues that may arise in everyday professional life. Essentially what we need to know is how to apply our personal or organizational principles to concrete moral problems. Moreover, there can be a disconnect between individual and organizational values which leads to internal conflict and dilemmas. Worse, there can be a disconnect between the stated and prevailing values in an organization. We all have, at some point or the other, faced conflicts between loyalty and integrity. We are confronted with issues of dissent and how to deal with dissent. Emerging commercial structures such as outsourcing bring with it their issues of enjoining the agent to profess the values of the principal they represent. Besides, a corporate reality check indicates that we have to BIS Review 45/2005 3 
increasingly live with issues which range from black and white areas such as false and misleading claims, fraud and manipulation, etc. to more grey issues such as concealment of information, conflicts of interest, coercion, vulnerabilities, principal-agent problems and fiduciary duties. Ethical dilemmas for individuals arise not from issues of corporate misconduct such as whether a particular practice is unfair, questionable, misleading or intended to deceive. It arises from one’s own personal beliefs, moral values and commitment to right action. They are in short challenges to one’s integrity. It arises from questionable behaviour in others or being pressured to indulge in questionable behaviour ones’ self by just getting a job done. It can be fostered by the demands of the times or organisational pressures in the form of explicit instructions to do things that may be considered sleazy. It need not necessarily arise because the organization or superiors are corrupt but could grow out of the intense pressure to get a job done or, for that matter, from an organizational culture or a leadership that fosters an environment in which unethical behaviour takes place. What is needed is a psychological approach to ethical competence where one can anticipate moral problems, recognize them and address them squarely with confidence. In resolving ethical dilemmas that professionals may be confronted with, communication plays an important role to explain first to one’s own self and then to others convincingly the basis of the decision taken and why that was the best in the circumstances. At an organizational level, it needs all the leadership qualities, communication skills and sensitivity to inculcate a culture that raises the level of ethical awareness and carries the organization and the group along with credibility and confidence. And confidence is what the quest for the value based professional is all about. It is thus not in codes and standards alone that a culture of the value based professional may be moulded. Nor in processes and compliance. While these are important, there are views that we need to cautiously work out the fine balance between processes and outcomes. In today’s politically correct world of form, there are therefore increasingly cries for substance - indeed, one school of thought, in the accounting profession itself, feels that obsession with compliance begets a creativity that subverts. This brings the word dialectics, more associated with bohemia, revolution and the intellectual, squarely into the lexicon of the staid accountant and regulator. Value based professionals is not just about compliance alone, but living up to the spirit of compliance. These are difficult issues indeed, and we have more questions than answers. Today I sign off with a call for more innocent times and leave you with a chiasmus (where meaning is reversed as in a mirror image): I trust that value based professionals value the profession they profess and value the values they profess to value. I leave it to you to pause and ponder. 4 BIS Review 45/2005 
Stanley Fischer: The relationship between economic growth and science and technology Remarks by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Rehovot Conference for Science and Technology, Rehovot, 9 June 2005. *      *      * Esteemed Minister of Finance, Mayor of Rehovot, President of the Weizmann Institute, President of the Israel Academy of Sciences and the Humanities, Director General of the Ministry of Science and Technology, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen: It is a great pleasure for me to be here today, especially since this important event, the first Rehovot Conference for Science and Technology, is being held at this eminent and illustrious institution, the Weizmann Institute. When the organizers of the conference asked me for a topic on which I would lecture today, I decided to speak about the topic of “Is Economics a Science?” Later on, I realized that the Academy of Science and the Humanities had already made a decision about this matter when it chose my friend, Professor Menahem Yaari, to be its president. I concur with the Academy, of course: economics is indeed a science! Therefore, I will speak today not about the theme that appears in the conference program but rather about several results of economic research on the relationship between economic growth and science and technology. In this matter, it is natural to begin with work performed by the Nobel Prize laureate, Professor Robert Solow, almost fifty years ago. It is possible to write a production function showing that the level of production is the result of levels of use of factor inputs - especially of labor and capital - and of the level of technology. Solow asks, “What did greater use of labor and capital contribute to growth in the United States in the 1909-1949 period, and how much did technological progress contribute to growth during that time?” His famous answer was that more than 80 percent of growth during that period traces to the technological changes in the economy during those years. Solow’s answer was robust enough to have withstood many tests since then. In Solow’s work, the level of technology is an exogenous factor, meaning that it is determined outside the economy. In the 1960s, economists began to investigate the origins of the technological level, but in the 1970s, when immense macroeconomic problems began to crop up in almost every corner of the world, we economists turned our attention to problems other than growth. Since the 1980s, economic research has made a focused and intensive attempt to include the factors that affect the increase in productivity, within the framework of economic models, in what is known as “the new theory of economic growth.” The results of this new theory of economic growth are spelled out at length in an excellent book that my friend, Professor Elhanan Helpman, published in 2004 under the title The Mystery of Economic Growth. Allow me to present several of the main findings in capsule form: 1. International comparison shows that the main result of Solow’s work is correct. There is evidence that the differences in total productivity among countries - differences that originate in different levels of technology - explain more than 60 percent of the differences among these countries in per-worker income and growth rates. 2. Although growth has its ups and downs in the course of the economic cycle, the average growth rate of the global economy has been accelerating over time. By inference, the rate of increase in technological level in global economies has also been accelerating over time. 3. Education plays an important role in explaining the differences in growth rates and per-worker income from country to country and over time. 4. One important result: society earns a much higher return on an investment in research and development than the investor earns.  Allow me to insert a parenthetical remark. There is a substantial difference between the marginal improvement of existing technologies and the development of new technologies that can serve many purposes - what we call multipurpose technologies. These are general-BIS Review 45/2005 1 
purpose technologies - such as mechanization, electrification, and computerization - from which other technologies derive many uses. The contribution of these technologies to productivity is large and long-lasting. However, it can take many years for an economy to assimilate multipurpose technologies. Furthermore, at the beginning of the process the rate of productivity growth in a given economy may even decline as the new technology crowds out antiquated technologies. Fifteen years ago, this led Robert Solow to postulate that the computer revolution is taking place in every part of the economy except for the productivity data. This situation, however, began to change in the middle of the 1990s. 5. Economists emphasize the importance of the openness of an economy for its growth rate. There is no economy in the world, in the modern era, that has managed to grow rapidly over a lengthy period without increasing its exports and its imports steeply. And on the technology side, countries have become interdependent due to the crossing of knowledge among them. It has been found the more a country’s trading partners invest in research and development, the more the country’s total productivity will increase. It is encouraging to see how greatly less-developed countries are benefiting from the R&D investments of the industrialized countries. These results, however, have a negative side: the investment in technological innovations may widen the gap between rich countries and poor ones. How can this outcome be prevented? Only by making a focused effort to rise to, and stay at, the forefront of global technology. And how can this be accomplished? By investing in education and by providing support for general and applied science-including research and development. This, however, is a complicated thing. Almost everywhere in the world, direct government intervention in R&D is regarded as a failure. There are two exceptions - Finland and Israel. The Office of the Chief Scientist in our country has been a success - even though it is necessary to continue investigating the factors that are responsible for our success and to draw inferences for possible changes in the future. Let me sum up this part of my remarks: 1. Increasing productivity is crucial for sustainable economic growth. 2. Being at the forefront of knowledge and of technological innovation is crucial for economic growth. 3. Countries that wish to stay at these forefronts must make sure that their pool of technological knowledge expands steadily. 4. Evidence from around the world speaks clearly about the importance for Israel of enhancing human capital in education and technological infrastructure, so that we stay at the forefronts of knowledge and technological innovation. These will lead to increases in productivity and per-capita growth. To bring this about, it is important to establish a correct set of incentives and a correct institutional structure. It is important to develop a set of incentives that will promote education, with emphasis on technological education, for the entire population. Concurrently, it is important to create various forms of incentives for processes that promote innovation and invention. 5. If I may, I would also like to address the relationships between growth and inequality and between inequality and poverty. The first result in regard to the relationship between growth and inequality is called the Kuznets curve. The data in Kuznets’ possession led him to believe that inequality rises at the beginning of the growth process and afterwards starts to fall. However, the data available back then were very scanty. It is now clear that there is no simple relationship between growth and inequality. The reason for this is simple: a. Inequality may be influenced by means of economic policy, including the education system. b. The relationship also depends on the origins of the growth, for example, the kind of technological progress on which the growth is based. As for the difference between reducing inequality and reducing poverty, we have to realize that poverty may decline even as inequality rises. This is happening, for example, in China. There may be a short-term substitution relationship between reducing poverty and reducing inequality. If such a relationship exists, then society has to decide where it wishes to be in the short term. I conclude by quoting remarks that my late friend, Professor Yoram Ben-Porath, wrote in 1986 in a book titled The Israeli Economy: Maturing Through Crisis: “The potential is there. Israel has a reservoir 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
of human capital and a scientific infrastructure that can be used to increase productivity and expand exports. Its national determination, used to achieve political independence and self-defense, could also be harnessed to achieve economic independence. Thus, economic maturity may still prove to be a starting point for a new phase of sustained growth”. In fact, we are already on the right path. If we stay on it, we will be able to attain our potential fully and to take up a position alongside the most developed countries in the world. BIS Review 45/2005 3 
Jaime Caruana: Overview of the Spanish economy in 2004 Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, to the Governing Council of the Bank of Spain on the occasion of the presentation of the Annual Report 2004, Madrid, 10 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, The performance of the world economy in 2004 was exceptional: growth exceeded 5%, the highest rate for the last quarter of a century; inflation remained under control, with the exception of slight rises in some emerging countries; and the climate on international financial markets was relatively relaxed, allowing generous financing conditions in most countries. No headway was made, however, in correcting the world economy’s main disequilibria, which tended to worsen. Adding to these imbalances was the shock of higher oil prices, which look more permanent than in previous episodes. There are thus persistent risks and vulnerabilities which, if not corrected, might endanger the continuity of growth. Underpinning the buoyancy of the world economy was, above all, the contribution of US and, to a greater extent, Chinese demand, along with that from other emerging Asian economies. There was also a marked rise in activity in other emerging regions, such as Latin America and the central and eastern European countries. Conversely, the economic performance in the euro area and Japan was disappointing, with rates of expansion running below initial forecasts. That would appear to confirm the scant flexibility of these economies and their limited responsiveness to changing conditions on world markets. Recent growth patterns have also led to widening divergence between the growth rates of the three main developed areas, as the high rate of expansion of the US economy increased and that of Europe and Japan declined or rose less than expected. This bore unfavourably on the global disequilibria, as manifest in the widening US current-account deficit, the counterpoint to which was the rising surplus in Japan, China and other Asian economies, as well as in the oil-exporting countries, while the slight surplus in the euro area increased very moderately. The prolonged deterioration of the US external balance - linked to a very expansionary fiscal policy that has compounded the effects of scant private-sector saving in recent years - engendered expectations of a depreciation of the dollar on international foreign exchange markets, which materialised only partially and asymmetrically. Consequently, while the dollar depreciated significantly against the euro until late 2004, it held very stable against the Asian currencies with which most of the US external imbalance has been built up. The effective depreciation of the dollar was thus only 5% in 2004. The dollar’s fall in the period 2002-04 has not prompted a turnaround in the progressive widening of the US external deficit, either because, as is well known, depreciations tend only to correct current-account deficits with a lag, or because of the aforementioned asymmetry in the behaviour of the dollar against the main currencies and the fact that it has scarcely depreciated against the currencies of the countries that are running the counterpart surpluses. In turn, in a situation of large current-account surpluses and strong capital inflows, the Asian countries with de jure or de facto fixed exchange rates against the dollar continued to build up sizable international reserves. The need of the Asian central banks to place these reserves also partly explains another salient feature of economic developments in 2004: the maintenance of long-term interest rates at abnormally low levels. This is also largely attributable to the persistence of low inflation expectations, set against highly credible counter-inflationary monetary policies, and to the conditions of ample liquidity in which international financial markets operated. For much of the year, European bond yields were markedly synchronous with their US counterparts, despite the different position of the fundamentals of the two economies. From November, however, European rates declined, moving progressively away from US rates so that the yield spread between these areas widened considerably. This more recent development is consistent with the uncertainty over economic recovery in the euro area and the brighter outlook for the US economy. But perhaps the most salient international economic development in 2004 was the persistent rise in oil prices. At the root of this, above all, is the force of demand from the United States and China, in a BIS Review 45/2005 1 
situation marked by production and refining capacity bottlenecks, arising from limited investment in the past. Compared with other recent periods of oil price rises, such as the peaks in 1990 and 2000 linked to geopolitical tensions, the increase in prices on this occasion fed through to a much greater extent to long-term futures contracts, suggesting the markets are expecting oil prices to hold at high levels. Despite this, and on the indicators available, dearer energy scarcely affected inflation expectations, meaning the so-called second-round effects - linked to the reaction by wages - were avoided. On past experience, it is these latter affects which are most damaging. So far, the effects of higher oil prices have been surprisingly mild. But economic policies should remain vigilant in the face of a potential pass-through to inflation expectations, all the more so when there are other risks and vulnerabilities in the world economy which, in some respects, have not only not diminished but have tended to increase. Of note, here, is the necessary re-establishment of a more normal macroeconomic stance (the main countries’ policies have been adding abnormally expansionary momentum in the world economy in recent years), and the potential impact on financial markets. As regards monetary policies, the countries most ahead in the business cycle have already begun to adjust their interest rates to a level more consistent with a neutral stance, and foreseeably those further behind in the cycle will progressively pursue this trend as their economies gather steam. Turning to fiscal policies, it is telling that these should have deteriorated both in areas with more moderate growth rates, such as Japan and certain euro area countries, where it has been sought to use fiscal policy for counter-cyclical purposes, and in other particularly dynamic economies, such as the United States, where buoyant demand should have allowed more ambitious fiscal consolidation goals. The exceptions to this pattern of deteriorating budget positions are in certain emerging economies, where public debt is relatively high. This is the case of the Latin-American countries, which have harnessed the favourable economic situation to improve their primary surpluses. The importance of furthering fiscal consolidation in the medium term in the more developed economies becomes even clearer if the long-term problems linked to population ageing are taken into account, while the emerging economies, with high debt levels, need to persevere with budgetary discipline. Restoring a more normal monetary and fiscal policy stance requires care, to ensure that the world economy is not dislodged from a low-inflation path of recovery. It is particularly important to limit the potential shock to international financial markets, which have been operating in very favourable conditions marked by high liquidity, low risk premiums and an interest-rate term structure that has been propitious to long-term borrowing. In this respect, monetary measures to safeguard price stability must be accompanied by an appropriate communication policy and consistency in the application of fiscal rules and commitments, if the authorities are to avoid a sharp change in conditions on financial markets, which might induce exaggerated reactions. In particular, although long-term interest rates should no doubt resume a level more in keeping with past experience and with the current cyclical phase, this process should be orderly and without excessive propagation towards credit risk premiums on the corporate-debt and emerging sovereign-debt markets, or on foreign-exchange markets. Another source of vulnerability of the international economy lies, as discussed, in the global disequilibria. Broad international consensus has it that the correction of these imbalances requires an increase in public and private saving in the United States, structural reforms to invigorate the euro area economies and Japan, and greater flexibility in Asian exchange rates, especially in China. These policies would gradually correct the present current-account mismatches and would have to be accompanied by exchange-rate movements tending to bring positions closer to long-term equilibrium levels. The correction of these current-account imbalances would also ideally re-establish a more natural direction of capital flows between developed and emerging countries. Compared with the anomalous situation at present, in which these flows are from the latter countries to the former ones, owing to the combined impact of the absorption exerted by the US economy and the exchange-rate policies in Asia, a smoother working of the world economy should channel surplus saving from the more mature economies to those where the return on capital is higher, as they are at a more incipient phase of development. It should be recalled that many of the achievements of the world economy in recent years, such as moving on to a high, inflation-free growth path and infusing the emerging areas with greater dynamism so as to allow them to achieve standards of living closer to those of the richer countries, are a direct or 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
indirect consequence of growing worldwide integration. Globalisation has thus given most countries more fluid access to foreign markets while offering them incentives to concentrate on those industries in which their comparative advantage lies, and it has provided consumers with a wider range of products at more favourable prices. But it should not be forgotten that the rigidity of certain countries’ exchange-rate policies has ultimately triggered protectionist threats in others that see themselves as adversely affected. It is thus vital not to succumb to these protectionist temptations and to persevere with the liberalisation of international trade so that the trends which have allowed the world economy to achieve its recent favourable results may become entrenched. The euro area The prolonged sluggishness of the euro area economy continues, with output growth of below 2% for the fourth year running. In the first half of 2004 a more dynamic trajectory was discernible, in line with the greater robustness of the world economy, presaging the onset of a firmer expansionary phase. Activity has since weakened notably, however, and the first half of the current year has seen no improvement. Nonetheless, the conditions remain in place to allow the rate of expansion of GDP to increase gradually in the coming quarters, spurred by the continuation of relatively expansionary financial conditions and by the momentum of the international situation. Dearer oil and the appreciation of the euro have been holding back growth in the euro area for some time, and these factors intensified in 2004. However, it would be wrong to attribute the protracted period of low growth seen in the euro area to these factors. The euro area has in fact benefited in recent years from a relatively sharp expansion of its export markets, allowing it largely to offset the negative effects of the euro’s appreciation. Moreover, the rise in the euro, along with progress in reducing oil dependency, has softened the adverse consequences of higher oil prices. At the root of the European economy’s persistent weakness are, instead, the factors that hamper the sustained buoyancy of domestic spending and which heighten its sensitivity to external developments. The lacklustre consumption and investment of recent years are telling in this connection, and denote the presence of structural shortcomings which dampen household confidence and dent corporate profit expectations. Accordingly, questions such as the uncertainty over the viability of the public pension system currently in place or the constraints preventing higher productivity growth not only have long-term repercussions but also exert a contractionary effect on the present economic situation. These overall characteristics of the area do not apply to all the member economies. Growth rates vary considerably, largely due to the different degrees of vigour shown by internal demand. Amid these divergences, Spain is one of the countries that has consistently posted substantially higher-than-average rates of expansion. The Eurosystem monetary policy has retained an accommodative stance, with the intervention rate set in June 2003 unchanged at 2%. Although the forceful oil shock has hampered the reduction of inflation, medium-term inflation expectations have held at a rate compatible with the Eurosystem’s definition of price stability, partly as a result of sustained wage moderation. The favourable trend of labour costs is a natural corollary of the prevailing sluggishness of activity and of employment creation, but it also reflects the credibility of the anti-inflationary goal of monetary policy. The European Central Bank has been able to sustain monetary conditions propitious to the strengthening of activity although, as indicated earlier, these have so far proven insufficient to achieve a satisfactory degree of dynamism. It thus appears that the euro area has yet to harness fully the benefits arising from economic integration and the introduction of the single currency. The emergence of difficulties in furthering European economic integration has recently been discerned. Cases in point are the problems affecting the fiscal discipline framework, the delays in meeting the targets of the Lisbon Agenda and the obstacles still blocking, in certain industries, the development of the single European market. At the March 2005 European Council, the authorities attempted to correct the lack of ambition behind the structural reforms and the scant consistency of budgetary policies with the disciplinary rules set by adjusting some of the policy co-ordination mechanisms. However, only clear resolve on the part of the authorities to fulfil their commitments would dispel the scepticism some of these proposals evoke. In the fiscal policy realm, the European Council approved a reform of the Stability and Growth Pact. Among other changes, provisions were made to pay greater attention to the particular situation of each country when evaluating its budgetary position and to make the application of the corrective measures BIS Review 45/2005 3 
envisaged in the Treaty more flexible. As a result of these changes, the economic rationality of certain components of the Pact has perhaps been enhanced, though its complexity and the margin available for discretion in its application have also undoubtedly increased. There are some favourable aspects to the new rules, but they raise doubts as to the Pact’s capacity to deliver the budgetary discipline that proper functioning of the Monetary Union requires. Regardless of the fact that a full assessment of the agreement reached can only be made once the related legal texts are known, it is imperative, to dispel the uncertainty the reform process has aroused, that the European authorities should now apply the revised rules unequivocally and strictly. The European Council also revised the so-called Lisbon Agenda, with which it was hoped to reinvigorate the European economy in the first decade of the new millennium. Assessment of the results achieved at the half-way stage makes disappointing reading. The introduction of reforms has been insufficient and the European co-ordination mechanisms have proven too weak to encourage the adoption of the appropriate measures at the national level. The Council has sought to re-launch this strategy, focusing on growth and employment, and altering the co-ordination arrangements between the Council, the Member States and the Commission, so as to ease the way for the adoption and monitoring of reforms at the national level. This new direction is appropriate, although more specific measures giving a more determined political impulse to the process would have been desirable. Such determination will be needed, in particular, to overcome the obstacles hindering completion of the single market. Indeed, these were manifest in the European Council’s request that the Commission revise its draft directive on liberalising the provision of services in the Union. The challenges facing the European economy are considerable and set in an institutional context that has been disrupted by the “no” votes in the recently held French and Dutch referendums on the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty. The difficulties of entrenching growth that is sufficient and consistent with the European model and with the general public’s expectations may have influenced the disappointing results returned by these referendums. But this is something which is closely related to the difficulties at the national level in pushing through the necessary reforms and explaining them convincingly. The significance and implications of these results should not be underestimated. But they need not check European integration. Rather, they should act as a spur to further integration by means of European and national policies that respond to the demands of the public. In any event, European integration has not been a linear process in the past and I am fully confident that the European Union will be capable of overcoming these difficulties just as it always has when obstacles have stood in its way. On the plus side in the current circumstances is the fact that it has a currency shared by a large number of countries and a federally organised central bank which are a focal point of stability and exemplify Europeans’ ability to embark on and co-ordinate ambitious undertakings that contribute effectively to the collective well-being. The Spanish economy Spain, as I said earlier, has been one of the euro area economies that has continued to post high growth rates, compared with the relative slackness of the area as a whole. The new base-year 2000 National Accounts estimates for Spain, released a few weeks ago, indicate that its GDP grew in 2004 at a significantly higher rate than the previous estimate (3.1% against 2.7%), albeit with a more unbalanced composition. Moreover, the growth rate has remained on a mildly accelerating path, which has continued into 2005 Q1, when output stood at 3.3% compared with the same period in 2004. As indicated in the Annual Report, it has not yet been possible to analyse in depth the new National Accounts series, although the first comparisons with previous estimates indicate that both datasets offer a fundamentally similar diagnosis of the economy’s performance. In particular, the higher growth the new figures - available so far from 2000 - show has confirmed the continuity of the long expansionary phase in train since the mid-nineties. The expansion has been the result of the notable momentum of domestic demand combined with high employment-generating capacity and the extension of the supply side of the economy, two mutually reinforcing phenomena over these years which have provided a sound base for growth. Spanish euro area membership lay at the root of the significant expansionary impulses experienced by household and corporate expenditure. The effects of the anchoring of inflation expectations and the adjustment of interest-rate levels have recently been reinforced by the looseness of monetary and financial conditions in the euro area. Progress towards fiscal consolidation and the maintenance of 4 BIS Review 45/2005 
balanced public finances have contributed decisively to shaping an environment of stability, which has eased the financing of private expenditure and growth. On the supply side, robust population and employment figures have made for favourable conditions in which the expansionary demand impulses have translated into higher growth in activity and not into greater pressure on productive capacity leading to disequilibria. That said, and as I will remark later, this has not prevented the structural shortcomings of the economy from being manifest in upward pressures on prices and costs and in a wider current-account deficit. Job creation is being fuelled by an expanding labour force, to which the increasing inflow of immigrants and the rising labour-market participation of women are both contributing. Regarding immigration, population projections drawn from the 2001 census and the continuously updated municipal population census show an impact that could hardly have been envisaged only a few years back. In any event, strong employment generation has been accompanied by very modest productivity gains, a trend which continued in 2004 when employment increased by 2.7%, compared with 2.5% in 2003, and apparent labour productivity growth was only 0.4%. Domestic demand quickened in 2004 by almost 1 pp, growing by 4.6%. The growth rate intensified as the year unfolded, rising to a rate of 5.8% at the start of 2005. This acceleration has been driven by a higher increase in private consumption and the renewed buoyancy of construction coupled with a pick-up in investment in equipment. Households’ expenditure has been underpinned by the recovery in their disposable income, which has benefited from higher employment growth and from a comparatively favourable contribution by general government, through the net effect of benefits and taxes. But above all it is the increase in household wealth in recent years - largely linked to the rise in real-estate asset values - and favourable financing conditions which are most underpinning household consumption and residential investment decisions. The behaviour of productive investment has, in recent years, reflected the opportunities and uncertainties of this expansionary phase, many of them related to the external environment. However, business investment progressively took a lead from the robustness of demand during 2004 and it started the current year on a clearly more expansionary path. Lax financial conditions, the healthy position achieved by those corporations with most investment potential and favourable expectations about economic developments are behind this rise. Set against the increase in domestic demand, external demand has exerted an increasingly contractionary influence. Although world trade picked up in 2004, goods exports grew less than external markets, while imports climbed at very high rates, increasing their penetration in the Spanish market. Tourism is feeling the effects of competition from nearby destinations offering packages similar to those of Spain at very competitive prices. The negative contribution of external demand to GDP growth thus continued to expand over the course of 2004, without any signs of a turnaround in 2005. On the contrary, according to National Accounts data for Q1, the contractionary effect of net external demand has stepped up significantly, against a backdrop of stronger domestic demand pressures driven by high consumption and vigorous construction spending combined with a clearer take-off in investment in capital goods. Among the factors influencing this negative behaviour of net external demand, the causes and repercussions of which I shall return to later, are the persistence of inflation differentials. Indeed, the inflation differential with the euro area widened during 2004, reflecting a relatively sharper impact of dearer oil on Spanish prices. Moreover, although the growth rate of labour costs eased, it remained relatively high. As a result, the 12-month increase in consumer prices rose from 3.2% in December to 3.5% in April. It is expected to moderate in the coming months, however. Indeed, the initial estimate of the HICP for May (3.1%) suggests it already has done. At the onset of 2005 the Spanish economy was highly buoyant. This robustness continues to be based on the momentum of domestic expenditure and on high job creation. While the impact of some of the factors underpinning household spending may moderate in the coming quarters, most of the factors operating in the recent past will continue to boost domestic demand and, in particular, productive investment. Likewise, insofar as European markets recover and the effects of the euro appreciation in 2004 ease and are absorbed, the contractionary influence of external demand might be checked. Under this scenario, the outlook for the economy in the short run points to a prolongation of the expansionary phase, with sustained GDP growth rates similar to those observed in 2004. These forecasts are subject, however, to some risk. This poses significant challenges for economic policy, especially when it comes to promoting the sustainability of economic dynamism over a longer BIS Review 45/2005 5 
term, under the constraints stemming from euro area membership. There are certain external risks whose potential influence on Spain is significant, but which economic policy action can do little to counter. This is the case with the dangers arising from the weakness of the euro area, from higher oil prices and from the appreciation of the euro. What economic policy can do here is in line with what policymakers can do to counter domestic risks, these undoubtedly being the most relevant ones for policy design. Accordingly, I shall focus on analysing the nature of the latter and their possible repercussions. The domestic risk factors stem largely from the very prolongation of a long, domestic demand-led expansionary phase, and can be grouped in two major areas. First, the losses in competitiveness that have built up in the earlier described setting of inflation differentials and very low productivity gains, which might ultimately check the generation of value added and job creation. And second, the increase in household debt that has accompanied the expansion of consumption and residential investment, which might constrain households’ spending capacity, particularly if developments in the housing markets were to prompt any uncertainty about the value of this sector’s wealth, which is strongly concentrated in real-estate assets. Although both areas of risk are inter-related, I shall deal with each separately. In respect of competitiveness, there are signs that the risks signalled by the Banco de España in the past have already begun to materialise. The significant restraint on growth exerted by external demand in the past year and the considerable widening of the Spanish economy’s external deficit point in this direction. Admittedly, these results partly reflect the influence of certain external factors, such as dearer oil and the appreciation of the euro, which have dampened the positive impact of the international recovery. Moreover, the deficit is also partly influenced by the cyclical divergences between Spain and the euro area. But these factors do not suffice to explain either the scale of the deficit or the speed at which it has widened, and they should not therefore conceal the existence of a genuine deterioration relating to the losses in competitiveness built up in recent years, as I shall now seek to illustrate. But let me first address the significance and scope of an external deficit when the country concerned belongs to a monetary union, so as to qualify interpretations whereby such a deficit would have ceased to be a cause for concern. It is true that under the new circumstances there is no danger of a burgeoning external deficit generating financial or foreign-exchange pressures that then trigger a sharp adjustment in the economy, since fundamental variables such as the interest rate and the exchange rate are determined at the area-wide level. But that does not mean that the economy is immune to competitiveness problems. On the contrary, when a large external deficit emerges in a monetary union as a result of an economy’s difficulties in competing, a very costly dilemma may arise: nominal costs are either adjusted head-on, or the loss of competitiveness will check the generation of value added and job creation. A first sign of competitiveness problems is to be found in the growing difficulties Spanish products face in maintaining their market shares. Spanish export shares on foreign markets, which had held stable since the start of Monetary Union, tended to decline in 2004, even on the European market. And the fall-off in the tourist market is a similar development. Although there are specific factors that might explain some aspects of this behaviour, the strength of growing import penetration in the domestic market tends to confirm the diagnosis of diminished competitiveness of Spanish products on domestic and foreign markets alike. The concurrence of the incipient slide in export shares and the ongoing increase in import penetration primarily reflects the higher relative prices of Spanish products as a result of persistent inflation differentials and of the more recent appreciation of the euro. Testifying to this is the negative trend of the traditional price competitiveness indicators, even when these are calculated with export deflators that capture how the sector more exposed to foreign trade has narrowed margins to face growing competitive pressure. Behind the ongoing deterioration in price competitiveness lie a relative increase in unit labour costs, reflecting continuing higher wage increases in Spain despite the moderation compared with previous periods, and very low labour productivity gains. The existence of wage-setting and indexing mechanisms that set a higher floor for nominal wage growth than in other countries hinders the rapid absorption of external price shocks. And it also tends to hamper full convergence with the arrangements required in an area of macroeconomic stability. The problems posed by wage inertia are exacerbated by the lacklustre behaviour of productivity. As noted on previous occasions, this partly reflects intensive growth in employment generation, which has 6 BIS Review 45/2005 
been most beneficial for entrenching the expansionary cycle of the economy and making more efficient use of the labour supply available. But weak total factor productivity growth - the relative position of which vis-à-vis the EU has continued to worsen - denotes the presence of other more worrying factors which appear to be checking the incorporation of innovations and technical progress into productive processes. The lack of innovation in the productive system tends to stifle the economy’s overall efficiency and its long-term growth capacity. The indicators available for the stock of technological capital suggest a considerable lag remains in place. Undoubtedly, specific features of the Spanish economy’s pattern of productive specialisation - which is very biased in manufacturing towards the production of intermediate- and low-technology goods, and in services towards tourism activities - may partly explain this phenomenon. But there are also shortcomings that are restricting the business sector’s capacity to incorporate advances in knowledge and to adapt productive processes, human resources management and corporate strategies to an environment of heightened competition. Of particular importance are the persistent mismatches between the skills and training levels of labour and companies’ requirements, and, above all, the rigidities in the workings of factor and product markets, which discourage the adoption of more innovative strategies. I draw attention to these limitations of the Spanish economy at a particular juncture in which foreign direct investment is slowing considerably (FDI having been one of the main channels for the diffusion of technological advances), and in which the weight of high-technology imports remains very limited, despite the surge in import penetration. The prolongation of the current trends might mean that the industries most exposed to foreign competition have to adjust their staffing levels in order to maintain their business margins. Hence the importance of creating an environment conducive to technological innovation and to higher productivity, which I shall refer to later. The second area where risks have arisen from the extended expansionary phase of the economy is related, as earlier indicated, to the ongoing buoyancy of household spending on consumption and residential investment. This variable has been favoured by the notable generosity of financing conditions, and this has given rise to certain pressures on the financial position of Spanish households. As is known, household debt last year held on the upward course it has been following since the mid-nineties, clearly exceeding 100% of the sector’s gross disposable income. This new peak marks a departure from the average levels of the euro area and is beginning to draw closer to that of countries such as the United States. Although the low interest rates and the long average maturities of liabilities keep the financial burden within moderate limits, at end-2004 the cushion of saving available after interest and capital payments had fallen to practically zero for Spanish households as a whole. However, the effects of higher indebtedness and of this lower saving on household wealth were again more than offset by the notable surge in their real-estate wealth, which was strongly linked to the rise in house prices. As a result, the overall financial position of Spanish households remains sound. The strength of the sector’s balance sheet as a whole is likewise reflected in the microeconomic information drawn from the Spanish Survey of Household Finances recently compiled by the Banco de España. Although this survey identifies a household segment that is in a more vulnerable situation than is apparent from the overall indicators, the size of this segment is small. While the notable changes in the household balance sheet have not led to a weakening of their wealth position, there has been an increase (by various mechanisms) in this sector’s exposure to a relatively broad range of possible shocks, thereby raising the sensitivity of consumption and of residential investment to them. These shocks notably include those that may affect employment, a variable which, as mentioned above, largely determines the behaviour of household spending. Obviously, the behaviour of interest rates is also very important. However, the greatest uncertainties lie in the possible implications of developments in the real-estate market. This market is in the midst of an expansionary phase which still shows no clear signs of faltering, despite its extraordinary duration and intensity. 2004 ended with significant growth in supply which, however, was insufficient to push down a price growth rate that again topped 17% in nominal terms. The statistical changes underlying the official information for 2005 make it harder to interpret the most recent data, although they still seem to show no signs of a significant slowdown. Such high growth rates are difficult to explain entirely on the basis of recent changes in income or in interest rates, or as a response to the demographic changes under way in Spain. Consequently, the overvaluation that has BIS Review 45/2005 7 
been detectable in this market for some years continued to expand in 2004, although the size of this gap is difficult to gauge accurately. Subject to the natural caution required in view of this lack of precision, analyses by the Banco de España indicate that the current level of overvaluation is not incompatible with a gradual correction of that overvaluation, as seen in the past in both Spain and abroad. However, a central bank should consider not only the most likely scenarios but also the consequences of those which, though unlikely, might significantly affect the behaviour of the economy. Importantly in this connection, the Spanish economy has sufficient depth of stability to enable it to weather the impact on household spending of an appreciable house price correction, in the unlikely event that it should occur. The soundness of Spanish credit institutions, underpinned by high solvency levels and comfortable bad debt coverage ratios (a matter to which I will return later in the more general framework of the situation of the financial system), minimises the possibility that downward adjustments in house prices, should they occur, would significantly impair banks’ ability to continue to efficiently finance the spending decisions of firms and households. Moreover, unlike in other countries, Spanish households have not started significantly to borrow against their increased housing wealth to directly finance current consumption plans. In any event, the losses in competitiveness, household debt levels and house prices evidently entail a risk of the expansion being interrupted. The economic policies under national sovereignty thus have the important mission of preventing these risks from materialising and providing a solid foundation for growth. In particular, since monetary and financial conditions will most likely continue to be relatively generous for the needs of the Spanish economy in the foreseeable future, it will continue to be the responsibility of fiscal policy to help establish an overall macroeconomic stance that will contribute to mitigating spending pressure. However, the available instruments are limited in their effect on aggregate demand, which means that a major role must be played by microeconomic and structural reform policies that can influence the behaviour of supply and create a basis for more efficient markets and institutions and for increased productivity. In 2004 fiscal policy achieved the expected results, since the budget on general government account was almost in balance (or in modest surplus if the effect of assuming RENFE’s debt is stripped out) and the public debt/GDP ratio showed a fresh decrease. Despite this, there was a certain drift in primary current expenditure, offset yet another year by highly buoyant government revenue. From a more general standpoint, the momentum of improvements in the structural balance must not be allowed to slacken, since this would indicate a fall-off in the fiscal drive of recent years. In the circumstances described, it is highly recommendable to make a fiscal effort which goes beyond that programmed in the fiscal plans in force, for at least two reasons. First, because a more ambitious fiscal policy would strengthen its role of stabilising and containing domestic demand in the short term, counterbalancing monetary and financial conditions. Second, because firmer improvements in the structural balance would leave public finances better placed to face the increased expenditure deriving from population ageing, even in a scenario of high immigration flows. Fiscal stability and fiscal discipline are basic assets of Spanish economic policy which, however, are not always easy to manage, as shown by the vagaries of the European fiscal framework. It is thus very important that the review of the Fiscal Stability Law and of the Autonomous (Regional) Government Financing system should not lead to a weakening of fiscal discipline. In a situation in which it is necessary to make headway simultaneously in job creation and in productivity gains, the role of supply-side policies geared to improving the workings of the economy and expanding its potential growth is crucial. One of the main messages in the Annual Report presented today is precisely that it will become increasingly difficult for the Spanish economy to keep raising its levels of well-being if it does not make progress on both these fronts. Maintaining high levels of job creation is, and will continue to be, a powerful means of expanding the economy’s growth potential, but it will be impossible to sustain economic momentum in the long term if the economy does not improve its competitive position in the increasingly dynamic international setting. And to do this, it is essential to significantly improve the poor performance of productivity. Under this approach, labour market reform heads the list of transformations that are needed. A more flexible and efficient labour market is necessary to overcome the distortions that are contributing to a deterioration in competitiveness and to provide an appropriate framework so that firms will find sufficient stimulus for job creation, the introduction of new technologies, the efficient use of factors of production and the enhancement of productivity. 8 BIS Review 45/2005 
In this setting, the persistent ratio of temporary to permanent employees, which seems to have encountered a floor at levels above 30%, with the attendant negative consequences for productivity and human capital accumulation, makes it advisable to review the effectiveness of the incentives in force to hire permanent workers in recent years. This would involve redefining the measures designed to reduce non-wage costs linked to this type of employment and introducing incentives to rationalise the use of temporary employment contracts. It is also necessary to set in train a reform of collective bargaining to make the wage-setting mechanisms more flexible, so that compensation is brought into line with the specific conditions of the productive sector and of firms and with the characteristics of workers. This reform would also eliminate, or at least reduce the emphasis on, wage-indexation mechanisms. The stepping-up of investment in training, in physical capital and in technological capital in line with the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda is fundamental for boosting productivity. As mentioned, Spain has notable weaknesses in the areas of innovation and of its incorporation and diffusion in the productive system. These weaknesses make it necessary to design specific policies to address this objective and to adapt the institutional and regulatory framework so that the smooth functioning of the markets will drive the innovation and development of new activities that will focus the productive structure on sectors in which demand and value added are greater. As a result of the launch of the new Plan to achieve a dynamic economy and to foster productivity, certain measures were adopted to promote competitiveness (of a sectoral nature), which will unquestionably play a part in improving productivity. The Banco de España particularly welcomes those measures addressing the financial system. However, what is most important is that this Plan should clearly steer reform policy priorities in the right direction and maintain the momentum of reform. The commitments announced must be implemented ambitiously and complement other actions aimed at fostering improvements in human and technological capital and in the workings of markets and institutions. This is not the appropriate setting for a detailed and exhaustive review of the range of measures and reforms required by the Spanish economy. I have referred only to some of the most necessary ones, but this list would be incomplete if I did not mention steps to mitigate the potential effects of household indebtedness and of house price rises on the sustainability of growth. The measures aimed at raising the supply of housing and its accessibility will not be sufficiently effective if they do not include a reorganisation of the land market, which remains one of the main unresolved issues facing the Spanish economy. Also, a more neutral tax treatment of house ownership and further measures to foster rental could improve the working of this market. There are also implications for the behaviour of financial intermediaries and I will look at these now as I review the main recent developments in the Spanish financial system. The financial system The international financial system benefited in 2004 from the favourable trends in train since 2003 and still apparent in the early months of 2005. Very low long-term interest rates, stable interest rate spreads both in emerging countries and in the corporate sector, the performance of the main stock market indices, low levels of volatility and ample liquidity all made for a relatively easy scenario that contrasted with the difficulties experienced at the beginning of the decade. Despite this favourable environment, the financial situation is complicated by certain circumstances that cannot be ignored. First, financing activities are becoming increasingly complex in terms of both demand and management. Low interest rates have thus increased the appetite for risk and spurred the development of new financial products, such as credit derivatives, and of new intermediaries, such as hedge funds. These new possibilities mean that institutions have had to become much more sophisticated risk managers because of the singular features of these financial products and intermediaries, particularly their complexity and opacity. If we factor in the natural doubts as to the sustainability of this scenario (not so much as to whether it will continue but as to how benign it will be), it becomes evident that the satisfactory behaviour of the markets and financial intermediaries should not be allowed to lead to complacency, but should be used to strengthen the soundness of institutions as a precaution against possible changes in the favourable central scenarios. Spanish deposit institutions have not been unaffected by these developments. In fact, to the favourable factors listed above should be added, in the case of Spain, a highly favourable BIS Review 45/2005 9 
macroeconomic scenario and a growth differential with the core European countries in both output and employment. This, along with the good starting position of our institutions in terms of efficiency and competitiveness, enabled the soundness and international leadership of our financial system to be strengthened. Our institutions have thus been able to meet the demand for more and increasingly complex banking products and services, and at the same time improve their profitability. Naturally, however, the above comments on the international scenario and the need for markets and institutions to maintain their operational soundness apply likewise to Spanish institutions. Thus in 2004 Spanish credit institutions again achieved very high levels of profitability, whether measured as growth on the previous year or as ROE, which was more than 14% higher than the average reported by their international competitors. The high business volumes, which more than offset the negative effects of low interest rates on net interest income, and the tight control over operating expenses, which enabled the efficiency ratio to be further improved, are the two basic factors behind this favourable performance. Moreover, business activity has been stepped up precisely through instruments that provide institutions with collateralised assets, specifically mortgage loans, which are characterised by lower default rates. Finally, this favourable earnings performance is also a result of the diversification of income sources, with significant growth of those associated with the provision of collection, payment and non-banking product services. Solvency remains at levels comfortably above the minimum regulatory requirements, although the strong growth of business, and therefore of capital requirements, meant that the bank solvency ratio decreased slightly in 2004 with respect to 2003. In the case of Spain, this solvency was strengthened by a rigorous bad debt provisioning policy. That said, the more optimistic and favourable the central scenario, the greater the need to pay careful attention to potential fragilities. In applying this caveat to Spanish institutions, we shall focus on the three lines of defence used by institutions to protect themselves from possible difficulties: risk management, which enables ex ante minimisation of difficulties, and profitability and solvency, which make it easier to absorb risks once they materialise. As regards risks, the low levels of default unquestionably reflect not only the favourable financial and macroeconomic trends, but also improvements in the procedures for identifying, measuring and controlling those risks. The sharp increase in activity, however, poses certain questions to which some thought should be given. First, although the fastest growing instruments are secured loans, their concentration in the real-estate market, together with growing household indebtedness, should be taken into account by managers, since both factors (sectoral concentration and growing indebtedness) entail under alternative scenarios a greater risk, which should be analysed within the framework of an institution’s medium- and long-term financial strategy, taking account of its financial equilibrium conditions. Second, there is a need for the management systems used to incorporate the regular performance of stress tests under adverse scenarios, considering variations in real estate prices, changes in interest rates and other possible modifications in macroeconomic data. This analysis will be of use in regularly reviewing each institution’s strategy and will determine the advisability of establishing internal control measures and how to ameliorate the residual risk incurred. Particular attention is required by those market segments, such as the financing of real-estate development activities, which have shown higher risk in the past. In addition, collateral security must, as stipulated by the attendant regulations, be assessed as a market value calculated in a manner that is prudent and sustainable over time, i.e. it is possible that the experience of potential losses in adverse situations over the last twenty years may not be consistent with the characteristics of the current situation. This has to be taken into account by institutions in calculating the capital consumed by real-estate loans under the advanced Basel II approaches. But this need for prudent assessment is not limited to credit institutions: appraisal companies play a key role in Spain’s financial system and hence it is essential for them to operate under the clear prudential guidelines laid down in their specific regulations. The sustainability of results, their recurrence, the diversity of income sources and the ongoing search for efficiency are needed to strengthen the line of defence represented by the high profitability of Spain’s institutions. In this respect, we must not overlook the behaviour of the liabilities side of bank balance sheets. The financing of this high volume of assets has been made possible by their access to efficient financial markets after Spain joined the euro area. This enabled them to supplement their traditional deposit-based financing, which despite its strong momentum is insufficient to finance lending activities. Although gearing is part and parcel of the lending business, that growing access to 10 BIS Review 45/2005 
international financial markets entails a higher cost of financing which puts upward pressure on the average cost of borrowing and negatively affects income, which is something to be taken into account in forward-looking strategies. The last line of defence is own funds and, within these, tier 1 capital. Indeed, only ordinary shares, reserves and preferential equity holdings allow both the absorption of possible losses and the continued engagement in banking operations. This, along with its long-term presence in own funds, explains why supervisors and markets pay particular attention to this component of regulatory own funds. Regarding preferential equity holdings, their long-term nature, their preferential use in absorbing losses and their non-participation in dividend distributions have led the Banco de España to allow them to rise to 30% of tier 1 capital. In addition, the characteristics of these securities and their frequent distribution through the network have led the Banco de España to remind institutions that they should take special care when distributing such a complex product to their retail customers, given the reputational risk in which they may incur. Looking ahead, it is advisable to strengthen this policy. For example, it would be clearly desirable that, when the issues are marketed among retail customers, the pricing mechanisms should be based on the intervention of institutional investors. Further, as a means of recognising the processes of financial innovation, consideration should be given to the adoption of a more flexible treatment of the characteristics of the so-called innovative instruments in tier 1, which are basically preferential equity holdings with a step-up in remuneration after 10 years, not currently accepted as tier 1 capital by the Banco de España. This option should, in any event, be accompanied by a decrease in the weight of preferential equity holdings from the present 30% to 15%, in order to heighten the importance of the basic components of tier 1 capital, namely ordinary shares and reserves. Moving on to regulatory developments, 2004 was a particularly eventful and, to tell the truth, difficult and complex year. It saw two projects with a direct impact on credit institutions: the IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) and the New Capital Accord, or Basel II. The European Union decided that from January 2005 the consolidated accounts of groups with securities quoted on any regulated market in the EU have to be prepared using international accounting standards (IAS). Its aim in doing this was to assist the growing integration of the European single market by ensuring that investors have access to financial information with the highest possible level of homogeneity. In addition, the international financial system is strengthened, since the plurinational nature of IAS facilitates the convergence of these standards with those of the US. The Banco de España, in accordance with its competence in the accounting regulation of Spanish credit institutions, decided to undertake a project to extend the use of IAS from consolidated financial statements to the individual, regulatory and prudential ones, thereby avoiding the cost and uncertainty of diverse accounting criteria. This initiative gave rise to the new accounting Circular 4/2004. Through this Circular, the Banco de España acknowledges and shares the benefits derived from the efforts to achieve greater accounting harmonisation, while pursuing, in its supervisory capacity, a legitimate interest in the quality of accounting standards and in their effective implementation. Also, since the process of approval and adoption of the new international standards was marked by its complexity and underwent certain timetable difficulties, the Banco de España’s new Circular was also intended to endow the process, as far as possible, with a greater degree of certainty. The complexity of the new accounting standards arises not only from the process referred to, but also basically from the modifications contained in them, since they involve notable changes in numerous matters that are very important in credit institution management and that impose new responsibilities on managers in the election of accounting policies. Although it is too early to make a detailed assessment of the introduction of the new accounting standards, which have only been in force for a few months, the initial evaluation by the Banco de España is positive, and the major efforts and work by financial institutions in this connection should be acknowledged. As regards Basel II, June 2004 saw the publication of the final text of “A Revised Framework of the International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards”. The most notable new developments are that it allows institutions to use internal risk measurement methodologies if they meet certain minimum requirements and are accepted by the supervisor. The possibility of using the most advanced methodologies will depend on the development of risk management systems, on the effective integration of these systems into management, on the adaptation of the technological environment and on the availability of consistent and integrated historical information databases. BIS Review 45/2005 11 
Although the Accord will not enter into force until 2007, work has commenced on the long and complicated task of development, implementation, internal validation by institutions and review by the Banco de España of these methodologies, at speeds which will inevitably differ depending on the preparedness of the institutions. Furthermore, the European Parliament is debating a directive to legally implement Basel II after appropriately adapting it to the specific features of EU institutions and markets. It is difficult to state, in a nutshell, what the new Accord will signify. Perhaps most noteworthy are the three core ideas on which the three pillars rest: a recognition in regulation of sound practices in risk management, along with an incentive to encourage them; a strengthening of the supervisor’s judgement, as an added factor of safety; and the importance of market discipline, i.e. of active scrutiny of the market, of shareholders and of creditors, which implies a continual strengthening of transparency. It is this latter aspect, relating to Pillar III, which is the least well-known, although it is that with the greatest potential in the medium term for disseminating best practices in risk management. Of course, the completion of Basel II is only the beginning of the implementation process, and not just in credit institutions, but also in their supervisors. In this respect, I believe that our institutions and our supervisory model are in a magnificent position to lead the implementation process insofar as quality is concerned. And this process will yield better managed institutions and more effective supervision. These two key regulatory issues raise other points. First, the development of IAS and Basel II make it necessary to strengthen international co-operation in supervision and regulation. The international expansion of Spanish banking and its presence in a larger number of jurisdictions with differing features raise the need to establish closer bilateral relations with the authorities of other countries, so as better to comply with the respective responsibilities. In addition, the new European legislation on financial conglomerates also addresses in depth the need for greater co-operation. Specifically, the EU has opted for a solution based on co-operation between supervisors as the most appropriate (and essential) approach. Indeed, this is the prevailing course of action at present, routed through, for example, the ECB Banking Supervisory Committee or the recently created Committee of European Banking Supervisors, a “level 3 committee” set up in application of the Lamfalussy approach to the banking sector. The functions of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors include promoting convergence of the supervisory practices of the EU Member States and increasing and improving co-operation between supervisors. Growing supervisory co-operation will become unavoidable as further headway is made in the necessary process of integration of the single financial market. In this respect, we cannot ignore that the pace of integration is far from homogeneous. Thus, the integration of the interbank market can be classed as full, particularly in the euro area, and very high in the wholesale, the securities issuance and the large company and bank financing markets. By contrast, the retail market remains markedly local in nature and it will only become integrated insofar as its cultural and idiosyncratic barriers are progressively lifted. The same is so of cross-border activity. Mergers and acquisitions of credit institutions have raised to forty the number of institutions with operations in various EU countries. If profitability is adequate, this trend will foreseeably continue and European institutions will keep exploring the opportunities for profitability and lower costs offered by operations of this type. Despite this, the more than 8,000 deposit institutions in the EU continue to exhibit a markedly local nature. In short, co-operation in supervisory matters in the EU has to observe the principles of pragmatism and flexibility. Pragmatism involves acknowledging the role that the competent national authorities must play in supervising a single market with very different levels of integration in the various areas of business and, furthermore, it advocates an increasingly important role for the authority in the home country of pan-European institutions. Flexibility is needed to adapt the levels of co-operation to the pace set by developments in the integration of the various segments of the single market. Finally, regarding the changes currently under way, a major source of such change is the intense regulatory process to which the banking sector is lately being subjected. The adaptation to the new accounting standards issued by the IASB, which in Spain are set out in the new accounting Circular, and the preparations for implementing the new capital accord are the two landmark projects which are undoubtedly calling for a major effort by European institutions. This effort is absorbing extensive resources and deserves our full support. In this respect, I consider that, after a process of intense regulatory change, we should focus on achieving proper implementation and allow ourselves to 12 BIS Review 45/2005 
slacken the pace of regulatory developments in these areas. This will enable the far-reaching changes made recently to be digested and will ensure that the new standards are properly implemented. From a different standpoint, allow me to share one last thought with you, which is intended to highlight the importance of providing appropriate information to financial statement users. Institutions are required to help customers to understand the products that they are offered, to assess them properly and, for this purpose, to identify the risks associated with each product and tailor them in terms of customer tolerance and affordability. In this respect, the Banco de España has always recognised that the smooth working of the financial system requires well-informed consumers capable of making responsible decisions. For this reason, in February this year an Internet portal was set up for bank customers. It is receiving 2,000 visits daily. Its purpose is not to give advice or make recommendations, but to orientate consumers in their dealings with credit institutions and help to make information available to them. Well-informed consumers, together with an attitude of transparency on the part of institutions, help to increase market discipline, with the consequent favourable effect on competition and efficiency in the Spanish banking system. I would not want to finish without conveying a message of confidence in our financial system. I am sure that Spanish institutions will, as in the past, show that they are capable of facing all the challenges to which I have referred. I therefore trust that the managers of institutions will act professionally and prudently, designing business strategies that are sustainable in the medium and long term. In this way, they will contribute not only to the stable functioning of the institutions for which they are responsible, but also to that of the financial system as a whole. The inclusion as from last year of a chapter dealing with management aspects of the Banco de España allows me to be brief and to point out that in 2004 the branch restructuring plans, the staff renewal and redimensioning plan and the early retirement plan were completed and the negotiation of the 2002-04 collective bargaining agreement was finalised. All these reforms, which enable us to undertake appropriately our important mission and functions in the euro area, have been made possible by the effort and dedication of all the Bank’s staff, whom I thank for their attitude and their work. Finally, I express my gratitude to all the members of this Council for their inestimable support and collaboration. I would like to conclude by remembering two people whose untimely loss we suffered last year: Ángel Pardillos, who was one of the victims of the 11 March attacks, and Eugenio Domingo, who shared, at this table, many sessions of this Council, both before and after his term of office at the European Central Bank. Thank you. BIS Review 45/2005 13 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - small, but global Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Swiss Chinese Chamber of Commerce (SwissCham), Beijing, 10 June 2005. *      *      * I am pleased to be a guest here today at the Swiss-Chinese Chamber of Commerce and speak a few words to you. I am sure it is not necessary to convince any of you of the importance of globalisation and trade. You are living proof of our export sector’s dynamism and willingness to adapt to changing circumstances. By your presence in China, you contribute not only to our country’s influence abroad, but also to the expansion of its economy. As you know, economic globalisation often gets bad press in Switzerland. Some of our fellow citizens condemn it, hoping that barriers to delocalisation might strengthen the situation on our labour market. But let’s not be led astray by these scaremongers! Those who succumb to those fears fall victim to an illusion. A policy of inactivity is not synonymous with consolidation, but with decline. It is important to realise that Swiss investment abroad, particularly in low-wage countries, secures the high added value jobs we have at home. As a small country, we therefore have no other choice but to trade with the rest of the world if we want to prosper. This means that we will be continuously faced with the challenge of international competition. Nevertheless, for many observers, Switzerland remains a tiny spot on the European map, a country of 7.5 million inhabitants completely surrounded by the European Union whose population has already grown to several hundred million. Our geographical position obviously puts the question of joining the European Union squarely in the centre of often heated debates. For our economy, however, the real challenge is not to become more European, but to open up further to global markets. Today, Switzerland is more than merely a quaint little country for tourists; it is not only home to watchmakers and bankers or trains that run on time. This cliché is a thing of the past. Switzerland today is a global production platform with 4 million jobs within its borders and 1.8 million people working in Swiss companies abroad. This ratio is unique for an industrialised country. It is the result of a long tradition of Switzerland’s presence abroad. We are all familiar with the big names in our industry which, as early as the beginning of the last century, courageously invested abroad with the goal of conquering new markets. Switzerland’s identity in the world has often been better perceived through the activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross and through our big companies, rather than through diplomacy. The internationalisation of the Swiss economy has not slowed down in recent years - on the contrary, it has amplified. Let’s look at the figures: 20 years ago, our current account surplus, i.e. foreign investment, accounted for 5% of Swiss GDP. Today, it amounts to 13%. It was also said at the time that one franc out of three was made abroad. Today, it is one franc in two! The 1990s marked the real turning point in our economy’s trend toward globalisation. Our commercial relations with China are exemplary in this regard. After having levelled off at approximately 900 million francs a year in the late 1990s, our exports to China grew at a rapid pace in more recent years, reaching 2.9 billion francs in 2004. With regard to Chinese exports to Switzerland, the trend is just as spectacular, but much more steady. Sales of products manufactured in China in the Swiss market have risen continuously for 20 years now, be it textiles, electronic equipment or - naturally - product components that are reintegrated into our domestic production. Owing to soaring exports to China, our trade balance with this country has thus flattened out steadily; toward the end of the 1990s, it was clearly negative, in 2004 we even had a slight surplus. Despite the rapid expansion of our trade with China, its overall significance remains modest, amounting to just 2% of total Swiss trade. From a Chinese perspective, the relative importance of trade relations with Switzerland is even smaller. Switzerland accounts for less than 1% of Chinese imports and exports. A similar picture can be observed with respect to Swiss foreign direct investment here. Despite a thirty-fold increase between 1993 and 2003, it still amounts to less than 0.6% of total Swiss investment abroad. All this shows that there is enormous potential for the expansion of bilateral economic relations between our two countries. BIS Review 45/2005 1 
Many politicians in Europe seem to forget that China, like all the other emerging economies in Asia and South America, has become one of the dynamic poles in the global economy in recent years. By contrast, Europe has trailed behind in terms of growth. This is precisely why globalisation makes sense for an economy open to international markets such as ours. For both historical and geographical reasons, our country is exposed to a considerable commercial risk in Europe: 60% of our exports are destined for European countries; accounting for 25%, Germany ranks first among our export markets. These European markets are no longer the most dynamic today, nor will they be in the future. It is essential that we step up the diversification process so as to ensure the expansion of our export sector. It is therefore in our own best interests to strengthen economic relations with Asia, in particular with China. Business relations between industrialised countries and China currently take centre stage in political discussions. In particular, harsh criticism has been levelled at China because of its exchange rate policy of pegging its currency to the US dollar despite the fact that it has made considerable progress in terms of efficiency. As a representative of a country that has had floating exchange rates for over thirty years now, I can only underscore the importance of an exchange rate regime that reflects the realities of the market. During the past three decades, the Swiss franc has been an essential factor in the development of the Swiss economy. However, it was never a reason for our exporters to sit back and relax. On the contrary, the franc put pressure on them to become more efficient and to specialise in those product areas in which we have a real competitive edge. Consumers also profited from the strong Swiss franc in that the prices for imported goods have fallen significantly. A currency that is accurately priced enables the economy to benefit from improvements in its terms of trade triggered by productivity increases. If a country’s currency is undervalued, products are sold on the market at give-away prices, and productive resources are inefficiently allocated. The functioning of a currency system, therefore, plays a pivotal role in the development of a country’s prosperity, and monetary reform, as China is currently expected to tackle, is a very delicate undertaking. Unless new monetary rules and mechanisms can immediately convince the market of the appropriateness of the new regime, a risk of speculative pressure will emerge. Switzerland has experience in this regard as well. We ultimately opted for flexible exchange rates, i.e. a system in which the Swiss franc’s value is continuously in line with market forces. In my view, floating rates are not a panacea, they can be volatile in the case of market disruption. At times, the Swiss franc was pushed to levels no longer compatible with the economic reality of our country’s fundamentals. These episodes lasted for only a limited time, however. Another advantage of a flexible Swiss franc is that changes in the international monetary system have little bearing on our currency which is largely determined by Switzerland’s economic realities. Consequently, the launch of the euro - a major event on the monetary scene in recent years - did not lead to the disappearance or the destabilisation of the franc as feared by some. Though the euro - for all intents and purposes - is accepted as a means of payment in Switzerland, there are not more euros in circulation now than there were French francs or German marks prior to the monetary integration. Furthermore, the calm that has characterised the foreign exchange market in Europe since the disappearance of the national currencies mitigated the speculative pressures on the franc. Our currency is therefore less volatile than before. Last but not least, contrary to the pessimistic assumption that the Swiss National Bank would have to shadow the policy of the European Central Bank, it was able to set its interest rates according to the needs of the Swiss economy. On the whole, our monetary regime passed the test imposed by the change in the European monetary system with flying colours. Even though Switzerland is a modest player on the international scene it carries more weight than one would imagine. The country’s edge lies in its small size, leaving it no other option than to open up to international trade. Moreover, its liberal philosophy and sound financial standing have given it the necessary tools to conduct a policy of openness and to have a strong presence abroad. Having chosen the option of free trade and free movement of capital, Switzerland is, in many respects, better prepared than others to take advantage of the greater opening of the borders brought about by globalisation. To be sure, this is not an easy ride, as international competition always necessitates painful adjustments, and Switzerland is no exception in this respect. When we take stock of the last few years, however, the bottom line looks favourable. We would certainly be in an even better position now, if we had built up a stronger presence in emerging economies. As you can see, contrary to what 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
some people believe, globalisation is not the cause of the weak growth of the Swiss economy; indeed the opposite is true. Foreign trade is the engine driving our economy. It has expanded in recent years in step with the global economy. By contrast, our domestic market has stagnated and registered only limited gains in productivity. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is where our problem lies. BIS Review 45/2005 3 
Donald L Kohn: Regulatory relief Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit, Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 9 June 2005. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on issues related to regulatory relief. The Board strongly supports the efforts of Congress to review periodically the federal banking laws to determine whether they can be streamlined without compromising the safety and soundness of banking organizations, consumer protections, or other important objectives that Congress has established for the financial system. In 2003, at Chairman Oxley’s request, the Board provided the Committee with a number of legislative proposals that we believe are consistent with this goal, and the Board recently agreed to support several additional regulatory relief proposals. A summary of the proposals supported by the Board is included in the appendix to my testimony. In my remarks, I will highlight those that would provide the most meaningful regulatory relief. For its part, the Board strives to review each of our regulations at least once every five years to identify those provisions that are out of date or otherwise unnecessary. The Board also has been an active participant in the ongoing regulatory review process being conducted by the federal banking agencies pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). EGRPRA requires the federal banking agencies, at least once every ten years, to review and seek public comment on the burden associated with the full range of the agencies’ regulations that affect insured depository institutions. The Board and the other banking agencies are in the midst of the first ten-year review cycle, and I am pleased to report that we are on track to complete this process by the 2006 deadline. The agencies already have solicited comments on five broad categories of regulations - including those governing applications, activities, money laundering, and consumer protection in lending transactions - and have conducted outreach meetings throughout the country to encourage public participation in the EGRPRA process. In response to these efforts, the agencies have received comments from more than 1,000 entities and individuals on ways to reduce the regulatory burden on banking organizations. The Board will consider and incorporate the comments relevant to our regulations as we move forward with our own regulation review efforts. While the banking agencies can achieve some burden reductions through administrative action, Congress plays a critical role in the regulatory relief process. Many proposals to reduce regulatory burden require congressional action to implement. Moreover, the Congress has ultimate responsibility for establishing the overall regulatory framework for banking organizations, and through its actions Congress can ensure that regulatory relief is consistent with the framework it has established to maintain the safety and soundness of banking organizations and promote other important public policy goals. Interest on reserves, reserve requirements and interest on demand deposits I am pleased to note that some of the Board’s most important regulatory relief suggestions - including those authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, enhancing the Board’s flexibility to set reserve requirements, and permitting depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits - recently were passed by the House as part of H.R. 1224, the Business Checking Freedom Act of 2005. Let me briefly explain why the Board supports passage of these amendments, either in a stand-alone bill or as part of a broader regulatory relief bill. I will also discuss a little later why the Board does not support those aspects of H.R. 1224 that would, for the first time, authorize industrial loan companies that operate outside the supervisory framework established for other insured banks to offer interest-bearing transaction accounts to business customers. For the purpose of implementing monetary policy, the Board is obliged by law to establish reserve requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions. Because the Federal Reserve does not pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their reserve balances to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of reserve avoidance activities, including sweep arrangements that move funds from deposits that are BIS Review 44/2005 1 
subject to reserve requirements to deposits and money market investments that are not. These sweep programs and similar activities absorb real resources and therefore diminish the efficiency of our banking system. H.R. 1224 would allow the Federal Reserve to pay depository institutions interest on their required reserve balances, which would remove a substantial portion of the incentive for depositories to engage in reserve avoidance measures. The resulting improvements in efficiency should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. Besides required reserve balances, depository institutions also voluntarily hold two other types of balances in their Reserve Bank accounts - contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances. H.R. 1224 would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on these balances as well. This authority would enhance the Federal Reserve’s toolkit for efficiently conducting monetary policy. In order for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to conduct monetary policy effectively, it is important that a sufficient and predictable demand for balances at the Reserve Banks exist so that the System knows the volume of reserves to supply (or remove) through open market operations to achieve the FOMC’s target federal funds rate. Authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances, in addition to required reserve balances, could potentially provide a demand for voluntary balances that would be stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented effectively through existing procedures without the need for required reserve balances. In these circumstances, the Board could consider using the authority granted in H.R. 1224 to reduce - or even eliminate - reserve requirements, thereby reducing a regulatory burden for all depository institutions, without adversely affecting the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct monetary policy. Having the authority to pay interest on excess reserves also could help mitigate potential volatility in overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve was authorized to pay interest on excess reserves, and did so, the rate paid would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks would not generally lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at a Reserve Bank. Although the Board sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, and any movement in this direction would need further study, the ability to do so would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve. The Board also strongly supports the provisions of H.R. 1224 that would repeal the statutory restrictions that currently prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. Repealing the prohibition of interest on demand deposits would improve the overall efficiency of our financial sector and, in particular, should assist small banks in attracting and retaining business deposits. To compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks have been compelled to set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts and they spend resources - and charge fees - for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. Small banks, however, often do not have the resources to develop the sweep or other programs that are needed to compete for the deposits of business customers. Moreover, from the standpoint of the overall economy, the expenses incurred by institutions of all sizes to implement these programs are a waste of resources and would be unnecessary if institutions were permitted to pay interest on demand deposits directly. The costs incurred by banks in operating these programs are passed on, directly or indirectly, to their large and small business customers. Authorizing banks to pay interest on demand deposits would eliminate the need for these customers to pay for more costly sweep and compensating balance arrangements to earn a return on their demand deposits. H.R. 1224 contains a provision that is intended to address the potential federal budgetary impact of this proposal by requiring the Reserve Banks to transfer some of their capital surplus to the Treasury to cover the budgetary costs of paying interest on required reserves through 2009. As the Board has consistently pointed out, these transfers would not provide any true offsets to budgetary costs. Although these transfers would allow the Treasury to issue fewer securities, the Federal Reserve would need to lower its holdings of Treasury securities by the same amount to make the required transfers. Thus, the level of Treasury debt held by the public sector would be unchanged, and the Treasury’s interest payments, net of receipts from the Federal Reserve, would be unaffected. 2 BIS Review 44/2005 
De novo interstate branching The Board has proposed an amendment that would remove outdated barriers to de novo interstate branching by banks. Since enactment of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (Riegle-Neal Act), all fifty states have permitted banks to expand on an interstate basis through the acquisition of an existing bank in their state. Interstate banking is not only good for banks, it is good for consumers and the economy. While the number of banks has fallen in recent years, the number of branches has risen sharply to more than 71,000 in 2004 compared with approximately 50,000 in 1990. More than 2,000 branches were opened by banks in 2004 alone. The creation of new branches helps maintain the competitiveness and dynamism of the American banking industry and improve access to banking services in otherwise under-served markets. It results in better banking services for households and small businesses, lower interest rates on loans, and higher interest rates on deposits. Interstate branching also increases convenience for customers who live, work, and operate across state borders. However, the Riegle-Neal Act permitted banks to open a branch in a new state without acquiring another bank only if the host state enacted legislation that expressly permits entry by de novo branching (an opt-in requirement). To date, twenty-one states and the District of Columbia have enacted some form of opt-in legislation, while twenty-nine states continue to require interstate entry through the acquisition of an existing bank. This limitation on de novo branching is an obstacle to interstate entry for all banks and also creates special problems for small banks seeking to operate across state lines. Moreover, it creates an unlevel playing field between banks and federal savings associations, which have long been allowed to establish de novo branches on an interstate basis. The Board’s proposed amendment would remove this last obstacle to full interstate branching for banks and level the playing field between banks and thrifts. The amendment also would remove the parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. These changes would allow banks, including in particular small banks near state borders, to better serve their customers by establishing new interstate branches and acquiring newly chartered banks across state lines. It also would increase competition by providing banks a less costly method for offering their services at new locations. The establishment and operation of any new interstate branches would continue to be subject to the other regulatory provisions and conditions established by Congress for de novo interstate branches, including the financial, managerial, and community reinvestment requirements set forth in the Riegle-Neal Act. Small bank examination flexibility Another amendment that the Board has supported would expand the number of small institutions that qualify for an extended examination cycle. Federal law currently mandates that the appropriate federal banking agency conduct an on-site examination of each insured depository institution at least once every twelve months. The statute, however, permits institutions that have $250 million or less in assets and that meet certain capital, managerial, and other criteria to be examined on an eighteen-month cycle. As the primary federal supervisors for state-chartered banks, the Board and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) may alternate responsibility for conducting these examinations with the appropriate state supervisory authority if the Board or FDIC determines that the state examination carries out the purposes of the statute. The $250 million asset cutoff for an eighteen-month examination cycle has not been raised since 1994. The Board’s proposed amendment would raise this asset cap from $250 million to $500 million, thus potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,100 insured depository institutions to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. The proposed amendment would provide meaningful relief to small institutions without jeopardizing the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. Under the proposed amendment, an institution with less than $500 million in assets would qualify for the eighteen-month examination cycle only if the institution was well capitalized, well managed, and met the other criteria established by Congress in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991. The amendment also would continue to require that all insured depository institutions undergo a full-scope, on-site examination at least once every twelve or eighteen months. Importantly, the agencies would continue to have the ability to examine any institution more frequently and at any time if the agency determines BIS Review 44/2005 3 
an examination is necessary or appropriate. Despite advances in off-site monitoring, the Board continues to believe that regular on-site examinations play a critical role in helping bank supervisors detect and correct asset, risk-management or internal control problems at an institution before these problems result in claims on the deposit insurance funds. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to attribution rule The Board has proposed another amendment that we believe will help banking organizations maintain attractive benefits programs for their employees. The Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) generally prohibits a bank holding company from owning, in the aggregate, more than 5 percent of the voting shares of any company without the Board’s approval. The BHC Act also provides that any shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company’s shareholders or employees are deemed to be controlled by the bank holding company itself. This attribution rule was intended to prevent a bank holding company from using a trust established for the benefit of its management, shareholders, or employees to evade the BHC Act’s restrictions on the acquisition of shares of banks and nonbanking companies. While this attribution rule has proved to be a useful tool in preventing evasions of the BHC Act, it does not always provide an appropriate result. For example, it may not be appropriate to apply the attribution rule when the shares in question are acquired by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by, and operated for the benefit of, the employees of the bank holding company. In these situations, the bank holding company may not have the ability to influence the purchase or sale decisions of the employees or otherwise control the shares that are held by the plan in trust for its employees. The suggested amendment would allow the Board to address these situations by authorizing the Board to grant exceptions from the attribution rule where appropriate. Reduce cross-marketing restrictions Another amendment proposed by the Board would modify the cross-marketing restrictions imposed by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) on the merchant banking and insurance company investments of financial holding companies. The GLB Act generally prohibits a depository institution controlled by a financial holding company from engaging in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company that is owned by the same financial holding company under the GLB Act’s merchant banking or insurance company investment authorities. However, the GLB Act currently permits a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company, with Board approval, to engage in limited cross-marketing activities through statement stuffers and Internet websites with nonfinancial companies that are held under the act’s insurance company investment authority (but not the act’s merchant banking authority). The Board’s proposed amendment would allow depository institutions controlled by a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with companies held under the merchant banking authority to the same extent, and subject to the same restrictions, as companies held under the insurance company investment authority. We believe that this parity of treatment is appropriate, and see no reason to treat the merchant banking and insurance investments of financial holding companies differently for purposes of the cross-marketing restrictions of the GLB Act. A second aspect of the amendment would liberalize the cross-marketing restrictions that apply to both merchant banking and insurance company investments. This aspect of the amendment would permit a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the nonfinancial company is not controlled by the financial holding company. When a financial holding company does not control a portfolio company, cross-marketing activities are unlikely to materially undermine the separation between the nonfinancial portfolio company and the financial holding company’s depository institution subsidiaries. Industrial loan companies As I noted earlier, the Board strongly supports allowing depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits and allowing banks to branch de novo across state lines. The Board, however, opposes proposals that would allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) to offer business NOW accounts, 4 BIS Review 44/2005 
as H.R. 1224 does, or open de novo branches nationwide if the corporate owner of the ILC takes advantage of the special exemption in current law that allows the owner to operate outside the prudential framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of other types of insured banks. ILCs are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks that were first established early in the twentieth century to make small loans to industrial workers. As insured banks, ILCs are supervised by the FDIC as well as by the chartering state. However, under a special exemption in current law, any type of company, including a commercial or retail firm, may acquire an ILC in a handful of states - principally Utah, California, and Nevada - and avoid the activity restrictions and supervisory requirements imposed on bank holding companies under the federal BHC Act. When the special exemption for ILCs was initially granted in 1987, ILCs were mostly small, local institutions that did not offer demand deposits or other types of checking accounts. In light of these facts, Congress conditioned the exemption on a requirement that any ILCs chartered after 1987 remain small (below $100 million in assets) or refrain from offering demand deposits that are withdrawable by check or similar means. This special exemption has been aggressively exploited since 1987. Some grandfathered states have allowed their ILCs to exercise many of the same powers as commercial banks and have begun to charter new ILCs. Today, several ILCs are owned by large, internationally active financial or commercial firms. In addition, a number of ILCs themselves have grown large, with one holding more than $50 billion in deposits and an additional eight holding more than $1 billion in deposits. Affirmatively granting ILCs the ability to offer business NOW accounts and open de novo branches across state lines would permit ILCs to become the functional equivalent of full-service insured banks and operate across the United States. This result would be inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. Because the parent companies of exempt ILCs are not subject to the BHC Act, authorizing ILCs to operate essentially as full-service banks would create an unlevel competitive playing field among banking organizations and undermine the framework Congress has established for the corporate owners of full-service banks. It would allow firms that are not subject to the consolidated supervisory framework of the BHC Act - including consolidated capital, examination, and reporting requirements - to own and control the functional equivalent of a full-service bank. It also would allow a foreign bank to acquire control of the equivalent of a full-service insured bank without meeting the requirement under the BHC Act that the foreign bank be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country. In addition, it would allow financial firms to acquire the equivalent of a full-service bank without complying with the capital, managerial, and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements established by Congress in the GLB Act. Congress has established consolidated supervision as a fundamental component of bank supervision in the United States because consolidated supervision provides important protection to the insured banks that are part of a larger organization and to the federal safety net that supports those banks. Financial trouble in one part of an organization can spread rapidly to other parts. To protect an insured bank that is part of a larger organization, a supervisor needs to have the authority and tools to understand the risks that exist within the parent organization and its affiliates and, if necessary, address any significant capital, managerial, or other deficiencies before they pose a danger to the bank. This is particularly true today, as holding companies increasingly manage their operations - and the risks that arise from these operations - in a centralized manner that cuts across legal entities. Risks that cross legal entities and that are managed on a consolidated basis simply cannot be monitored properly through supervision directed at one, or even several, of the legal entities within the overall organization. For these reasons, Congress since 1956 has required that the parent companies of full-service insured banks be subject to consolidated supervision under the BHC Act. In addition, following the collapse of Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), Congress has required that foreign banks seeking to acquire control of a U.S. bank under the BHC Act be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in the foreign bank’s home country. Authorizing exempt ILCs to operate as essentially full-service banks also would undermine the framework that Congress has established - and recently reaffirmed in the GLB Act - to limit the affiliation of banks and commercial entities. This is because any type of company, including a commercial firm, may own an exempt ILC without regard to the activity restrictions in the BHC Act that are designed to maintain the separation of banking and commerce. While H.R. 1224 attempts to address concerns related to mixing banking and commerce by placing certain limits on the types of BIS Review 44/2005 5 
ILCs that could offer business NOW accounts, the limits in H.R. 1224 do not adequately address this issue. For example, H.R. 1224 would allow any ILC that received FDIC insurance before October 1, 2003, or had an application for deposit insurance pending on that date, to offer NOW accounts to business customers so long as the institution does not experience a change in control. Thus, the bill would allow the commercial and retail firms that acquired an ILC before October 1, 2003, to transform the institution into the functional equivalent of a full-service insured bank. The bill also would allow any ILC that was established or acquired after October 1, 2003, to offer business NOW accounts so long as the ILC’s appropriate state supervisor determined that the companies controlling the ILC derived at least 85 percent of their annual gross revenues from activities that are “financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity.” Importantly, the bill does not define these terms by reference to the GLB Act or otherwise establish any standards for a state authority to use in determining what activities are “financial in nature or incidental to a financial activity.” Instead, the bill leaves this important determination - which has the potential to undermine the nation’s longstanding policy of maintaining the separation of banking and commerce - to the discretion of the ILC’s state supervisor. Moreover, unlike the grandfather provisions of the GLB Act on which the ILC provisions of the bill purportedly are based (see 12 U.S.C. § 1843(n)), H.R. 1224 would not require a company that acquires an ILC after October 1, 2003, to divest its non-financial, commercial activities within a specified period of time. The limits contained in H.R. 1224 also do not address the other risks and issues presented by ILCs. For example, the bill fails to address the supervisory issues associated with allowing domestic firms or foreign banks that are not subject to consolidated supervision to own and control the functional equivalent of a full-service insured bank. Let me be clear. The Board does not oppose granting ILCs the ability to offer business NOW accounts or open de novo branches if the corporate owners of ILCs engaged in these expanded activities are covered by the same supervisory and regulatory framework that applies to the owners of other full-service insured banks. Stated simply, if ILCs want to benefit from expanded powers and become functionally indistinguishable from other insured banks, then they and their corporate parents should be subject to the same rules that apply to the owners of other full-service insured banks. The Board believes that important principles governing the structure of the nation’s banking system - such as consolidated supervision, the separation of banking and commerce, and the maintenance of a level playing field for all competitors in the financial services marketplace - should not be abandoned without careful consideration by the Congress. In the Board’s view, legislation concerning the payment of interest on demand deposits or de novo branching is unlikely to provide an appropriate vehicle for the thorough consideration of the consequences of altering these key principles. Conclusion I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board’s legislative suggestions and priorities concerning regulatory relief. The Board would be pleased to work with the Subcommittee, the full Committee, and their staffs as you move forward in developing and considering regulatory relief legislation. Appendix: Regulatory Relief Proposals Supported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System1 1. Authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks* Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks.                                                       1 Items identified with an asterisk (*) were included in H.R. 1375, the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2004, as passed by the House of Representatives. 6 BIS Review 44/2005 
2. Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements* Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. 3. Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits* Amendment repeals the provisions in current law that prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. 4. Ease restrictions on interstate branching and mergers in a competitively equitable manner Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. The amendment also would remove a parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. The amendment would not allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) that operate under a special exemption in federal law from opening de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with the terms of their special exemption in federal law. 5. Small Bank Examination Flexibility Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-month (rather than a twelve-month) examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution must have $250 million or less in total assets to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. See 12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,100 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle. 6. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders or employees* The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its shareholders or employees. The amendment would allow the Board to waive the rule when, for example, the shares in question are held by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by the bank holding company’s employees and the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares held by the plan. 7. Modification of the cross-marketing restrictions applicable to merchant banking and insurance company investments* Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as such activities are currently permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act’s insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a portfolio company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company. BIS Review 44/2005 7 
8. Allow insured banks to engage in interstate merger transactions with savings associations and trust companies* The amendment would allow an insured bank to directly acquire, by merger, an insured savings association or uninsured trust company in a different home state without first converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger. 9. Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts* Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves the deposits in other banks that are “passed through” by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts. 10. Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have adverse competitive effects Amendment allows the responsible federal banking agency, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment would not alter the time period that a private party has to challenge a banking agency’s approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act. 11. Eliminate requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions* Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, and (ii) request a competitive factors report from the Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency). 12. Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities that are already under common control The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition. 13. a. Restore Board’s authority to determine that new activities are “closely related to banking” and permissible for all bank holding companies Amendment would restore the Board’s ability to determine that nonbanking activities are “closely related to banking” under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies. Bank holding companies would still have to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act - including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance underwriting, and merchant banking activities - as well as any new activities that the Board determines are financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities under the GLB Act. b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative to Item 13.a.) Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies, to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Currently, bank holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited insurance sales activities (primarily involving credit-related insurance). However, most banks are 8 BIS Review 44/2005 
permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. Bank holding companies would continue to be required to become a financial holding company to engage in insurance underwriting activities. 14. Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository institutions* Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank’s board of directors concerning the officer’s indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a member bank to file a separate report each quarter concerning any loans made to its executive officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank’s board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These amendments would not alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by bank to their insiders. 15. Provide an adjustment for the small depository institutions exception under the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA)* Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one institution from serving as a management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but this dollar figure has not been updated since 1978. The amendment would increase this amount to $200 million. 16. Flood insurance amendments These amendments would: (a) Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old; (b) Increase the “small loan” exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to $20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index; (c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can “force place” flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and (d) Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements. 17. Periodic interagency review of Call Reports Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports may be eliminated. The federal banking agencies would retain their current authority to determine what information must be included in the Call Reports filed by the institutions under their primary supervision. 18. Ensure protection of confidential information received from foreign supervisory authorities* Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained the information in connection with the administration and enforcement of federal banking laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The amendment would not authorize an agency to withhold BIS Review 44/2005 9 
information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency. 19. Restricting the ability of convicted individuals to participate in the affairs of a bank holding company or Edge Act or agreement corporation Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent convicted individuals from participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. 20. Clarify application of section 8(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act* Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for conduct that occurred during his or her affiliation with a banking organization even if the person resigns from the organization, regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order. 10 BIS Review 44/2005 
V Leeladhar: Challenges in banking security  Inaugural speech by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banking Security Conference - 2005, arranged by the Indian Banks’ Association, Mumbai, 22 June 2005. *      *      * Fellow Participants and Colleagues, It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst, as we commence this workshop on Banking Security. I am particularly happy to be here to address a group of involved persons who are the harbingers of change - so to say - in the use of technology in Banking. Banking as a business involves the management of risks. While much has been said about the financial risks, the risks arising out of the large scale implementation of technology is of recent origin, with banks having taken to large scale use of technology for their normal day-to-day business. Security in banks has thus assumed significant proportions, comprising both physical aspects in addition to those relating to Information, Information Systems and Information Technology, all of which have an impact on the reputational risk of a financial organisation. In a world where geographical barriers are losing significance and the death of distances is already a reality, it is but essential that security be given prime importance in a transnational scenario where large sums of money are at stake. While the challenges related to physical security are those which can be confronted with relative ease, the position is much more complicated in respect of IT security. It is widely accepted that security is as effective as the weakest link in a chain. And, in the case of banking, the weakest link, in my view, does not relate to the components of technology (which do have an implication although), but on the person who is part of the information supply chain, and is typically the insider in the bank itself. This reminds me of an interesting or rather disturbing question one of the top police officials asked of the bankers in a security conference. “Are you keeping a track of some sort of the officials who left the organization ? Are you at least aware where they are now ?” There was complete silence around the table. He went on to clarify that most of the financial crimes had insider links. This is supported by studies carried out by international organisations. These studies have indicated that a substantial portion of the breach of security in financial institutions have occurred on account of, or have been triggered with the aid of internal exposures or internal controls being compromised. Against this backdrop, the security requirements of the banking sector need to be assigned high levels of priority. Information Security is something which is best experienced than explained. All of us have at some point of time experienced the flow of information to persons others than to the intended users - even in a nonelectronic traditional environment. With networking and access to information being available at rates much larger than before, Information Security is an activity which provides some comfort to both the policy makers and the users of data. The largest set of functions in the banking sector which has benefited from the advances in IT relate to payment systems since quick, safe and efficient transfer of funds across the length and breadth of the country is the requirement of the day. Security in Payment Systems cannot be addressed in isolation. It requires the integration of work processes, communication linkages and integrated delivery systems and should focus on stability, efficiency and risk control. Yet another prime aspect of concern in a good security policy is the role that the human beings have in a secure computerised environment. It would be advisable to build security features at the application level in respect of banking oriented products, because of the critical nature of financial data transfer. The financial messages should have the under noted features: • The receipt of the message at the intended destination • The content of the message should be the same as the transmitted one • The Sender of information should be able to verify its receipt by the recipient • The Recipient of the message could verify that the sender is indeed the person • Information in transit should not be observed, altered or extracted • Any attempt to tamper with the data in transit will need to be revealed BIS Review 49/2005 1 
• Non-repudiation These features boil down essentially to authentication (to verify the identity of the sender of the message to the intended recipient to prevent spoofing or impersonation), authorisation (to control the access to specific resources for unauthorised persons), confidentiality (to maintain the secrecy of the content of transmission between the authorised parties), integrity (to ensure that no changes/errors are introduced in the messages during transmission) and nonrepudiation (to ensure that an entity cannot later deny the origin and receipt and contents of the communication). I must add here that in a recent case of a co-operative bank, the entire operations, maintenance and management of the computer systems were totally in the hands of the firm which supplied the computer software and this led to a fraud and loss for the bank. Such cases cause reason for substantial concern. While the aspects relating to physical security leave a lot to be desired with even the most basic security requirements not being in place (like access for unauthorised personnel even to sensitive Cash holding areas), the security features in the computer systems are not fully fool proof in some banks. There are at present a number of security standards available for different financial applications; most of them are internationally accepted and part of the ISO standards. These international standards should be examined and adopted keeping in view the requirements of the Indian banking industry. Banks need to put in place measures which conform to there is policies and ensure the regular, periodical audit. An important issue is relating to the security levels of use within the various operating departments in the banks. The common level of entry is the use of validation of authorised access (in the form of authorised User-Ids) to be further authenticated by correctness of passwords keyed in by the authorised users. Passwords often become ‘passed’ words in our context with no change at all in the passwords since passwords tend to be rather fixed for long periods of time. It is absolutely essential that passwords lapse after certain periods of time - generally not exceeding a month at the latest. Authorisation of users is another activity that needs to be closely regulated and monitored. One of the basic requirements for implementation of security and monitoring thereof at the various departments is the need for system administrators. Most of our offices and departments have the system administration function clubbed to the normal operational functions assigned to a particular officer. The proliferation of networks within an office also acts as a negative factor in implementation of strict security features. Further, rights assigned need to be changed upon change of functions assigned to the operative staff and that updation, including those related to staff who retire have to be looked into. There is an imperative need to imbibe a culture of security among all operative functionaries - whether officers or other staff and cutting across administrative gradings. Access to databases in computer systems and to the data contained therein have to be strictly restricted and not available to any but those authorised to make any changes in case of an eventuality for resolving a software lock / malfunction which is a conscious decision by the authorised personnel taken in conjunction with the head of the office concerned. Change Management is another aspect that needs to be viewed from the security angle. Software (and at times hardware too), undergoes frequent updation and version control and levels of software in use across offices is an issue which needs to be examined in its totality for practicable implementation at all offices / departments. I am sure that most of the newer software programmes would have all the essential and desirable features as mandatory part of their architecture. The software that are currently in use would have to be scrutinised from the point of view of conformity to the minimum security requirements that I had dwelt upon. As leaders who would be using technology as a cutting edge towards excellence in services, you would all agree that these key requirements of security are required to be addressed in the sessions of today. It is gratifying to note the initiative taken by IBA in organizing such seminars and conferences which facilitate transfer of knowledge. I am sure that the deliberations of the day would be enriching to all the delegates. I wish the Conference all success. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building a progressive Islamic banking sector - charting the way forward  Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Seminar on 10-Year Master Plan for Islamic Financial Services Industry, “Building a Progressive Islamic Banking Sector - Charting the Way Forward”, Putrajaya, 22 June 2005. *      *      * "The Islamic financial services industry is now at the threshold of its next stage of development. This decade has seen significant progress being achieved. Islamic finance has now gained wide acceptance as a form of financial intermediation. The sustainability of this progress, however, demands due attention to the future - to look beyond the near term, and to take a longer-term perspective into the needs of the future and to evolve an Islamic financial system that will best serve these needs. An essential part of this process is the clarity of the vision and the objectives that are to be achieved. This provides the starting point for the formulation of a Master Plan which defines the blueprint for the future development of Islamic finance. While envisioning the future will provide the strategic focus and the common goal to be achieved, of greater importance will be the actions that need to be taken to make it happen."  Your Excellencies Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen, I am most honoured to be invited to speak at this Seminar on the Ten-Year Master Plan for the Islamic financial services industry organized by the Islamic Development Bank and the Islamic Financial Services Board to discuss the key issues and considerations in the formulation of a master plan for the development of Islamic banking and finance. Our goals are to develop an efficient, progressive and comprehensive Islamic financial system that is able to contribute to the overall growth process and development. In this first session on the banking sector, the focus of my address will be on the blueprint for building a progressive Islamic banking sector. This will include a discussion of the building blocks that are necessary to provide the foundations on which subsequent enhancements can be built. I will also take this opportunity to share with you Malaysia's experience in formulating a ten-year Financial Sector Master Plan which was launched in 2001, and our experience in the implementation of the Plan, in particular, for the development of the Islamic banking sector. The need for a Master Plan Islamic finance is now taking on a new dimension to meet the changing requirements of consumers and businesses; to participate in a more liberalized and globalised environment and to become increasingly more internationally integrated. The financial system is also operating in an era of change. Indeed, the national and international financial landscape is being shaped by powerful forces of change, creating an environment of increased uncertainty. However, with clarity of vision on the ultimate goals that the financial system aims to achieve, we can, by our actions and initiatives taken today, help realize our vision of the future.  The Master Plan in essence provides a common vision, and template for countries in developing the Islamic financial services industry. The vision and desired objective will to a large extent depend on the desired aspirations for the economy, expected the role of the financial sector in the economy, the stage of development of the economy and the financial sector and the degree of international integration with the rest of the world.  The Master Plan will also serve as a key reference document to guide countries in charting an orderly development of the Islamic financial system. The broad strategies and action plans, with the necessary milestones that need to be pursued over the medium to long term to develop an Islamic financial system can then be identified. Within the defined parameters, countries have distinct options in determining the best course of action to achieve the envisaged country vision. Experiences of other member countries can be compiled to serve as references. It needs to be recognized however, while the Plan provides the strategic direction, the implementation needs to be managed with flexibility. The approach for the implementation of the action plans outlined BIS Review 49/2005 1 
in a Master Plan needs to be done in an iterative manner, taking into account the potential for change that may occur in both the domestic and external environment. The Master Plan will also identify the building blocks of the various parts of the financial sector that need to be put in place to provide the foundation on which further progress can be built. The Financial Master Plan thus provides the sequencing of priorities and identifies the key financial infrastructure that needs to be put in place before advancing forward. In some areas, the implementation can be simultaneous, while in others a more direct route can be taken to enable a more rapid pace of development. In designing and formulating the Master Plan, consideration needs to be given to the diversity of the member countries of the IDB. The member countries are at various stages of economic development, facing different economic and financial challenges, and with different development priorities. The Master Plan aims to highlight the approaches, templates and building blocks that can be adopted at the different stages in the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial system. A phased-approach would provide the Master Plan with the flexibility to take into account the different stages of economic development of respective countries. While the starting points may differ, countries may adapt the approaches to their requirements and that is commensurate with their stage of development. The Master Plan would allow countries the option to evolve the financial system sequentially, or alternatively the option to accelerate the process of development by providing countries the opportunity to develop the institutions and supporting infrastructure simultaneously.  Significance of banking system At the outset, due attention needs to be given to promoting the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial system, involving the development of the key structural components of the system, comprising the Islamic banking industry, the takaful industry, the non-bank financial institutions, and the Islamic interbank and capital markets. The comprehensiveness of the system will allow for a more balanced allocation of financial and economic resources within an economy and ensure greater diversification of risks within the Islamic financial system. This enhances the resilience and robustness of the Islamic financial system to withstand financial shocks and contributes to the overall stability of the Islamic financial system. The respective components of the Islamic financial system are also highly integrated and inter-dependent. A more diversified Islamic financial infrastructure will contribute to the more efficient functioning of the overall financial system.  Given its roles in the intermediation process and payments system, the Islamic banking system will continue to be at the core of the Islamic financial system. A well functioning and efficient banking system is vital for achieving robust economic performance. As financial intermediaries, banks are entrusted to safeguard their deposits and preserve the efficiency in the manner the funds are mobilised, while vigilantly channeling these savings to productive investments. Given these responsibilities, the banking institutions therefore need to play their role effectively and efficiently to contribute to the overall stability of the financial system, and the growth and development of the economy.  Visioning for the Islamic banking system In charting the future development of the Islamic banking system, due consideration would therefore need to be given to the role of the banking system in the economy. The ultimate goal is to enhance wealth creation, and promote sustainable and balanced economic growth. The vision is, therefore, to develop a progressive and robust Islamic banking and financial system, rooted in the Islamic core values and principles, that best serves the needs of our economies.  By indicating the destination in the journey, to developing the Islamic banking industry, the Master Plan would provide a road map to drive convergence towards the common vision among countries in the development of an Islamic financial system. While collective efforts can be directed to achieve this common vision, consideration needs to be given to the stage of development of the respective economies. In particular, the expected role that the banking system needs to fulfill can be identified accordingly. This could range from the development of an Islamic banking system to efficiently intermediate funds in the economy, to having in place a sophisticated Islamic banking and financial system that is internationally integrated and that is in itself, an engine of growth. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
Pre-requisites of the Islamic banking system The development of a vibrant and dynamic Islamic banking system that has a meaningful role in a nation's future economic and social development requires well-defined strategies that focus on two main areas, building institutional capacity and the development of the supporting financial infrastructure. Allow me to highlight the key areas of the strategies. The first task is to identify the nature of Islamic banking system that is appropriate for the country - whether to ultimately adopt a dual banking system where Islamic banks and conventional banks offering Islamic banking products operate in parallel with the conventional banking system, or alternatively to adopt a single banking system that fully accords the Shariah injunctions where all the banks are Islamic.  Second, measures need to be in place to ensure that the Islamic banks are well-capitalised and resilient. For Islamic banks that are already in existence, clear criteria need to be specified on the minimum capital size that would enable them to be significant players in the market, be able to gain from economies of scale, have a diversified earnings base and stronger market presence. Such minimum size can either be achieved through organic growth or merger with a partner bank which would bring about the desired outcome in a shorter period of time. Incentives can be provided to induce the banks to consolidate while guidelines on minimum capital size can be imposed to ensure that the banks either merge or undergo a recapitalisation exercise. In the case of countries that are just embarking on the introduction of Islamic banks, this could be achieved by the issue of new Islamic banking licences.  Third, for countries that have a dual banking system, where conventional banks are allowed to offer Islamic banking products, there must be adequate firewalls to ensure absolute separation of banking operations to avoid co-mingling between the Islamic and conventional funds. This is to ensure the integrity of Islamic banking operations and the sanctity of Islamic funds. The firewalls would need to include separate capital funds, cheque clearing systems, clearing accounts with the Central Bank, settlement accounts and reporting systems.  Fourth, regardless of the choice of system, it is important that the stakeholders of the institutions play their role effectively and efficiently to generate improvements in the entity. Of importance, is strong leadership in the management team that has a firm commitment toward performance and capacity enhancements. In addition, investments in the requisite talent and skills is essential to spearhead the development of Islamic financial products. Fifth, is the need to put in place a comprehensive legal infrastructure. Enactment of an Islamic banking law is an important part of this process. For conventional banks offering Islamic banking products, amendments to the existing banking legislation may be necessary to allow such banks to undertake trade-related activities and other multi-faceted functions. The investment policy of the Government may need to be reviewed to provide for the issue of Islamic investment instruments to facilitate the liquidity operations of such banking institutions. In addition, a legal fraternity that is competent in both Shariah and civil laws is also important. Finally, in a dual banking system, the tax legislation should accord neutrality in treatment between Islamic and conventional banking products.  Sixth, the development of a comprehensive Shariah framework is a fundamental part of the process. Each institution offering Islamic products will need to establish a Shariah advisory committee to ensure that all Islamic transactions, products and operations are Shariah-compliant. Shariah decisions need to be made transparent to promote greater understanding and the acceptance of such decisions. Seventh, the importance of a robust and effective regulatory and supervisory framework cannot be over-emphasised. While the financial regulation and supervision of Islamic banking institutions would be similar, the areas such as capital adequacy, the liquidity framework have to take into account the unique risk characteristics of the Islamic banking models that accord the Shariah requirements. Sound corporate governance, transparency, accountability, disclosure, market discipline, risk management and consumer protection are common issues that need to be addressed. In a dual banking system, it is important that opportunities for regulatory arbitrage in banking practices should be eliminated.  Eighth, research and development is important to incorporate core Islamic values into banking products and business models. Research and development, and leveraging on the advances in information and communication technology are also critical in ensuring performance and a more equitable distribution of profits and wealth among all stakeholders. In addition, robust financial models that leverage on the advances in information technology can be used to enhance product development and risk management.  BIS Review 49/2005 3 
Ninth, the development of the financial market infrastructure is equally important to ensure the sustainability of Islamic banking. The Islamic interbank and foreign exchange markets are integral to the efficient functioning of the Islamic banking system. They facilitate the liquidity operations of Islamic banks and promote financial stability. In addition, they serve as an important transmission channel for the implementation of monetary policy as well as the central bank's role as lender of last resort. The creation of a well-developed Islamic capital market is also important as it provides the users of capital with an alternative and cost-efficient source of longer-term financing, and accords investors with a wider range of financial instruments to suit their different risk profiles. And at the core of any financial system lies an efficient and robust payment system for the clearing and settlement of payments. Other financial infrastructure that provides support to the development of the Islamic banking sector includes the mortgage corporation to undertake the securitisation of house financing, a credit guarantee corporation to provide guarantee schemes to the SME industry, and a rating agency to rate the Islamic financial instruments and a deposit insurance scheme to provide the necessary safety net for depositors should also be developed. In addition, the auditing, tax and legal firms must have the right talents to provide their services to the Islamic financial institutions. These ancillary institutions must have the ability to provide their services that are in accordance with the Shariah principles.  Tenth, consumer education and awareness about Islamic banking is critical to its success and future development. A consumer education programme needs to be developed to enhance public awareness of the features of Islamic banking products and services.  Translating the action plan into reality  The appropriate Islamic banking system for a country would be largely based on the national agenda of the respective countries, the objectives that the system hopes to achieve and the available resources. For the adoption of a dual banking system, the conventional banks have the option of offering Islamic banking products on a window basis or via full-fledged Islamic branches or an Islamic subsidiary. Conventional bank may also be converted to operate as an Islamic bank. Alternatively, the Islamic banking system may only comprise Islamic banks newly created to operate in parallel with the conventional banking system.  In addition, the government can upgrade existing Islamic savings institutions to Islamic banks; license foreign Islamic banks as a consortium or on joint venture with local banks; or a combination of these options to achieve its objective. Alternatively, a country may wish to adopt a system-wide Islamic banking and finance, a single banking system that fully accords the Shariah framework. Allow me to take the opportunity to present the Malaysian experience. The development of Islamic banking has transitioned through four distinct phases. The first phase involved the establishment of Islamic financial institutions. In the second phase, conventional banks with the appropriate firewalls in place were permitted to offer Islamic financial products and services. As this window operations achieved a critical mass, the option to transform these operations into Islamic subsidiaries represents the third phase of development. And finally as capacities were enhanced, liberalisation allowed for the international integration of our domestic Islamic banking system in the fourth phase of the development. The first phase of development of Islamic finance in Malaysia started in 1969 with the establishment of an Islamic savings institution known as the Pilgrim Fund Board, or Tabung Haji, as the first Islamic financial institution in Malaysia. Its objective is to mobilise savings of Muslims intending to perform the pilgrimage and to channel the funds to permissible investments according to the Shariah principles. As awareness of Islamic finance increased, a full-fledged Islamic bank was established in 1983 when Bank Islam, the first Islamic bank was established under the Islamic Banking Act. The Government Investment Act was also enacted in 1983 to allow for government investment certificates to be issued to facilitate the Bank's liquidity operations. As part of the long term objective of developing a comprehensive Islamic financial system operating side-by-side with the conventional banking system, a year after the establishment of Bank Islam, a takaful or Islamic insurance company was established under the Takaful Act to provide the coverage for Islamic financing.  In the second phase of the development of Islamic banking, conventional banking institutions were permitted to offer Islamic banking products and services on a window basis to leverage on the existing infrastructure, including staff and branch network, and achieve wider market and cost optimisation. This landmark policy was undertaken ten years after the establishment of the full Islamic bank to allow 4 BIS Review 49/2005 
for its greater outreach. The window operations opened the door for the existing conventional banks to participate in the Islamic banking market for both the Muslim and non-Muslim communities. Under a pilot programme, three conventional banks were initially allowed to offer Islamic banking products and services. Then in early 1994, together with the establishment of the Islamic interbank market, a dual banking system was created. The interbank market is integral to the smooth functioning of the Islamic banking system, and became the first of such models. Concurrently, firewalls between the conventional and Islamic funds were put in place, which included separation of capital funds, cheque clearing system, clearing account with the central bank, settlement account and reporting system. They were also required to establish Islamic banking units to be headed by a senior banker, create an Islamic banking fund with a minimum allocation, and appoint at least a Shariah consultant to advise on the day-to-day operations of the Islamic banking division. In the ensuing years, additional rules and regulations were made to strengthen such operations. Eventually, more players were granted approval to offer Islamic financial products and services. The move enhanced further the vibrancy of the Islamic interbank market.  The efficiency of the Islamic interbank market is enhanced by the Real Time Gross Settlement System (RENTAS) and the Fully Automated System for Tendering (FAST). RENTAS facilitates larger value interbank funds transfers and scriptless securities while FAST facilitates the tendering process for Islamic securities including government securities, commercial papers and private debt securities. Funds are raised to finance long-term infrastructure and development projects through the issuance of Islamic private debt securities.  Recognising the importance of the capital market, Malaysia initiated the development of a private Islamic financial securities market in the early nineties, about six years after the establishment of the Islamic bank, with the issuance of the first Islamic financial instrument. Subsequently, more instruments were issued and these created an investment environment conducive for investors, including banks. The introduction of the Islamic capital market has reduced the over-dependence on the Islamic banking system for long-term financing and allows Islamic banking institutions to diversify part of the risks emanating from asset and liability mismatches. The existence of the Islamic capital market plays an important role in reducing a potential source of financial vulnerabilities and enhances the robustness and resilience of the Islamic financial system, leading to greater financial stability. A significant development in the domestic Islamic financial market was the recent issuance of ringgit-denominated Islamic debt securities by two multilateral financial institutions. This has heightened confidence in the Malaysian Islamic financial market. The issuance was made possible following the liberalisation to the foreign exchange administration rules to facilitate multilateral development banks, multilateral financial institutions and multinational corporations to raise ringgit-denominated bonds in the Malaysian capital market. The Islamic banking system is currently represented by 30 Islamic banking institutions, comprising four Islamic banks and 26 conventional banking institutions, that is, eight commercial banks, four foreign banks, three finance companies, four merchant banks and seven discount houses. The ability of the Islamic banking institutions to arrange and offer products with attractive and innovative features at competitive prices vis-a-viz conventional banking products, has appealed to both Muslim and non-Muslim customers, reflecting the effectiveness and competitiveness of Islamic finance as a form of financial intermediation. The extensive distribution network of Islamic banking institutions, comprising 152 full-fledged Islamic banking branches and 2,065 Islamic banking counters, is also supported by an efficient and secure payment system. The other institutions which have been established to ensure that the Islamic financial system remain sustainable and robust include the external credit rating agencies such as the Rating Agency Malaysia and Malaysian Rating Corporation Berhad, three more takaful players, five development financial institutions that offer Islamic financial products including a cooperative bank that has fully converted to operating as a full fledged Islamic financial institution and a national mortgage corporation, Cagamas Berhad, all of which offer Islamic financial products. Malaysia has also adopted legal reform, self-regulation and measures to encourage market-based regulation. New measures have been introduced to further improve the level of governance among banking institutions. In the case of Malaysia, the High Court of Malaysia has dedicated high court judges to preside over litigation on matters relating to Islamic banking and finance. To undertake a holistic legal review, the Central Bank of Malaysia has set up a Law Review Committee to review the common law-based domestic legislations to assimilate the Shariah principles. The aim is to remove any legal impediments and ensure the unhindered and efficient functioning of the Islamic banking and BIS Review 49/2005 5 
financial system. The Central Bank Act has also been amended to provide for the establishment of a Shariah Advisory Council at the Central Bank as the sole authority and reference on all Shariah matters pertaining to Islamic banking and finance. The Islamic financial system today has emerged as an important component of the overall Malaysian financial system that contributes to the growth and development of the Malaysian economy. Since 2000, the domestic Islamic banking industry has been growing at an average rate of 18% per annum in terms of assets. As at end-2004, total assets of the Islamic banking sector increased to RM94.6 billion, accounting for 10.5% of the total assets in the banking system. The market share of Islamic deposits and financing also increased to 11.2% and 11.3% respectively.  As the domestic Islamic banking industry progresses into a more advanced stage of development, significant developments are shaping the industry's financial regulatory infrastructure. The developments in the pipe-line include the unique set of prudential regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic banking operations by the Islamic Financial Services Board, tailor-made set of accounting standards for Islamic financial business by the Malaysian Accounting Standards Board and introduction of the Deposit Insurance Scheme in Malaysia. Having achieved the critical mass, Bank Negara Malaysia conducted a review in 2003 of the existing 'window' institutional structure of the banks to prepare an enabling structure that can assimilate future developments in the Islamic financial regulatory infrastructure over the longer term and thus strengthen the prudential regulatory and supervisory regime. This represents the third phase in the development of Islamic banking in Malaysia. The new institutional structure known as 'Islamic subsidiary' was introduced in 2004. It is envisaged that greater strategic focus and resources as well as higher autonomy and governance will be accorded to the Islamic banks. To-date, two Islamic subsidiaries of two banking groups have been set up. Integrating with international financial system Another significant milestone in the progress of Islamic banking and finance in the Malaysian banking system in its two decades of development is the issuance of three new Islamic bank licences to Islamic financial institutions from the Middle East. The new entrants with distinctive capabilities and strengths will have the opportunity to bridge the two regions, participate in the growing Islamic banking industry as well as tap new markets in Malaysia and in the region, and promote healthy competition thereby contributing to elevate the industry to new levels of dynamism. In addition, up to 49% foreign interest is permitted in the Islamic subsidiaries. This represents the fourth phase of development of our Islamic banking sector. The pace of the integration process of Islamic finance with the international financial system is dependent on the steps to enhance the robustness and resilience of the domestic Islamic financial system. It will promote increased competitiveness, resilience and sustainability of the Islamic financial system as a form of financial intermediation. The integration would greatly contribute towards facilitating greater cross border flows in terms of increased trade and investment transactions; thereby, strengthening the global economic and financial inter-linkages. As this international integration process intensifies, it will facilitate greater mobilisation and channelling of resources between countries to productive investments; hence, raising the prospects for more balanced global growth and shared prosperity among the Ummah. This would also allow for more diversification of risks to achieve global stability.  We are witnessing the beginning of this process through greater presence of Islamic banks in the markets of other Muslim and non-Muslim countries as well as ability to raise funds in each others' financial markets, particularly by traditional multilateral institutions. Subscription and trading of Islamic financial instruments by conventional financial institutions is already commonplace, which is undertaken using the existing systems for trading, the existing international exchanges for listing and the existing clearing houses for settlement purposes.  An important initiative in the development of the international Islamic financial architecture is the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) in 2002. It was established to promulgate the international regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic financial institutions worldwide aimed at achieving harmonisation of Islamic banking practices, fostering best practices and securing soundness and stability in Islamic finance. Another initiative to accelerate the integration of Islamic finance was the setting up of the International Islamic Financial Market or IIFM in 2002. The IIFM provides the environment to link all the financial centres around the world that participate in Islamic finance, thereby encouraging active participation by both Islamic and non-Islamic financial institutions 6 BIS Review 49/2005 
in the secondary market for Islamic financial instruments. As the volume increases, it would strengthen the inter-linkages and integration amongst the Islamic financial centres. While having a Master Plan will provide a shared vision and a common goal, it needs to be recognised that the evolution of an Islamic financial system with all its component parts cannot be achieved within a short period of time. Having the medium and longer term goals outlined however, provides a basis to ensure the short term initiatives will be consistent and coherent with the long term objective. In other words, the construction of the building blocks must move in the right direction. As part of the process, each Islamic banking institution needs to formulate its own strategic plans and short-term action plans within this longer term perspective. With the foundations built and the plans in place, the future is by no means secure. It is only with the combined efforts and perseverance of all the stakeholders that the vision that is being envisaged for the future development of Islamic finance can yield the desired results. InsyaAllah'. Thank you. BIS Review 49/2005 7 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening linkages in the Islamic financial markets  Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the seminar on Derivatives in Islamic Finance, “Strengthening Linkages in the Islamic Financial Markets”, Kuala Lumpur, 24 June 2005. *      *      * Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, "Islamic finance in Malaysia today has become increasingly more entrenched and integrated both on the domestic and international fronts. The successful integration has contributed to its rapid growth in assets and created a more robust and resilient Islamic financial system. The challenge now is to further strengthen the linkages in the respective components of the Islamic financial system, in particular, the Islamic financial markets. " It is my pleasure to welcome you to this seminar on Derivatives in Islamic Finance jointly organised by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Financial Market Association of Malaysia. During this recent two days, we have organized the Investors Conference, the seminar on the 10-year Masterplan on Islamic Finance and the dialogue among Shariah scholars which have gathered an extensive participation, from policy makers, investors, industry players and Shariah scholars. Today's event is another important initiative which brings together financial experts to deliberate on a vital aspect in the development of Islamic finance.  Ladies and Gentlemen, The successful development of a robust and resilient Islamic financial system depends on the ability to integrate the various components of the Islamic financial system that includes the Islamic banking industry, takaful and the money and capital markets. Of equal importance is also to integrate the domestic Islamic financial system with the international financial system. For more than two decades, we have witnessed the success of the development of each of these respective components that has contributed to the rapid expansion in Malaysia's Islamic financial services industry. Indeed, we have seen the development of a comprehensive Islamic financial system. This has placed the Malaysian Islamic financial system at the forefront of the global Islamic financial system. Notwithstanding this, there have been imbalances in the pace of the growth of the components of the financial system. While Islamic banking, being the core component, has recorded significant progress, more efforts need to be directed to promote the growth of takaful and the financial markets. My remarks today will focus on measures to accelerate the growth of the Islamic financial markets by strengthening its required linkages. Of most importance is the development of a wider range of Islamic financial instruments, developing the relevant indicators to support benchmarking and an efficient pricing mechanism as well as to actively promote the role of the market players. Development of a wider range of Islamic financial instruments For Islamic financial institutions to effectively manage its funds, there is a need to have diversity in the type and the maturity of the Islamic financial instruments. This is one area in Islamic finance that offers formidable challenges and opportunities to market participants in Malaysia. A broader range of products and services is vital in this fast changing global financial landscape. In today's marketplace, there are only a number of Islamic financial instruments that have been developed to cater for this need which for the most part constitutes straight private and government Islamic papers. In a bid to deepen and broaden the Islamic bond market, the government has been regularly issuing Islamic and conventional securities with different maturities, enabling the creation of a benchmark yield curve. This was further enhanced with the introduction of an Auction Calender in the year 2000. In the 2000, Government Investment Issues or GIIs were introduced, followed by Islamic negotiable notes, private debt securities, Treasury Bills and sukuk. Furthermore, following the amendment to the Government Investment Act in year 2005, the Government has started issuing shorter-term Islamic Treasury Bills and longer-term sukuk or Islamic bonds with a maturity of 10 years in order to further diversify the Islamic financial instruments available for investors. Under the Act, the Government is able to issue Islamic instruments under various Shariah principles and for different tenures; short and long term, to BIS Review 49/2005 1 
meet the varying needs of investors. Islamic private debt securities (PDS) too have been fast growing in importance and size, accounting for 50% of the total PDS market in 2004.  Despite these developments, there has been an inadequate supply of short-term Islamic instruments thereby providing less flexibility to the institutions in managing their asset and liability profiles. This is important as the Islamic banking institution has, to a large extent of its portfolio, long-term assets that include long-term Islamic housing mortgages and long-term Islamic financial instruments. These two asset classes constitute approximately 80% of their portfolio. This over-concentration warrants the need to have effective risk mitigating techniques and instruments as to avoid any potential adverse consequences that could occur in volatile market conditions. On major importance is the elimination of uncertainties from a particular transaction. The need for Islamic hedging instruments in the Islamic financial services industry has therefore become increasingly important. Thus far, significant progress in this area has yet to be made. It is hoped that this seminar will be able to generate new ideas that can be implemented to support the requirements of the Islamic financial services industry players. Ladies and Gentlemen, As the Islamic finance is undergoing transformation, the financial infrastructure and product development must be complemented by the ability to manage risks by market participants. This becomes particularly important as the growing and changing needs and expectations of consumers occurs as a result of increased education levels and growing wealth. Corporate customers have become more performance-oriented and are demanding both competitively financial products and world-class financial advisory services. Consumers too are becoming increasingly discerning and have become more involved in their financial decisions, demanding a broader range of products and services at more competitive prices through more efficient and convenient channels. In this environment, product innovation needs to be escalated accordingly in particular, to respond to the growing need for managing risks to realign the risk-return profile of assets and liabilities for financial institutions and investors in reaction to fast changing economic variables. This is made more pronounced by the fact that increasingly, with the unprecedented economic integration, financial markets across the globe are not immune to financial volatilities. Therefore, it is crucial that market participants have the necessary tools to manage financial risks prudently and this is where derivatives can be applied. Application of derivatives will yield benefits to the general public as spread of risk among economic agents will mitigate risk of financial shocks to the financial markets at the macro level and individual institutions at the micro level. As a result, the financial system becomes more robust, stable and resilient to extreme volatilities in the financial markets. The introduction of derivatives in the Islamic finance with adequate legal, regulatory and corporate governance framework will enhance the development of the functioning of the Islamic financial system.  Developing the relevant indicators  The pricing mechanism for the Islamic financial instruments has so far been based on the prevailing interest rate framework. There appears to be no real difference in both the conventional and Islamic instrument. In order for the Islamic financial instrument to be efficiently priced, it needs to have its own indicator. As an example, for an instrument issued based on Ijarah principle using the property as its underlying asset, the actual rate of rental can be used to determine the rate of return on this instrument. The indicator of the rate of rental will fluctuate based on the demand and supply of the said property. By having its own indicator, it will give a true reflection of the price of the underlying property asset as opposed to being linked to the KLIBOR which has no direct correlation with the changes in the rental rate.  Actively promote the role of the market players The Islamic financial services industry is expected to benefit from the recent increase in the number of players following the launching of Islamic subsidiaries, the issuance of foreign Islamic banking licences and the measures to issue additional takaful licences. The entrance of these players will contribute to an active participation in both the primary and secondary markets for Islamic financial instruments.  Ladies and Gentlemen, 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
I hope this seminar will crystallize positive ideas to pave the way and contribute towards the development of a more vibrant and dynamic Islamic financial system. I wish to take this opportunity to thank the speakers for accepting our invitation to share their invaluable knowledge and experiences in this Seminar. The participation by researchers and practitioners in the Islamic financial system is also important. On this note, I wish you all a successful seminar. BIS Review 49/2005 3 
Nicholas C Garganas: Adjusting to the single monetary policy of the ECB Luncheon address by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, before the Euro 50 Group, Athens, 24 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to thank Prof. Richard Portes for his kind introduction. It is indeed an honour and a pleasure to address such a distinguished audience of academics and practitioners specialized in the field of European economic policies and broader issues linked to the Euro. This meeting is an important event. It takes place at a time of tensions about the impact of the single monetary policy on the euro area and when several commentators have raised doubts about the sustainability of monetary union. Europe's single-currency undertaking is perhaps the boldest attempt ever in which a large and diverse group of sovereign states has attempted to reap the efficiency gains of using a common currency. The euro has created a new monetary reality for 307 million Europeans that few would have thought possible a generation ago. Like most bold undertakings, however, the euro has had its share of ups and downs. When the euro was launched in 1999, skeptics were doubtful whether it would be possible to make the euro a stable currency. Yet, the euro, which is probably the most visible and tangible symbol of this integration process, is now in its seventh year and has been firmly and credibly established as a stable currency. Today, I want to address a widely-debated issue - namely, whether a single monetary policy can fit all parties in a supposedly heterogeneous currency area. This issue has been debated extensively since the start of EMU. The debate has recently intensified, reflecting concerns about the increased divergence of growth rates over the past few quarters and uncertainties deriving from French and Dutch rejections of the Constitutional Treaty. Before I discuss this issue, allow me to offer the following qualification. My perspective is that of someone from Greece, a small, open economy with a history of very high inflation and enormous fiscal deficits in the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s. Other countries' perspectives might well highlight features other than those that I will discuss. EMU: An optimum currency area perspective EMU brought unique challenges for monetary policy. Critical observers took the view that a single monetary policy was doomed to failure. This skepticism was supported by the arguments of the traditional theory of optimum currency areas, which recommended monetary unification only among economies with flexible markets, free mobility of labour, a centralised fiscal policy, and a limited incidence of asymmetric shocks. Clearly, these conditions did not - and do not - hold for the euro area. After all, the euro zone is characterised by significant rigidities in labour and product markets, the absence of a significant centralised fiscal transfer mechanism, and national economies with unique institutional and economic features - a set of circumstances that results in a high incidence and impact of asymmetric shocks. In these circumstances, so the argument goes, such shocks are likely to lead to widening price differentials so that a common nominal interest rate in the monetary union results in different real interest rates among countries. For member countries with relatively-strong domestic demand and a higher-than-average inflation rate, the lower real interest rate fuels domestic demand and national inflation. Conversely, for countries with relatively-weak domestic demand and a lower-than-average inflation rate, the high real interest rates put further downward pressures on domestic demand and inflation. A one-size monetary policy, in other words, does not match the needs of all members. The foregoing, traditional view of optimum currency areas neglects several important factors. It seeks to identify the characteristics that a country should satisfy prior to joining a monetary union - that is, ex ante. We now know, however, that participation in a monetary union may itself induce changes in economic structure and performance ex post through at least two channels. These channels operate through enhanced credibility and trade and financial integration. How does the credibility channel work? A major benefit of participating in EMU, especially for countries such as Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain that have had recent histories of relatively-high inflation rates, has been the credibility gain derived from eliminating the inflation bias of discretionary monetary BIS Review 49/2005 1 
policy. With low and stable inflation and inflation expectations, nominal interest-rate differentials between these countries and countries with histories of relatively-low inflation rates, such as Germany, have almost been eliminated. With lower nominal interest rates in traditionally high-inflation countries, the cost of servicing public-sector debt is reduced, facilitating fiscal adjustment, and freeing resources for other uses. Moreover, with low and stable inflation, economic horizons lengthen, encouraging a transformation of the financial sector. The lengthening of horizons and the reduction of interest rates stimulate private investment and risk taking, fostering faster growth. For Greece, entering the euro zone has meant not only the loss of an independent monetary policy - the fruits of which were amply demonstrated in the 1980s and the early 1990s - but also the credibility gains associated with a stable, low-inflation monetary regime. In the 15 years until 1994 - the year in which Greece's efforts to qualify for euro-area entry began in earnest - inflation averaged almost 20 per cent while real growth averaged less than 1 per cent. In contrast, during the past 6 years real growth has averaged more than 4 per cent while inflation has been slightly above 3 per cent. Another way to infer the credibility gains is by looking at interest-rate spreads. In 1997, the year in which a 10-year government bond was first issued in the Greek financial market, the yield differential between that bond and the comparable German bond was 412 basis points. Today, it stands at only 24 basis points. I suggest, therefore, that giving up a nationally-tailored monetary policy has not, in fact, been a cost, but a benefit. Now let me turn to the trade channel. Recent empirical work has shown that a common currency can promote trade and growth over and above any effect produced by separate currencies tied together with fixed exchange rates. For the euro area, the evidence suggests that the adoption of the euro has already increased trade among EMU members by between 4 and 16 per cent compared with trade among European countries that have not adopted the euro. Increased trade integration leads to more-highly-correlated business cycles because of common demand shocks and greater intra-industry trade, reducing the need for country-specific monetary policies. There are additional reasons that a monetary union reduces the incidence of country-specific shocks. One of the principal causes of asymmetric shocks - the effects of divergent monetary policies - no longer exists. Furthermore, it is to be expected that the deepening of financial-market integration will also entail a convergence in the transmission mechanism of monetary impulses. Finally, the common currency helps to increase price transparency and, therefore, competition in goods, services and factor markets, leading to a further alignment of economic cycles. Inflation differentials The fact remains, however, that there are inflation differentials among the members of the euro zone. How significant are these differentials and how concerned should we be? Recent evidence provided by the ECB shows that, over the period 1990-99, the 12 countries now comprising the euro area experienced a downward trend in the degree of inflation dispersion - measured as the standard deviation of that dispersion - from about 6 percentage points in the early 1990s to a low of less than one percentage point in the second half of 1999. Since that time, inflation dispersion has changed very little - that is, it remains less than a percentage point. To provide a basis of comparison, since 1999 inflation dispersion across the euro area has fluctuated close to the level observed across the 14 metropolitan statistical areas of the United States. Remarkably, the process of nominal convergence in the euro area was not accompanied by greater dispersion of real GDP growth rates, which has remained close to its historical average of around 2 percentage points following the adoption of the euro. There is one notable difference, however, between inflation differentials in the euro area and those in the United States. Although inflation differentials in the euro area have not widened, they have exhibited a relatively-high degree of persistence, higher than that experienced across the 14 metropolitan statistical areas of the United States. Seven of the 12 euro-area economies have recorded annual inflation rates that have remained either persistently above or persistently below the euro-area average since 1999. One of those countries is Greece, where inflation has persistently exceeded the euro-area average by about one-and-a-half percentage points since Greece became a member of the euro area in 2001. Several factors have contributed to the persistence of inflation differentials across euro-area economies. One factor in relatively-low income countries, such as Greece, is the so called Balassa-Samuelson effect, according to which long-term differentials in regional inflation are attributable to 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
differences in the rate at which productivity increases in the various regions' tradable and non-tradable goods sectors. Although it is difficult to quantify this effect with precision, it provides only a partial explanation for the persistent inflation differentials that exist in the euro area. In any case, this effect is a transitory one. It is part of what I have called the adjustment mechanism - in this case, the adjustment to a higher standard of living. Other factors contributing to the inflation differentials within the euro area, including misaligned fiscal policies, wage dynamics not linked to productivity developments and structural inefficiencies such as rigidities in product and factors markets, are not so benign. Redressing these problems, as you know, is not within the domain of monetary policy. National economic policies are the relevant instruments to enhance the ability of individual countries to respond to economic shocks and to national divergences. I believe that EMU has helped stimulate reforms in the euro area. Major reforms are undoing the rigidities accumulated over decades, preparing social institutions for the looming demographic changes and making the euro area increasingly competitive internationally. It is crucial to continue strengthening competition in labour and product markets, for example, through liberalisation and deregulation, to improve the efficiency of price signals. National fiscal policies also provide important instruments. They can react to shocks in such a way as to counteract the emergence of differentials. However, sound public finances are an essential element of price stability and are necessary if automatic stabilizers are to work fully without the risk of excessively high deficits. In this respect it is important that Governments strive to achieve balanced budgets or surpluses in periods of favourable economic activity. What difference would such changes make? I previously referred to the relatively-low dispersion of real growth rates in the euro area, which is, in fact, of an order of magnitude near that existing among regions of the United States. The dispersion among US regions, however, is centered around a higher average growth rate. Since 1999, the US economy, which is more flexible than that of the euro zone, has grown at an average rate of about 3.1 per cent, compared with about 1.9 per cent average in the euro area. It is important that national labour market policies enhance flexibility at the national and regional levels. Structural policies should also aim at improving the efficiency of the wage and price setting mechanism to reduce the persistence of inflation divergence. In this connection, I should note that in some countries, such as Greece, wage behaviour has not fully adapted to the new regime. Conclusions Let me conclude with the following thoughts. Recent events have given rise to some populist rhetoric about the wisdom of a single currency within Europe. A few commentators have posed the question: Why have a monetary union in Europe? My perspective is very different. I share the sentiment of my colleagues on the Governing Council who have dismissed as "absurd" speculation that the euro area's future has been thrown into doubt. A single-size monetary policy has worked extremely well, delivering price stability so that changes in prices convey more effective information about demand and supply conditions. The credibility of the ECB's monetary policy has delivered interest rates that are at historically low levels to all member countries of the euro-area. Yet, price stability and low interest rates are not enough to raise growth and improve living standards. They provide the fabric upon which a more dynamic Europe can be woven. Recent events, in my view, only confirm that a currency union requires greater competition than do independent monetary areas. Market reform and strict fiscal rules are not luxuries for members of a monetary union, but necessities. In response to those who are asking, "Why have a single currency? let me cite some wise words penned by the late Irish playwright, George Bernard Shaw. "Some people," he wrote, "look at things as they are and ask, 'Why?' I look at things as they might be, and ask 'Why not?'" This, Ladies and Gentlemen, is the way I look at the future of Europe. Why not, indeed? Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for your attention. BIS Review 49/2005 3 
Christian Noyer: The contribution of payment infrastructures to the European financial integration and to the establishment of the SEPA (Single Euro Payments Area) Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 20th Anniversary of the European Banking Association (EBA), Paris, 23 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to join you today to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the European Banking Association (EBA), here in Paris at Palais Brongniart. First of all, I would like to give credit to the EBA for its strong commitment in favour of the European financial integration. This commitment has led the EBA to set up the large value payment system EURO 1 and the retail payment systems STEP 1 and STEP 2. Central banks of the Eurosystem, like any central bank, have a keen interest in securing that the financial system falling under their monetary competence is unified, competitive and stable. This is essential for the European economy, considering that a high degree of financial integration enables an efficient transmission of the monetary policy, a better allocation of financial resources, a minimisation of cost of capital, as well as a fast and safe execution of payments across the so called SEPA, that is to say the Single Euro Payments Area. Different factors support the development of a fully integrated financial system at the European level. Today, I will emphasise a key driver of this process - payment infrastructures. In particular, I will focus on what has already been done in this area and on what remains to be done. I will start by underlining the importance, for the European financial integration, of the development of efficient and safe payment infrastructures. Then, I will assess progress made in this field since the launch of the euro. I should mention immediately that my assessment is mixed. On the one hand, I consider that the situation is favourable for large-value payment systems. On the other hand, I can’t yet make the same positive assessment concerning retail payment systems. As a consequence, I will end my presentation by elaborating on the further developments needed to strengthen the integration of retail payments. 1.  Payment infrastructures are a necessary driver for financial integration Payment infrastructures cover all procedures and systems used by financial intermediaries to exchange payment orders issued by economic agents. Accordingly, they play a fundamental role for the smooth functioning of the economy as a whole. Indeed, provided that they allow financial transfers to take place between economic agents in an efficient and safe way, payment infrastructures are a key support to one of the core functions of money, namely money as a means of exchange. In the EU, infrastructures processing payments in euro consist in a number of arrangements, which are of different nature. For example, the exchange of payment orders in euro between financial intermediaries can be handled within multilateral systems or within the framework of correspondent banking bilateral arrangements. Although there is a great number of arrangements that ensure money transfers between financial intermediaries, in practice, financial transfers tend to be concentrated on a few of them. Thus, the largest volumes and values of payment orders are currently carried out in multilateral payment systems. On the basis of several surveys conducted by the Eurosystem since 1999, we consider that the market share of these systems is nearly 80 %, both in terms of volume and value. However, we should not minimise the role of correspondent banking, which holds the remaining 20 % of the market. Correspondent banking arrangements also show a high degree of concentration: out of all reporting banks to the Eurosystem’s survey, the ten largest banks account for about 80 % of the overall value of correspondent banking transactions. Moreover, correspondent activities of some banks are substantial and similar in size to those of some interbank funds transfer systems. The issue of the infrastructures diversity for payments in euro across the EU was raised prior to, and due to, the introduction of the euro. At that time, it was realised that diversity had drawbacks to the BIS Review 49/2005 1 
extent that it came together with a discrepancy of service level between national and cross border payments, at the expense of the latter. With respect to the objective of financial integration, it was clear that this situation could not be considered as an optimum. The issue was taken into account before the launch of the euro. The re-engineering of payments processing, aiming at notably closing identified efficiency and safety gaps between cross-border and national payment infrastructures, appeared as a pillar for ensuring a high degree of monetary and financial integration in Europe. The Eurosystem has been closely involved in lifting obstacles to the European financial integration in particular with respect to those related to payment infrastructures, in support of market initiatives, including notably those of the EBA. The rationale for such an involvement is in line with the statutory role of the Eurosystem. Indeed, pursuant to the Treaty, the responsibility of ensuring the smooth functioning of payment systems is one of the basic statutory tasks of the Eurosystem. Therefore, the Eurosystem has participated so far in the process of integration under three roles. Firstly, as a service provider for clearing and settlement of large value payments, with the operation of the TARGET system. Secondly, as a catalyst of market participants’ efforts for the creation of a SEPA for retail payments. Thirdly, as an overseer of the functioning of systems processing payments in euro. 2.  The present situation display a significant discrepancy in the integration of payment infrastructures Let me now assess the achievements of the integration process of payment infrastructures. The degree of integration depends on the segment of the payment infrastructures market. While the large value payments segment has already reached a high level of streamlining and consolidation and will further progress with the launch of the TARGET 2 system, the retail payments segment is still very fragmented. In the area of large value payment infrastructures, the degree of integration has increased very quickly. We should bear in mind that EURO 1 and TARGET have been clearly set up to face the challenge of the EMU. It was of great importance for large value payments, in particular those linked to the money market, to rely on systems handling efficiently and safely cross border transactions. Moreover, TARGET was a prerequisite for the effective conduct of the single monetary policy, because it ensures the settlement of monetary policy operations. The timeframe was particularly tight to build up the TARGET system. Therefore, the design of TARGET 1 was based on the principle of minimum harmonisation and on a decentralised architecture, with an interlinking of the national RTGS (Real-Time Gross Settlement Systems). TARGET 2, which is due to go live in 2007, will further improve the degree of integration of wholesale payment infrastructures. It will provide fully harmonised settlement services across Europe in real-time in central bank money, supported by a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments and a single processing platform. This single platform will be used by all central banks of the ESCB to provide services to their banking community. TARGET 2 will enhance cost-efficiency and meet state-of-the-art business continuity procedures.  As a result, in less than ten years since the launch of the euro, the number of large value payment systems in euro operating in the EU will have been dramatically reduced: this number is to drop from 21 ( i.e the 16 components of TARGET1 plus 5 privately-owned systems) down to 2 (TARGET2 and EURO 1). To sum up, we should shortly be on the same footing as the United States in terms of the integration of large-value payment infrastructures. On the retail side, the situation is quite different. Indeed, there are today in the EU, 15 multilateral clearing and settlement systems in euro, almost the same number than 10 years ago, and there is no clear sign for the time being that this number is going to fall significantly in the short to medium run. The market is therefore characterized by this multiplicity of national multilateral retail payment systems, coexisting with various other payment arrangements such as bilateral schemes, international card schemes or banking “clubs”. It is fair to say that significant steps towards integration have nevertheless been made since the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. In 2002, the European banking community launched the SEPA project, with the final objective that by 2010 “all payments are treated as domestic as far as speed, security, convenience and cost are concerned”. 2 BIS Review 49/2005 
However, meeting this ambitious objective implies a significant evolution of the current retail infrastructures towards a pan European infrastructure, the so called PEACH, which will aim at reinforcing the global efficiency of payments in Europe. The main achievement with regards to infrastructures until now has been the launch of STEP2, since it is the first infrastructure compliant with the PEACH requirements, as defined by the EPC. But there is still a significant way to go since STEP2 handles low volumes, 170.000 payments in May 2005, and can still not offer the same level of service as national ACHs. In that context, it must be seen as a positive prospect that most national retail payment systems are now preparing themselves to the implementation of SEPA, through the spreading use of standardisation, which will allow the interoperability of infrastructures. In France for example, several banks have initiated the STET project in view of SEPA. However, one should note that the idea of consolidating the retail systems platforms is for the time being not really at the forefront of market initiatives, even though consolidation is a source of cost savings and efficiency. Why such a gap in the level of integration between large-value payment systems and retail payment systems? I see two main explanations. First, large value payment systems have benefited from the incentive of the adoption of the single monetary policy in the Euro area, which made the creation of TARGET mandatory. Second, the integration of retail payment infrastructures is a more complex issue. Large value payment infrastructures handle only one type of payment instrument, the fund credit transfer, whereas the diversity of retail payment instruments makes the integration of national retail infrastructures more difficult. In addition, the transition costs are significant and the coordination problems to be solved are important. 3.  The integration of retail payment infrastructures has become a priority on the agenda of the Eurosystem It is particularly important that the European banking community now focuses on the retail payment issue and takes up in particular the challenge of creating a fully integrated retail payment infrastructure. The stake is obvious - the success of the SEPA. Tools to build a SEPA for infrastructures are known by all of us, but I would like to mention them briefly: it deals with enforcing standardisation and interoperability between systems on one side, with ensuring equal access of financial intermediaries without considering national locations on the other side. The EPC expressed its commitment to deliver two pan-European payment schemes - one for credit transfers and one for direct debits- and to develop a framework for cards that will be available for clients by 2008. Furthermore, the EPC expects that “a critical mass of transactions will naturally migrate to these payment instruments by 2010 such that SEPA will be irreversible through the operation of market forces and network effects”. From my point of view, to be successful, the new strategy of the EPC requires that two main conditions are fulfilled. The first condition is to make sure that the pan-European instruments are attractive for consumers. As regards this first condition, I just would like to draw your attention on one point: in order to be really attractive, the pan-European payment instruments need to be the “best of breed” that is to say that the service level to be provided should converge towards the best service levels in Europe. The second condition is that infrastructures are ready to support the critical mass effect expected in terms of adoption by customers of pan-European payment instruments. The 2010 deadline for infrastructures to be “SEPA compliant”, as recommended by the Eurosystem, is therefore very important. This “SEPA compliance” of infrastructures implies in particular that interoperability between all retail infrastructures is ensured. Defining and enforcing requirements for interoperability can certainly be part of the self-regulation space claimed by the EPC. In line with its supportive stance of market efforts, the Eurosystem, as Jean-Claude Trichet has already explained to you this morning, stands ready to assist the banking industry in the definition and implementation of such requirements. To conclude, I would like to stress that it is essential that the efforts put together by the banking industry since 2002 bear their fruit so that the SEPA becomes shortly a tangible reality for citizens, companies and other economic agents. Change in the functioning of payments infrastructures is to be a key enabler if such a result is to be obtained. The sector of wholesale payments is about to enter a crucial stage of consolidation due to the launch of TARGET 2 by central banks. A breakthrough is also necessary on the retail side: in the field of infrastructures this breakthrough should notably mean BIS Review 49/2005 3 
interoperability so that through increased competition, the market selects the best infrastructures for the SEPA. Thank you for your attention. 4 BIS Review 49/2005 
Mark W Olson: Regulatory relief Testimony of Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 21 June 2005. *      *      * Chairman Shelby, Senator Sarbanes, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on issues related to regulatory relief. The Board is aware of the current and growing regulatory burden that is imposed on this nation’s banking organizations. Often this burden falls particularly hard on small institutions, which have fewer resources than their larger brethren. The Board strongly supports the efforts of Congress to review periodically the federal banking laws to determine whether they can be streamlined without compromising the safety and soundness of banking organizations, consumer protections, or other important objectives that Congress has established for the financial system. In 2003, at Chairman Shelby’s request, the Board provided the Committee with a number of legislative proposals that we believe are consistent with this goal. Since then, the Board has continued to work with the other federal banking agencies and your staffs on regulatory relief matters and the Board recently agreed to support several additional regulatory relief proposals. A summary of the proposals supported by the Board is included in the appendix to my testimony. In my remarks, I will highlight the Board’s three highest priority proposals. These three proposals would allow the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at Reserve Banks, provide the Board greater flexibility in setting reserve requirements, and permit depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits. These amendments would improve efficiency in the financial sector, assist small banks and small businesses, and enhance the Federal Reserve’s toolkit for efficiently conducting monetary policy. I also will mention a few additional proposals that the Board supports and that would provide meaningful regulatory relief to banking organizations. The Board looks forward to working with Congress, our fellow banking agencies and other interested parties in developing and analyzing other potential regulatory relief proposals as the legislative process moves forward. For its part, the Board strives to review each of our regulations at least once every five years to identify those provisions that are out of date or otherwise unnecessary. The Board also has been an active participant in the ongoing regulatory review process being conducted by the federal banking agencies pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). EGRPRA requires the federal banking agencies, at least once every ten years, to review and seek public comment on the burden associated with the full range of the agencies’ regulations that affect insured depository institutions. The Board and the other banking agencies are in the midst of the first ten-year review cycle, and I am pleased to report that we are on track to complete this process by the 2006 deadline. The agencies already have solicited comments on four broad categories of regulations - including those governing applications, activities, money laundering, and consumer protection in lending transactions - and have conducted outreach meetings throughout the country to encourage public participation in the EGRPRA process. In response to these efforts, the agencies have received comments from more than 1,000 entities and individuals on ways to reduce the regulatory burden on banking organizations. The Board will consider and incorporate the comments relevant to our regulations as we move forward with our own regulation review efforts. While the banking agencies can achieve some burden reductions through administrative action, Congress plays a critical role in the regulatory relief process. Many proposals to reduce regulatory burden require congressional action to implement. Moreover, the Congress has ultimate responsibility for establishing the overall regulatory framework for banking organizations, and through its actions Congress can ensure that regulatory relief is consistent with the framework it has established to maintain the safety and soundness of banking organizations and promote other important public policy goals. Interest on reserves and reserve requirement flexibility For the purpose of implementing monetary policy, the Board is obliged by law to establish reserve requirements on certain deposits held at depository institutions. By law, the Board currently must set BIS Review 47/2005 1 
the ratio of required reserves on transaction deposits above a certain threshold at between 8 and 14 percent. Because the Federal Reserve does not pay interest on the balances held at Reserve Banks to meet reserve requirements, depositories have an incentive to reduce their reserve balances to a minimum. To do so, they engage in a variety of reserve avoidance activities, including sweep arrangements that move funds from deposits that are subject to reserve requirements to deposits and money market investments that are not. These sweep programs and similar activities absorb real resources and therefore diminish the efficiency of our banking system. The Board’s proposed amendment would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay depository institutions interest on their required reserve balances. Paying interest on these required reserve balances would remove a substantial portion of the incentive for depositories to engage in reserve avoidance measures, and the resulting improvements in efficiency should eventually be passed through to bank borrowers and depositors. Besides required reserve balances, depository institutions also voluntarily hold two other types of balances in their Reserve Bank accounts - contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances. A depository institution holds contractual clearing balances when it needs a higher level of balances than its required reserve balances in order to pay checks or make wire transfers out of its account at the Federal Reserve without incurring overnight overdrafts. Currently, such clearing balances do not earn explicit interest, but they do earn implicit interest in the form of credits that may be used to pay for Federal Reserve services, such as check clearing. Excess reserve balances are funds held by depository institutions in their accounts at Reserve Banks in excess of their required reserve and contractual clearing balances. Excess reserve balances currently do not earn explicit or implicit interest. The Board’s proposed amendment would authorize the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances, as well as required reserve balances. This authority would enhance the Federal Reserve’s ability to efficiently conduct monetary policy, and would complement another of the Board’s proposed amendments, which would give the Board greater flexibility in setting reserve requirements for depository institutions. In order for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to conduct monetary policy effectively, it is important that a sufficient and predictable demand for balances at the Reserve Banks exist so that the System knows the volume of reserves to supply (or remove) through open market operations to achieve the FOMC’s target federal funds rate. Authorizing the Federal Reserve to pay explicit interest on contractual clearing balances and excess reserve balances, in addition to required reserve balances, could potentially provide a demand for voluntary balances that would be stable enough for monetary policy to be implemented effectively through existing procedures without the need for required reserve balances. In these circumstances, the Board, if authorized, could consider reducing - or even eliminating - reserve requirements, thereby reducing a regulatory burden for all depository institutions, without adversely affecting the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct monetary policy. Having the authority to pay interest on excess reserves also could help mitigate potential volatility in overnight interest rates. If the Federal Reserve was authorized to pay interest on excess reserves, and did so, the rate paid would act as a minimum for overnight interest rates, because banks would not generally lend to other banks at a lower rate than they could earn by keeping their excess funds at a Reserve Bank. Although the Board sees no need to pay interest on excess reserves in the near future, and any movement in this direction would need further study, the ability to do so would be a potentially useful addition to the monetary toolkit of the Federal Reserve. The payment of interest on required reserve balances, or reductions in reserve requirements, would lower the revenues received by the Treasury from the Federal Reserve. The extent of the potential revenue loss, however, has fallen over the last decade as banks have increasingly implemented reserve-avoidance techniques. Paying interest on contractual clearing balances would primarily involve a switch to explicit interest from the implicit interest currently paid in the form of credits, and therefore would have essentially no net cost to the Treasury. Interest on demand deposits The Board also strongly supports repealing the statutory restrictions that currently prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. The Board’s proposed amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the legal authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. As I will explain a little later, however, the Board opposes amendments that would 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
separately authorize industrial loan companies that operate outside the supervisory and regulatory framework established for other insured banks to offer, for the first time, interest bearing transaction accounts to business customers. Repealing the prohibition of interest on demand deposits would improve the overall efficiency of our financial sector and, in particular, should assist small banks in attracting and retaining business deposits. To compete for the liquid assets of businesses, banks have been compelled to set up complicated procedures to pay implicit interest on compensating balance accounts and they spend resources - and charge fees - for sweeping the excess demand deposits of businesses into money market investments on a nightly basis. Small banks, however, often do not have the resources to develop the sweep or other programs that are needed to compete for the deposits of business customers. Moreover, from the standpoint of the overall economy, the expenses incurred by institutions of all sizes to implement these programs are a waste of resources and would be unnecessary if institutions were permitted to pay interest on demand deposits directly. The costs incurred by banks in operating these programs are passed on, directly or indirectly, to their large and small business customers. Authorizing banks to pay interest on demand deposits would eliminate the need for these customers to pay for more costly sweep and compensating balance arrangements to earn a return on their demand deposits. The payment of interest on demand deposits would have no direct effect on federal revenues, as interest payments would be deductible for banks but taxable for the firms that received them. Some proposals, such as H.R. 1224 - the Business Checking Freedom Act of 2005 - which recently passed the House, would delay the effectiveness of the authorization of interest on demand deposits for two years. The Board believes that a short implementation delay of one year, or even less, would be in the best interest of the public and the efficiency of our financial sector. A separate provision of H.R. 1224 would, in effect, allow implicit interest to be paid on demand deposits without any delay through a new type of sweep arrangement, but this provision would not promote efficiency. It would allow banks to offer a reservable money market deposit account (MMDA) from which twenty-four transfers a month could be made to other accounts of the same depositor. Banks would be able to sweep balances from demand deposits into these MMDAs each night, pay interest on them, and then sweep them back into demand deposits the next day. This type of account would likely permit banks to pay interest on demand deposits more selectively than with direct interest payments. The twenty-four-transfer MMDA, which would be useful only during the transition period before direct interest payments were allowed, could be implemented at lower cost by banks already having sweep programs. However, other banks would face a competitive disadvantage and pressures to incur the cost of setting up this new program during the transition for the one-year interim period. Moreover, some businesses would not benefit from this MMDA. Hence, the Board does not advocate this twenty-four-transfer account. Small bank examination flexibility The Board also supports an amendment that would expand the number of small institutions that qualify for an extended examination cycle. Federal law currently mandates that the appropriate federal banking agency conduct an on-site examination of each insured depository institution at least once every twelve months. The statute, however, permits institutions that have $250 million or less in assets and that meet certain capital, managerial, and other criteria to be examined on an eighteen-month cycle. As the primary federal supervisors for state-chartered banks, the Board and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) may alternate responsibility for conducting these examinations with the appropriate state supervisory authority if the Board or FDIC determines that the state examination carries out the purposes of the statute. The $250 million asset cutoff for an eighteen-month examination cycle has not been raised since 1994. The Board’s proposed amendment would raise this asset cap from $250 million to $500 million, thus potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,100 insured depository institutions to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. The proposed amendment would provide meaningful relief to small institutions without jeopardizing the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. Under the proposed amendment, an institution with less than $500 million in assets would qualify for the eighteen-month examination cycle only if the institution was well capitalized, well managed, and met the other criteria established by Congress in the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991. The amendment BIS Review 47/2005 3 
also would continue to require that all insured depository institutions undergo a full-scope, on-site examination at least once every twelve or eighteen months. Importantly, the agencies would continue to have the ability to examine any institution more frequently and at any time if the agency determines an examination is necessary or appropriate. Despite advances in off-site monitoring, the Board continues to believe that regular on-site examinations play a critical role in helping bank supervisors detect and correct asset, risk-management, or internal control problems at an institution before these problems result in claims on the deposit insurance funds. The mandatory twelve- or eighteen-month on-site examination cycle imposes important discipline on the federal banking agencies, ensures that insured depository institutions do not go unexamined for extended periods, and has contributed significantly to the safety and soundness of insured depository institutions. For these reasons, the Board opposes alternative amendments that would allow an agency to indefinitely lengthen the exam cycle for any institution in order to allocate and conserve the agency’s examination resources. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to attribution rule The Board has proposed another amendment that we believe will help banking organizations maintain attractive benefits programs for their employees. The Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) generally prohibits a bank holding company from owning, in the aggregate, more than 5 percent of the voting shares of any company without the Board’s approval. The BHC Act also provides that any shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company’s shareholders or employees are deemed to be controlled by the bank holding company itself. This attribution rule was intended to prevent a bank holding company from using a trust established for the benefit of its management, shareholders, or employees to evade the BHC Act’s restrictions on the acquisition of shares of banks and nonbanking companies. While this attribution rule has proved to be a useful tool in preventing evasions of the BHC Act, it does not always provide an appropriate result. For example, it may not be appropriate to apply the attribution rule when the shares in question are acquired by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by, and operated for the benefit of, the employees of the bank holding company. In these situations, the bank holding company may not have the ability to influence the purchase or sale decisions of the employees or otherwise control the shares that are held by the plan in trust for its employees. The suggested amendment would allow the Board to address these situations by authorizing the Board to grant exceptions from the attribution rule where appropriate. Reduce cross-marketing restrictions Another amendment proposed by the Board would modify the cross-marketing restrictions imposed by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) on the merchant banking and insurance company investments of financial holding companies. The GLB Act generally prohibits a depository institution controlled by a financial holding company from engaging in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company that is owned by the same financial holding company under the GLB Act’s merchant banking or insurance company investment authorities. However, the GLB Act currently permits a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company, with Board approval, to engage in limited cross-marketing activities through statement stuffers and Internet websites with nonfinancial companies that are held under the act’s insurance company investment authority (but not the act’s merchant banking authority). The Board’s proposed amendment would allow depository institutions controlled by a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with companies held under the merchant banking authority to the same extent, and subject to the same restrictions, as companies held under the insurance company investment authority. We believe that this parity of treatment is appropriate, and see no reason to treat the merchant banking and insurance investments of financial holding companies differently for purposes of the cross-marketing restrictions of the GLB Act. A second aspect of the amendment would liberalize the cross-marketing restrictions that apply to both merchant banking and insurance company investments. This aspect of the amendment would permit a depository institution subsidiary of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a nonfinancial company held under either the merchant banking or insurance company investment authority if the nonfinancial company is not controlled by the financial holding company. 4 BIS Review 47/2005 
When a financial holding company does not control a portfolio company, cross-marketing activities are unlikely to materially undermine the separation between the nonfinancial portfolio company and the financial holding company’s depository institution subsidiaries. Industrial loan companies As I noted earlier, the Board strongly supports allowing depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits. The Board, however, opposes proposals that would allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) to offer interest-bearing, negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts to business customers if the corporate owner of the ILC takes advantage of the special exemption in current law that allows the owner to operate outside the prudential framework that Congress has established for the corporate owners of other types of insured banks. ILCs are state-chartered FDIC-insured banks that were first established early in the twentieth century to make small loans to industrial workers. As insured banks, ILCs are supervised by the FDIC as well as by the chartering state. However, under a special exemption in current law, any type of company, including a commercial or retail firm, may acquire an ILC in a handful of states - principally Utah, California, and Nevada - and avoid the activity restrictions and supervisory requirements imposed on bank holding companies under the federal BHC Act. When the special exemption for ILCs was initially granted in 1987, ILCs were mostly small, local institutions that did not offer demand deposits or other types of checking accounts. In light of these facts, Congress conditioned the exemption on a requirement that any ILCs chartered after 1987 remain small (below $100 million in assets) or refrain from offering demand deposits that are withdrawable by check or similar means. This special exemption has been aggressively exploited since 1987. Some grandfathered states have allowed their ILCs to exercise many of the same powers as commercial banks and have begun to charter new ILCs. Today, several ILCs are owned by large, internationally active financial or commercial firms. In addition, a number of ILCs themselves have grown large, with one holding more than $50 billion in deposits and an additional six holding more than $1 billion in deposits. Affirmatively granting ILCs the ability to offer business NOW accounts would permit ILCs to become the functional equivalent of full-service insured banks. This result would be inconsistent with both the historical functions of ILCs and the terms of their special exemption in current law. Because the parent companies of exempt ILCs are not subject to the BHC Act, authorizing ILCs to operate essentially as full-service banks would create an unlevel competitive playing field among banking organizations and undermine the framework Congress has established for the corporate owners of full-service banks. It would allow firms that are not subject to the consolidated supervisory framework of the BHC Act - including consolidated capital, examination, and reporting requirements - to own and control the functional equivalent of a full-service bank. It also would allow a foreign bank to acquire control of the equivalent of a full-service insured bank without meeting the requirement under the BHC Act that the foreign bank be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in its home country. In addition, it would allow financial firms to acquire the equivalent of a full-service bank without complying with the capital, managerial, and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) requirements established by Congress in the GLB Act. Congress has established consolidated supervision as a fundamental component of bank supervision in the United States because consolidated supervision provides important protection to the insured banks that are part of a larger organization and to the federal safety net that supports those banks. Financial trouble in one part of an organization can spread rapidly to other parts. To protect an insured bank that is part of a larger organization, a supervisor needs to have the authority and tools to understand the risks that exist within the parent organization and its affiliates and, if necessary, address any significant capital, managerial, or other deficiencies before they pose a danger to the bank. This is particularly true today, as holding companies increasingly manage their operations - and the risks that arise from these operations - in a centralized manner that cuts across legal entities. Risks that cross legal entities and that are managed on a consolidated basis simply cannot be monitored properly through supervision directed at one, or even several, of the legal entities within the overall organization. For these reasons, Congress since 1956 has required that the parent companies of full-service insured banks be subject to consolidated supervision under the BHC Act. In addition, following the collapse of Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI), Congress has required BIS Review 47/2005 5 
that foreign banks seeking to acquire control of a U.S. bank under the BHC Act be subject to comprehensive supervision on a consolidated basis in the foreign bank’s home country. Authorizing exempt ILCs to operate as essentially full-service banks also would undermine the framework that Congress has established - and recently reaffirmed in the GLB Act - to limit the affiliation of banks and commercial entities. This is because any type of company, including a commercial firm, may own an exempt ILC without regard to the activity restrictions in the BHC Act that are designed to maintain the separation of banking and commerce. H.R. 1224 attempts to address the banking and commerce concerns raised by allowing ILCs to offer business NOW accounts by placing certain limits on the types of ILCs that may engage in these new activities. However, as Governor Kohn recently testified in the House on behalf of the Board, the limits contained in H.R. 1224 do not adequately address these concerns. Moreover, H.R. 1224 fails to address the supervisory issues associated with allowing domestic firms and foreign banks that are not subject to consolidated supervision to control the functional equivalent of a full-service insured bank. Let me be clear. The Board does not oppose granting ILCs the ability to offer business NOW accounts if the corporate owners of ILCs engaged in these expanded activities are covered by the same supervisory and regulatory framework that applies to the owners of other full-service insured banks. Stated simply, if ILCs want to benefit from expanded powers and become functionally indistinguishable from other insured banks, then they and their corporate parents should be subject to the same rules that apply to the owners of other full-service insured banks. For the same reasons discussed above, the Board opposes amendments that would allow exempt ILCs to open de novo branches throughout the United States. Affirmatively granting exempt ILCs the authority to offer business NOW accounts also is not necessary to ensure or provide parity among insured banks. The Board’s proposed amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits the ability to pay interest on those deposits. Thus, the Board’s proposed amendment would treat all depository institutions equally. Separately granting exempt ILCs the ability to offer the functional equivalent of a corporate demand deposit, on the other hand, would grant new and expanded powers to institutions that already benefit from a special exemption in current law. Far from promoting competitive equity, these proposals would promote competitive inequality in the financial marketplace. The Board believes that important principles governing the structure of the nation’s banking system - such as consolidated supervision, the separation of banking and commerce, and the maintenance of a level playing field for all competitors in the financial services marketplace - should not be abandoned without careful consideration by the Congress. In the Board’s view, legislation concerning the payment of interest on demand deposits is unlikely to provide an appropriate vehicle for the thorough consideration of the consequences of altering these key principles. Conclusion I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Board’s legislative suggestions and priorities concerning regulatory relief. The Board would be pleased to work with the Committee and your staffs as you seek to develop and advance meaningful regulatory relief legislation that is consistent with the nation’s public policy objectives. Appendix: Regulatory Relief Proposals Supported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 1. Authorize the Federal Reserve to pay interest on balances held at Reserve Banks Amendment gives the Federal Reserve explicit authority to pay interest on balances held by depository institutions at the Federal Reserve Banks. 6 BIS Review 47/2005 
2. Grant the Board additional flexibility in establishing reserve requirements Amendment provides the Federal Reserve with greater flexibility to set the ratio of reserves that a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts below the current ranges established by the Monetary Control Act of 1980. 3. Authorize depository institutions to pay interest on demand deposits Amendment repeals the provisions in current law that prohibit depository institutions from paying interest on demand deposits. If adopted, the amendment would allow all depository institutions that have the authority to offer demand deposits to pay interest on those deposits. 4. Ease restrictions on interstate branching and mergers in a competitively equitable manner Amendment affirmatively authorizes national and state banks to open de novo branches on an interstate basis. Currently, banks may establish de novo branches in a new state only if the state has affirmatively authorized de novo branching. This existing limitation places banks at a disadvantage to federal savings associations, which currently have the ability to branch de novo on an interstate basis. The amendment also would remove a parallel provision that allows states to impose a minimum requirement on the age of banks that are acquired by an out-of-state banking organization. The amendment would not allow industrial loan companies (ILCs) that operate under a special exemption in federal law from opening de novo branches on a nationwide basis. The corporate owners of these ILCs are not subject to the type of consolidated supervision and activities restrictions that generally apply to the corporate owners of other banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Granting exempt ILCs nationwide branching rights also would be inconsistent with the terms of their special exemption in federal law. 5. Small Bank Examination Flexibility Amendment would expand the number of small institutions that may qualify for an eighteen-month (rather than a twelve-month) examination cycle. Under current law, an insured depository institution must have $250 million or less in total assets to qualify for an eighteen-month examination cycle. See 12 U.S.C. § 1820(d). The amendment would raise this asset cap to $500 million, thereby potentially allowing approximately an additional 1,100 institutions to qualify for an extended examination cycle. 6. Permit the Board to grant exceptions to the attribution rule concerning shares held by a trust for the benefit of a bank holding company or its shareholders or employees The amendment would allow the Board, in appropriate circumstances, to waive the attribution rule in section 2(g)(2) of the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act). This attribution rule currently provides that, for purposes of the BHC Act, a company is deemed in all circumstances to own or control any shares that are held by a trust (such as an employee benefit plan) for the benefit of the company or its shareholders or employees. The amendment would allow the Board to waive the rule when, for example, the shares in question are held by a 401(k) plan that is widely held by the bank holding company’s employees and the bank holding company does not have the ability to control the shares held by the plan. 7. Modification of the cross-marketing restrictions applicable to merchant banking and insurance company investments Amendment allows the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with portfolio companies that are held under the merchant banking authority in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB Act) to the same extent as such activities are currently permissible for portfolio companies held under the GLB Act’s insurance company investment authority. The amendment also would allow the depository institution subsidiaries of a financial holding company to engage in cross-marketing activities with a portfolio company held under either the merchant BIS Review 47/2005 7 
banking or insurance company investment authority if the financial holding company does not control the portfolio company. 8. Allow insured banks to engage in interstate merger transactions with savings associations and trust companies The amendment would allow an insured bank to directly acquire, by merger, an insured savings association or uninsured trust company in a different home state without first converting the target savings association or trust company into an insured bank. As under current law, the insured bank would have to be the survivor of the merger. 9. Authorize member banks to use pass-through reserve accounts Amendment permits banks that are members of the Federal Reserve System to count as reserves the deposits in other banks that are “passed through” by those banks to the Federal Reserve as required reserve balances. Nonmember banks already are able to use such pass-through reserve accounts. 10. Shorten the post-approval waiting period for bank mergers and acquisitions where the relevant banking agency and the Attorney General agree the transaction will not have adverse competitive effects Amendment allows the responsible federal banking agency, with the concurrence of the Attorney General, to reduce the post-approval waiting periods under the Bank Merger Act and BHC Act from fifteen days to as few as five days. The amendment would not alter the time period that a private party has to challenge a banking agency’s approval of a transaction for reasons related to the Community Reinvestment Act. 11. Eliminate requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies in Bank Merger Act transactions Amendment would eliminate the requirement that the reviewing agency request a competitive factors report from the other banking agencies on Bank Merger Act transactions. The reviewing agency would, however, continue to be required to (i) conduct a competitive analysis of the proposed merger, and (ii) request a competitive factors report from the Attorney General and provide a copy of this request to the FDIC (when the FDIC is not the reviewing agency). 12. Streamline Bank Merger Act procedural requirements for transactions involving entities that are already under common control The amendment eliminates the need for the reviewing agency for a bank merger involving affiliated entities to request a report on the competitive factors associated with the transaction from the other banking agencies and the Attorney General. The amendment also would eliminate the post-approval waiting period for Bank Merger Act transactions involving affiliated entities. The merger of depository institutions that already are under common control typically does not have any impact on competition. 13. a. Restore Board’s authority to determine that new activities are “closely related to banking” and permissible for all bank holding companies Amendment would restore the Board’s ability to determine that nonbanking activities are “closely related to banking” under section 4(c)(8) of the BHC Act and, thus, permissible for all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies. Bank holding companies would still have to become a financial holding company to engage in the types of expanded activities authorized by the GLB Act - including full-scope securities underwriting, insurance underwriting, and merchant banking activities - as well as any new activities that the Board determines are financial in nature or incidental or complementary to financial activities under the GLB Act. 8 BIS Review 47/2005 
b. Allow bank holding companies to engage in insurance agency activities (Alternative to Item 13.a.) Alternative amendment would allow all bank holding companies, including those that have not elected to become financial holding companies, to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Currently, bank holding companies that do not become a financial holding company may engage only in very limited insurance sales activities (primarily involving credit-related insurance). However, most banks are permitted to sell any type of insurance, either directly or through a subsidiary. The amendment would rectify this imbalance by permitting all bank holding companies to act as agent in the sale of insurance. Insurance agency activities involve less risk than insurance underwriting and other principal activities. Bank holding companies would continue to be required to become a financial holding company to engage in insurance underwriting activities. 14. Repeal certain reporting requirements imposed on the insiders of insured depository institutions Amendment repeals the provisions of current law that require: (i) an executive officer of a bank to file a report with the bank’s board of directors concerning the officer’s indebtedness to other banks; (ii) a member bank to file a separate report each quarter concerning any loans made to its executive officers during the quarter; and (iii) executive officers and principal shareholders of a bank to report to the bank’s board of directors any loans received from a correspondent bank. The Board has found that these reporting requirements do not contribute significantly to the monitoring of insider lending. These amendments would not alter the statutory limits or conditions imposed on loans by bank to their insiders. 15. Provide an adjustment for the small depository institutions exception under the Depository Institution Management Interlocks Act (DIMIA) Currently, the DIMIA generally prohibits a management official of one institution from serving as a management official of any other non-affiliated depository institution or depository institution holding company if the institutions or an affiliate of such institutions have offices that are located in the same metropolitan statistical area. The statute provides an exception from this restriction for institutions that have less than $20 million in assets, but this dollar figure has not been updated since 1978. The amendment would increase this amount to $100 million. 16. Flood insurance amendments These amendments would: (a) Allow lenders to rely on information from licensed surveyors to determine whether a property is in a flood zone, if the flood map is more than ten years old; (b) Increase the “small loan” exception to the flood insurance requirements from $5,000 to $20,000 and adjust this amount periodically based on changes in the Consumer Price Index; (c) Reduce the forty-five-day waiting period required after policy expiration before a lender can “force place” flood insurance by fifteen days to coincide with the thirty-day grace period during which flood insurance coverage continues after policy expiration, which would better enable lenders to avoid gaps in coverage on the relevant collateral; and (d) Give the federal banking agencies discretion to impose civil money penalties on institutions found to have engaged in a pattern or practice of violating the flood insurance requirements. 17. Periodic interagency review of Call Reports Amendment requires that the federal banking agencies jointly review the Call Report forms at least once every five years to determine if some of the information required by the reports may be eliminated. The federal banking agencies would retain their current authority to determine what information must be included in the Call Reports filed by the institutions under their primary supervision. BIS Review 47/2005 9 
18. Ensure protection of confidential information received from foreign supervisory authorities Amendment ensures that a federal banking agency may keep confidential information received from a foreign regulatory or supervisory authority if public disclosure of the information would violate the laws of the foreign country, and the banking agency obtained the information in connection with the administration and enforcement of federal banking laws or under a memorandum of understanding between the authority and the agency. The amendment would not authorize an agency to withhold information from Congress or in response to a court order in an action brought by the United States or the agency. 19. Restricting the ability of convicted individuals to participate in the affairs of a bank holding company or Edge Act or agreement corporation Amendment would prohibit a person convicted of a criminal offense involving dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from participating in the affairs of a bank holding company (other than a foreign bank) or an Edge Act or agreement corporation without the consent of the Board. The amendment also would provide the Board with greater discretion to prevent convicted individuals from participating in the affairs of a nonbank subsidiary of a bank holding company. 20. Clarify application of section 8(i) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act Amendment clarifies that a federal banking agency may take enforcement action against a person for conduct that occurred during his or her affiliation with a banking organization even if the person resigns from the organization, regardless of whether the enforcement action is initiated through a notice or an order. 10 BIS Review 47/2005 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance - promoting the competitive advantage Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Islamic Bankers’ Forum 2005: Islamic Finance - Promoting The Competitive Advantage, Putrajaya, 21 June 2005. *      *      * “Islamic finance has become a competitive form of financial intermediation that has been able to meet the differentiated requirements of our economies. In an environment of rapid change, a key factor that will influence the future prospects of the Islamic financial services industry will be the investments to build the foundations on which further progress can be achieved. Investing in the future, in research and development and in the development of talent and expertise will be the differentiating factor that will contribute to the effectiveness, resilience and competitiveness of the industry. This undertaking needs to be the joint responsibility of both the private and public sectors to mutually elevate the performance of the industry and thus increase its potential to contribute to wealth creation and prosperity of our nations.” Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is my honour to be invited to speak at this Islamic Banker’s Forum organized by the General Council for Islamic Banks and Financial Institutions (CIBAFI) on the strategic approach in developing a progressive Islamic financial system. The occasion of this Forum is indeed an excellent opportunity for the industry practitioners, regulators and academia to deliberate on the key issues that are important to the future of the Islamic financial services industry. My remarks today will focus, in particular, on the issues relating to innovation, which is indeed derived from the investment in research and development, and from the investment in the workforce in the sector. Innovation is key to sustaining growth and securing the competitive advantage. Innovation is about developing new Islamic financial products and services and increasing the range of products and services to meet the more sophisticated and complex requirements of today’s consumers and businesses. It is also about improving the overall efficiency by which the products and services are being provided. Innovation will also involve the introduction of new structures that may contribute towards enhancing convenience for consumers and businesses. Finally, it may also contribute towards creating new markets or expand the existing markets for Islamic products and services. Industry practitioners thus have an important role to promote innovation. Financial institutions need to equip their business strategies with research and development to design new innovative products and services. Such innovative financial products and services which are credible, competitive and Shariah-compliant would indeed find a ready market. The introduction of the global sovereign sukuk more than two years ago was an important innovation that has since gained significant ground. Innovation can also take the form of the application of technology to improve convenience for customers and reduce the cost of financial transactions. In embracing new leading-edge technology, the potential for the Islamic financial industry to provide new products and services will be enhanced. It also represents the potential to increase access to financial products through a wider range of new delivery channels. Greater application of IT in the industry can also enhance efficiency by driving down costs for consumers and businesses. Other areas include leveraging on IT in making strategic decisions in the alignment of business, in elevating institutional capacity and operational efficiency and strengthening risk management capabilities. Moving forward, the enhancement of technological capabilities becomes vital for the financial industry as it competes in an increasingly technology-driven environment. The environment and the incentive structure is also important in providing an enabling environment that promotes innovation. In particular, the regulatory framework and the tax structure are important to the innovation process. The regulatory framework should not be so onerous as to impose a high cost and a regulatory burden on businesses. Intrusive regulatory approaches on new products can become a disincentive to innovation. Tax structures can also be designed to support the innovation process. Within financial institutions, organisational structures can also create an environment for innovation by aligning the organization’s processes and implementing appropriate performance incentives. BIS Review 47/2005 1 
The pace of innovation that has taken place in the Islamic financial services industry has contributed to the development of a broad and diversified range of Islamic financial products and services that has been able to effectively mobilize financial resources to meet the investment requirements of the economy. Notwithstanding this significant progress, the process of innovation in Islamic finance has generally been structured mainly along the adaptation approach. Although there are Islamic financial instruments that are distinct from the conventional financial instruments, the numbers are still few. In most instances, the Islamic financial products are repackaged along the features of the conventional financial products, while eliminating the elements that are not in compliance with the Shariah. The Islamic financial services industry is now at the threshold of a new level of development. As we advance forward, the Islamic financial services industry can expect to have a different set of regulatory and supervisory standards which is conducive to its unique financial operations. There is also an increased awareness and understanding amongst the international financial community on the distinct nature of Islamic banking and financial operations. In addition, a higher degree of Shariah dynamism is evident in the evolution of sophisticated Islamic financial products that are being structured based on multiple Shariah concepts. Against these developments, it is timely to move away from “plain vanilla” innovation and to embrace a new wave of innovation that will evolve Islamic financial instruments into distinct products that will maximize the potential and wisdom of the Shariah and that meets the greater sophistication of consumers and the more complex requirements of today’s businesses. This paradigm of innovation in Islamic finance, which by itself shall accord Islamic financial institutions with the competitive advantage to forge ahead, entails substantial and continuous investments in research and development (R&D). R&D is indeed an essential aspect of modern industries and enterprises and is no less the case in the financial world. There are three important pre-requisites in strengthening research and development capabilities, namely, adequate allocation of resources for infrastructure development, forging strategic alliances through smart partnerships and developing the required pool of qualified and skilled talent. Adequate allocation of resources for infrastructure development Islamic financial institutions are continually being confronted with new challenges that need to be addressed. Their institutional capacities and capabilities need to be continuously strengthened. This includes attention to continually review their strategic orientation and key priorities and the necessary adjustments that need to be made to position the institutions to effectively respond to the new developments and challenges that have emerged. In order to meet the increasing demands of a modern and sophisticated market, financial institutions must continually invest in the supporting infrastructure that promotes research and development. This will enhance the capacity for innovation. Attention also needs to be given to the applied approach to Islamic finance and its modern practice. Financial support for advanced research at universities and research institutes will increase research opportunities. Efforts to utilise and install strong technological capabilities will also contribute to enhance research and development. In embracing the new leading-edge technology, the potential for the Islamic financial industry to develop new products and services will also be enhanced. Forging strategic alliances through smart partnerships To further enhance research and development (R&D) activities, the promotion of strategic alliances through smart partnerships can play an important role. Entering into strategic alliances with other entities would create greater synergy, which may bring about new approaches, new technologies and new areas of specialization. Collaborative efforts amongst Islamic financial institutions in particular, would strengthen the ability to leverage on the industry’s expertise. The introduction of innovative Islamic financial products in a specific jurisdiction can be expanded to other jurisdictions, which in turn, will contribute to broaden and deepen Islamic financial markets and thus strengthen the overall development of the Islamic financial industry. In addition, active collaboration between academic researchers and the practitioners will enable the practical application of research findings. In Malaysia, an industry-owned research and training institute in Islamic banking and finance, the Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM) has been established to spearhead greater collaborative efforts with universities to undertake research in areas that are key for the progressive development of the Islamic financial industry. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
A highly qualified and skilled pool of talent The fast pace of innovation in global financial services in general and for the Islamic financial services sector in particular, will demand a rapid and continuous infusion and upgrading of skills. Developing a substantial pool of talent and expertise is indispensable for strengthening research capabilities. In this regard, there has to be a strong focus on human capital development through training and education. In today’s competitive environment, intellectual capital is the major factor in determining the level of innovation and competitiveness of an institution or corporation. A key challenge for Islamic financial institutions is to attract a knowledge-based workforce with the skills required to enhance the potential for innovation, productivity and performance. The Islamic financial services industry needs to continually promote human capital development and expertise to create a larger pool of experts and high calibre professionals. This involves attracting and retaining the existing talent, and building a robust pipeline of skilled individuals for the future. In addition, specialists in Islamic finance would need to combine knowledge and understanding of the Shariah with the necessary skills in finance. The provision of training and career development will have a key role in the sector. Learning systems therefore need to be strengthened to meet the skills and talent requirements of the next decade. Training is a joint responsibility between the industry, academia and Government. In Malaysia, the Government plans to establish an international financial training institute on Islamic finance. The ground work to establish this institute has already commenced. While this may meet some of the requirements, Islamic banking institutions are also encouraged to explore the feasibility of entering into collaborative arrangements with universities and other institutions locally and abroad, to identify and provide specialized training for the financial services industry. These would include training workshops and courses in new and emerging product lines which require specialised skills and expertise. Education of graduates and other personnel entering the Islamic financial market is also important. Undergraduate opportunities to study Islamic finance or Shariah, either as a speciality or a major component of a business degree, should be readily available at local and foreign universities. The challenge is to provide programmes which keep pace with changes in financial innovation and technology. Meeting this need requires rigorous, extended programmes such as the post-graduate programmes in Islamic Finance and Financial Engineering with emphasis on Islamic banking principles. At the same time, relevant organizations can support such programmes by creating funds to sponsor promising students to pursue formal education, ranging from modular courses in Islamic finance to full post-graduate programmes. There is also a need to increase programmes and initiatives that provide education and training in Shariah. Islamic research organizations and financial institutions need to work towards developing a sufficient number of competent Shariah scholars who are equipped with sound knowledge and expertise in both Islamic jurisprudence and Islamic commercial laws to deal with innovative and cutting-edge products. There is also the need for extensive education of the consumer and business community. This would increase the outreach resulting in increased demand for new and innovative products and approaches. Malaysia has implemented a 10-year structured consumer education programme to increase the level of consumer awareness on the unique characteristics of Islamic financial products and the product choices offered by Islamic financial service providers. Increased awareness will drive the demand for a broader range of Islamic products and services customized to their requirements at more competitive prices and through more convenient channels. The outreach has also been targeted at small and medium sized businesses. This process will also prompt the financial industry to increase innovation to strengthen their competitive position. This can be reinforced by market research to enhance the understanding of customers’ distinct financial needs and their risk tolerance and therefore enable the design of Islamic financial instruments that offer tangible benefits and value to customers. In addition, with increased disclosure and transparency on the manner in which Islamic financial transactions are being conducted and on how Islamic financial contracts are being executed as well as on the risk and return profiles of financial products, this will further strengthen the role of competition. In conclusion, the investment in the future needs to be undertaken by all the relevant entities in the Islamic financial sector - the industry, the regulators, the market participants, the academia and the international community. As a co-ordinated and concerted effort it will be mutually reinforcing in elevating the performance of Islamic finance. While the increasingly more competitive prevailing environment raises the pressures to produce immediate-term results, it is the investment in human capital and in research and development that will secure the long-term sustainability of the industry. It is these investments that will be the defining element of the future development of Islamic finance and its long-term success. BIS Review 47/2005 3 
Klaus Liebscher: Overview of financial services in Austria Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Global Financial Services Industry 2005 Summit, Vienna, 17 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and gentlemen, It is with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation to participate in the Global Financial Services Industry 2005 Summit here in Vienna, and I would like to extend to all of you a warm welcome on behalf of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB). In the next twenty minutes I will address some issues regarding the development of the financial services industry in Austria. First, I would like to highlight the changes in the Austrian economy and financial sector that have taken place since Austria joined the European Union (EU) ten years ago. Second, I am going to outline how these developments and adaptations have made Austria’s financial sector highly competitive, sound and stable. Third, I will focus on the recent performance of the Austrian financial sector and on the major challenges it will face in the near future. 1. Changes in the Austrian economy and financial sector since EU accession Austria celebrates a number of important anniversaries this year. We commemorate not only the end of World War II 60 years ago and the signing of the Austrian State Treaty 50 years ago, but also Austria’s accession to the European Union ten years ago. EU accession was an important milestone promoting the positive development of the Austrian economy and had - among other things - beneficial effects on economic growth, price stability, the labor market and the country’s attractiveness to foreign investors. These effects - paired with the high adaptability and innovative character of the industrial and especially also the financial sector - strengthened Austria’s competitiveness in the international arena. Let me give you a few figures that attest to the favorable economic development in Austria following its accession to the EU: • Goods exports increased considerably from 25% of GDP in 1995 to 38% in 2004. • The trade deficit had been widening until 1995, but this trend clearly reversed following EU accession. • The volume of foreign direct investment from the EU-15 in Austria almost quadrupled from 10 billion euro to 38 billion euro over the last ten years, while the volume of Austrian investments within the EU-15 went up nearly five times from 4 billion euro to 19 billion euro. Austria’s accession to the EU had a considerable impact on the financial services industry and the capital market. In this respect, the EU’s common market served as an important catalyst for the increased refocusing and consolidation efforts the Austrian banking sector made in order to become more competitive. Specifically, consolidation efforts resulted in a decline in the total number of Austrian credit institutions from 1,053 at end-1994 to 882 at end-2004 while total assets on an unconsolidated basis increased from 369 billion euro to 653 billion euro over the same period. The unconsolidated return on assets (ROA) improved from 0.33% at end-1995 to 0.46% at end-2004. The number of credit institutions went down most significantly in particular in the decentralized sectors of the Austrian banking industry (that is savings banks, Raiffeisen and Volksbank credit cooperatives) and to a lesser extent also in the other banking sectors (that is joint stock banks, state mortgage banks, building and loan associations, and special purpose banks). Examples of the consolidation dynamics at the level of large banking groups were the acquisition of the largest Austrian bank - Bank Austria Creditanstalt - by the German HypoVereinsbank as well as the acquisition of P.S.K., the Austrian Postal Savings Bank, by BAWAG, both in 2000. Austria nevertheless retains a high banking and branch office density, with the number of inhabitants per banking office (head offices and branches) amounting to 1,537 in 2003. This compares to 2,113 inhabitants per banking office in BIS Review 47/2005 1 
Germany and 2,043 in Switzerland. This means there is still room for further consolidation in the Austrian banking sector. Another significant development in the last decade was the formation of clusters of smaller banks within a sector that became increasingly tied to central institutions (e.g. Erste Bank, RZB) through cross-guarantee schemes. This development produced a few relatively large banking groups. To put that into perspective, in a worldwide ranking of banking groups1, BA-CA occupied rank 99 in 2003, while Erste Bank occupied rank 106 and RZB rank 189. The banks at the head of the sector pyramid provide centralized services and achieve economies of scale in areas such as payment and settlement, liquidity management and funding. Furthermore, the traditional multisector structure of the Austrian banking sector - derived from historical differences in lines of business and ownership - has changed significantly in recent years, and the vast majority of banks now effectively operate as universal banks. The refocusing of efforts aimed at raising financial sector competitiveness in the run-up to Austria’s EU accession resulted, among other things, in the expansion of some large Austrian banks (RZB, BA-CA, Erste Bank) into Central and Eastern Europe (CEE), a region sharing historical ties with Austria. At the beginning of the transition period in CEE, the financial sectors of these economies showed inefficiencies, instabilities and a low degree of financial intermediation. For this reason, Austrian banks’ strategic move into this region not only benefited the respective banks, but also helped stabilize the financial sectors in these economies and improved the penetration of banking services. The successful cross-border diversification strategy of several Austrian banks has contributed substantially to their positive profit development, since margins in CEE are still relatively high. Austrian banks today account for a market share of approximately 20% in CEE (except Russia), and Erste Bank, BA-CA and RZB are among the major players in this region. In our neighboring countries Austrian credit institutions reach market shares ranging from 32% in the Czech Republic to 44% in Slovakia in 2004. 42% of net profits of Austria’s five largest banks stem from operations in Central and Eastern European countries. Not least owing to the accession of many CEE countries to the EU in May 2004 and the subsequent boost in economic growth as well as the harmonization of the legal framework, this positive impact on profitability is expected to continue, although probably on a less pronounced basis as margins adapt to EU level and therefore are expected to decline. The positive experience from operations in CEE are now being transferred to upcoming markets, especially in the Southeastern European countries, with Austrian banks increasingly taking the lead in this region as well. As I have shown by taking the Austrian banking sector as an example, European integration has been a success story. In this respect, Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) - and especially the adoption of a common currency for 12 EU Member States - certainly marked a historic and successful milestone of the integration process. EMU is based on the efficient interplay of three main factors embodied in the stability architecture: first, a monetary policy with the primary goal of maintaining price stability in the medium term; second, sustainable public finances; and third, structural policies that support growth and global competitiveness. Price stability is of high importance for safeguarding consumers’ purchasing power and promoting secure and stable planning conditions for enterprises. Price stability, however, can only be maintained if a solid financial policy is pursued. Moreover, structural reforms are necessary to overcome frictions in the labor and product markets as well as in the service sector; they are also important when it comes to improving the resilience of economies against shocks by making them more flexible. These three mutually supportive factors are responsible for the success of EMU and are prerequisite for economic stability, sustainable growth and employment. Therefore, some of the recent public discussions about a dissolution of EMU are totally absurd. Regarding price stability, moderate wage increases in Austria in the last ten years and low inflation, which remained below 2% annually after 1999, have contributed to the positive development of the economy and supported Austria’s competitiveness in the euro area as well as internationally.                                                       1 Source: The American Banker. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
However, since the beginning of 2005 inflation in Austria has been higher than 2%, which is mainly attributable to growing pressures from energy prices, the services sector and increasing rents. 2.  Stability and soundness of the Austrian financial sector The fact that Austria’s financial institutions proved to be highly adaptable to the changing macroeconomic environment has strengthened the stability and soundness of the Austrian financial sector. This was confirmed by the International Monetary Fund during its Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)2 in 2004 and reconfirmed during its yearly consultation finalized in May 2005. The key conclusions of the IMF assessment are as follows: • Austria’s financial sector is generally stable and resilient to external shocks. • The stability of the banking sector was confirmed by detailed stress tests conducted by the IMF in cooperation with the Oesterreichische Nationalbank. • The Austrian insurance sector has performed relatively well compared with that of many other European countries. • Austria enjoys a high standard of prudential supervision based on strong institutions and a comprehensive legal framework. Financial supervision was integrated in the Financial Market Authority (FMA) in 2002, and the cooperation between the FMA and the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, which continues to be strongly involved in banking supervision, works smoothly. • This framework results in a high level of compliance with internationally accepted standards in the areas of banking, insurance, securities and the prevention of money laundering. This highly favorable IMF assessment reflects, among other things, the strategic foresight of Austrian banks with respect to the opportunities in Central and Eastern Europe and the innovative potential and adaptability of Austria’s financial intermediaries. The strong competitiveness of the financial sector is furthermore supported by high business and regulatory standards as well as effective and stringent banking secrecy rules. However, the IMF critically mentioned the low domestic profitability and efficiency of Austrian banks. For one thing, these factors are traceable to strong competitive pressures given the high banking and branch office density. For another, banks still retain a rather unfavorable cost-income ratio, with some banks still absorbing the costs of recent domestic consolidation, of expansion into Central and Eastern Europe as well as of major investments into upgrading information technology platforms and risk management systems. Furthermore, the IMF expressed concerns regarding the high level of foreign currency loans taken out especially for house mortgages. The Oesterreichische Nationalbank had already raised the same concerns earlier on. In the first quarter of 2005, foreign currency loans accounted for 19.3% of all loans issued to domestic nonbanks and for about 30% of all loans to households. From the European perspective, loans granted by Austrian banks accounted for approximately 3% of all euro area loans to nonbanks while foreign currency loans accounted for 18% of all euro area foreign currency loans granted to nonbanks at end-20043. Nearly 90% of all foreign currency loans issued to nonbanks in Austria are denominated in Swiss francs while the importance of the Japanese yen currently stagnates at a low level, equaling the volume of loans denominated in U.S. dollars. This high amount of foreign currency loans is tightly monitored by the Austrian authorities and has already entailed a number of supervisory actions, including the introduction of a set of recommendations called “Minimum Standards of Granting and Managing Foreign Currency Loans.”                                                       2 FSAPs are designed to assess the stability of a financial system as well as to identify and remedy weaknesses in a country’s financial sector structure. 3 Swiss francs 42%, Japanese yen 19%, U.S. dollars 2%. BIS Review 47/2005 3 
3.  Economic and financial sector performance in 2004 and in the first months of 2005 Turning to my third issue, I would now like to give you a brief glance on the development of the Austrian economy and financial sector in 2004 and the first months of 2005. Austria encounters the current challenges and reform requirements with a forward-looking economic policy. The pension reform contributes to a sustainable retirement system that is financially secure in the long term. The corporate and income tax reform add to making Austria an attractive business location and supports the real income of households. Austria’s current account surplus amounted to 0.3% of GDP in 2004 and is expected to improve further in the course of this year. Mainly on the back of strong exports, Austria’s GDP grew by 2% in 2004, thus being clearly higher than in the two previous years but in line with the euro area average. The OeNB recently forecast real GDP to grow by 2.0% in 2005 and 2.2% in the next two years. Supported mainly by exports, the second stage of the tax reform also constitutes an important impetus for domestic demand. Austria’s economy, however, cannot fully withstand the current economic slowdown in the euro area. Austria’s deficit according to Maastricht amounted to 1.2% of GDP in 2004, which is considerably less than the euro area average. The 2005 tax reform is expected to raise the deficit to 1.8% in 2005. However, Austria’s most recent Stability Program sets the target of reaching a balanced budget as well as a debt ratio of below 60% of GDP by 2008. The stability of the banking sector strengthened further in 2004 and the first quarter of 2005. In March 2005, total assets of the banking sector amounted to 678 billion euro on an unconsolidated basis (+3.9% qoq). In other words, total banking sector assets grew by 3.9% compared to the fourth quarter of 2004, which is among other things attributable to a rise in international business. The cost-income ratio improved to 64% on an unconsolidated basis owing to reduced costs and higher income. The unconsolidated operating profit increased in the first quarter of 2005 by 13% year-on-year to 1.34 billion euro. The capital ratio, which relates banks’ capital to their risk-weighted assets, remained well above the minimum requirement and stood at 14.6% on an unconsolidated basis, giving Austrian banks ample capital buffers in case of stress scenarios. (Year-end 2004 data: consolidated ROA 0.6%, consolidated capital ratio 12.2%). The insurance industry experienced a positive development in 2004 as well. A total of 52 insurance undertakings (except small mutual associations) were operating in Austriain 2004. Their total assets came to 68 billion euro in 2004, which constitutes an increase of 7% year on year. Their total premium volume rose by 7% to around 14 billion euro in 2004, which was mainly attributable to a further increase in the demand for retirement-related products. Insurance penetration expressed as a ratio of total insurance premiums to GDP stood at 7.2% in Austria in 20044. Pension funds (Pensionskassen) managed assets to the amount of approximately 10 billion euro in 2004, which means an 11% increase year on year. Pension funds thus further strengthened their position as important institutional players in Austria’s financial sector. The Austrian market for pension funds is highly concentrated, with the three major players accounting for a market share of approximately 70%. The performance of pension funds exceeded 7% on average in 2004, thus continuing the positive trend of the previous year. The mutual fund sector enjoyed a strong year-on-year growth of 13% in 2004, which can be attributed to the positive economic environment, the launch of new retirement-related saving products as well as the good performance of the Vienna stock exchange, Wiener Börse AG. Total assets of the mutual fund sector amounted to 125 billion euro in 2004. 2,021 funds of domestic mutual fund management companies and 3,378 funds of foreign mutual fund management companies are licensed in Austria. The Vienna stock exchange performed strongly in 2004 and has continued to do so in 2005, with the ATX outperforming major international indices. Stock market capitalization amounted to 74 billion euro in April 2005, reaching approximately 30% of GDP. While market capitalization can still be considered rather low compared with other advanced economies, the ATX showed a strong growth of                                                       4 U.K.: 14.8%, Switzerland: 13.4%. 4 BIS Review 47/2005 
approximately 33% year on year at end-April 2005, or of 140% when comparing end-2000 with April 2005. Having demonstrated the positive performance of the Austrian financial sector as well as its stability and soundness, I would now like to outline some major challenges that financial institutions face in the near future. These challenges result not only from the continuing integration process of the EU financial services sector, but also from the development of new products and techniques that shape the financial industry. Continuing financial integration in the euro area is - from the perspective of a central bank - conducive to the effective implementation of monetary policy. Moreover, the economies of the euro area should become more efficient owing to an improved allocation of financial resources and a reduction of financing costs. However, the impact of financial integration on financial stability is more complex. Deeper financial integration may increase diversification and reduce certain vulnerabilities, while possibly raising contagion risk. Close cooperation between supervisors and central banks especially in the euro area therefore seems warranted. Faster and more efficient legislative procedures on the European level are important in order to keep pace with rapid technological changes and financial innovations. In this respect, the so-called Lamfalussy regime, which was developed in the securities business, was extended to comprise the entire financial services sector in 2004. The Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS), which consists of high-level representatives of national supervisory authorities and central banks, has become the most important advisory body supporting the European Commission in supervisory matters. The CEBS not only aims to ensure a consistent implementation of EU directives across member countries, but develops standards and guidelines to harmonize supervisory practices in the EU. In order to achieve further financial integration in the EU and a single market in financial services, the European Commission launched the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) in 1999. One of the last and most prominent open issues on the agenda of the FSAP is the proposal of a new capital adequacy directive to implement the New Basel Capital Accord (Basel II) in the banking sector. Basel II is regarded a necessary instrument to meet the fundamental changes in the banking industry, which includes the emergence of new financial products and advances in risk management practices. Basel II aims to enhance the stability of the financial system via more risk-sensitive capital requirements. Austrian banks are considered to be well informed of, and prepared for, the changes induced by Basel II. The Oesterreichische Nationalbank is closely involved in the Basel II process and currently conducts a road show on this topic to improve the level of know-how especially among small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Austria. While completing the EU initiatives especially with a view to the new capital requirements, Solvency II, and the Legal Framework for Payments, the European Commission has announced that in the post-FSAP era, its activities will rather focus on the effective implementation and enforcement of regulations issued in recent years. Any new initiatives will be subject to rigorous impact assessments, and the European Commission will continue its consultation activities with the industry. One of the priorities in this respect will be the further integration of the retail financial market. Ladies and gentlemen, Given the limited time frame I was only able to touch upon some cornerstones of the financial services industry in Austria. By way of conclusion, however, let me say that I am convinced that, based on its solid background, the Austrian financial sector is in an excellent position to meet both current and future challenges. Thank you very much for your attention. BIS Review 47/2005 5 
Alan Greenspan: China Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Committee on Finance, US Senate, Washington DC, 23 June 2005. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on China’s trade and exchange rate regime. I would emphasize that the views I will express are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. Some observers mistakenly believe that a marked increase in the exchange value of the Chinese renminbi (RMB) relative to the U.S. dollar would significantly increase manufacturing activity and jobs in the United States. I am aware of no credible evidence that supports such a conclusion. The enhanced integration of China into the world trading system is having a notable effect on Asia’s trade with the rest of the world and on trade within Asia. After having risen rapidly through the 1990s, U.S. imports from Asia excluding China have flattened since 2000. This has occurred as production within Asia has evolved, with the final stages of assembly and exporting to the United States and elsewhere becoming increasingly concentrated in China. As a consequence, because exports by country are recorded on a gross basis rather than as value added, the widening of the United States’ bilateral trade deficit with China, measured gross, has largely been in lieu of wider deficits with other Asian economies, including Japan. Measured by value added, our bilateral deficits with China would have been far less, and our bilateral deficits with other Asian exporters would have been far more. Accordingly, an increase in the exchange rate of the RMB, relative to the dollar, would likely redirect trade within Asia, reversing to some extent the patterns that have emerged during the past half decade. However, a revaluation of the RMB would have limited consequences for overall U.S. imports as well as for U.S. exports that compete with Chinese products in third markets. Such a revaluation would affect Chinese value added but not the dollar cost of intermediate goods imported into China from the rest of Asia, which represents a significant share of the gross value of Chinese exports to the United States and elsewhere. (To the extent that exporters to China revalued as well, of course, the impact on overall Asian exports would be somewhat greater.) The broad tariff on Chinese goods that has recently been proposed, should it be implemented, would significantly lower U.S. imports from China but would comparably raise U.S. imports from other low-cost sources of supply. At only slightly higher prices than prevail at present, U.S. imports of textiles, light manufactures, assembled computers, toys, and similar products would in part shift from China as the final assembler to other emerging-market economies in Asia and, perhaps, in Latin America as well. Few, if any, American jobs would be protected. More generally, any significant elevation of tariffs that substantially reduces our overall imports, by keeping out competitively priced goods, would materially lower our standard of living. A return to protectionism would threaten the continuation of much of the extraordinary growth in living standards worldwide, but especially in the United States, that is due importantly to the post-World War II opening of global markets. Such an initiative would send the adverse message to our trading partners that the United States, while accepting the benefits of broadened world trade, is not willing to absorb the structural adjustments that are often necessary. To maintain a rising standard of living, a dynamic economy such as ours requires a continual shifting of resources toward the most up-to-date technologies, financed not only by savings but also importantly by the depreciation of increasingly obsolescent facilities. This highly dynamic process is mirrored in our labor markets, where jobs are constantly being created and destroyed at a rapid pace. New hires in the United States currently average more than a million per week, half resulting from voluntary job change. At the same time, during a typical recent week, about 150,000 workers are temporarily laid off and another 225,000 are subject to permanent job loss. Any effect of trade with China on U.S. employment is likely to be very small relative to the scale of job creation and job loss in our economy. A policy to dismantle the global trading system in a misguided effort to protect jobs from competition would redound to the eventual detriment of all U.S. job seekers, as well as of millions of American consumers. Policy should aim to bolster the well-being of job losers through retraining and BIS Review 47/2005 1 
unemployment insurance, not to stave off job loss through counterproductive efforts to impede the process of income-enhancing international trade and globalization. *** While the presumption that a revaluation of the RMB will notably increase jobs in the United States by constraining imports or expanding exports is without statistical or analytical support, it is nonetheless the case that a more flexible RMB would be helpful to China’s economic stability and, hence, to world and U.S. economic growth. Rapid accumulation of foreign, largely dollar, reserve holdings by the People’s Bank of China, China’s central bank, as a consequence of support for the RMB could boost the growth of the money stock, with the accompanying risk of triggering upward pressure on inflation and a general overheating of the Chinese economy. The Chinese central bank’s issuance of liquidity management bonds to lessen potential increases in the money supply created by foreign asset accumulation has accelerated since regular issuance began in April 2003. Nonetheless, only about one-half of the increase in reserves over the past two years has been offset, with the remainder showing through as money growth. Because the Chinese financial system has considerable distance to go before achieving a satisfactory degree of soundness and flexibility, sterilization of continuing inflows of speculative funds will presumably become more difficult as the scale of these operations, already large, increases over time. In spite of its recent improvements, the financial system of China is still inordinately governed by administrative command and control. Market pricing of financial instruments is still accorded only a minor role. Financial markets, if left free to continuously reprice interest rates and asset values, will identify and respond to imbalances far sooner than a system based on administrative edict. In market-based financial pricing systems, automatic adjustments are inherent. But in a highly administered system, supervisors can identify emerging imbalances only when these imbalances become visibly large and are already troublesome. Adjustment in a system requiring human intervention is accordingly far less flexible than in a system based on the automaticity of markets. Given this vulnerability to emerging imbalances, the buildup of ever-larger holdings of bonds resulting from sterilization of foreign exchange purchases poses threats to China’s financial stability. Hence, the sooner the Chinese, in their own self-interest, move to a more flexible currency regime, perhaps leading other Asian currencies to become more flexible as well, the better for all participants in the global trading system. *** In the decades ahead, it is in our interest and that of the global economy that China continue to progress toward becoming a more market-based, productive, and dynamic economy in which individual initiative, not government decisionmaking, is the fundamental strength behind economic activity. For our part, it is essential that we not put that outcome, or our future, at risk with a step back into protectionism. 2 BIS Review 47/2005 
Lucas Papademos: What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries (opening remarks) Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB Workshop “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member countries?”, Frankfurt, 16 June 2005. *      *      * Introduction When the ECB started organising this workshop a year ago, we thought that addressing the question of the workshop’s title would provide a necessary stocktaking and useful analysis of the effects of EMU on the euro area and its member countries, 6½ years after the introduction of the single currency. Recent developments and debates have shown that the impact of EMU on the euro area countries is a very topical issue indeed. Officials, economists and commentators have sought to analyse the pertinent issues and tried to answer the question of this conference. And some of them have come to conclusions which my colleagues in the Governing Council have called “absurd”, “nonsensical” or implying “economic suicide” – and rightly so. This debate has sometimes risked being fairly long on polemics and rather short on arguments. With this workshop, to which I would like to welcome you all, we can bring to this discussion some solid facts, sound arguments and a better understanding of the manifold issues involved.  The debate on these issues has often been couched in terms of two key concepts, “convergence” and “heterogeneity” (which do, however, need clearer definitions), and the relationship between the two. On the one hand, further integration of labour, product and capital markets can be expected to reduce economic heterogeneity within the euro area. On the other hand, some degree of heterogeneity can be expected to remain and, indeed, it can be considered a natural feature of any monetary union. These propositions raise several important questions, for example: • What kind of convergence processes has EMU set in motion? • To what extent has EMU-induced convergence moderated economic heterogeneity within the euro area? • What are the causes and consequences of sometimes sizeable and in some cases persistent inflation and output growth divergences across different euro area countries, in a macroeconomic environment shaped by the ECB’s monetary policy, which aims to preserve price stability for the euro area as a whole?  These questions, which will be addressed in this workshop, relate to diverse but interrelated issues, such as trade integration, business cycle synchronisation, financial integration, structural reforms in product and labour markets, as well as inflation persistence and inflation differentials. I believe that the quality of the papers to be presented and the impressive group of discussants, chairpersons and panellists will contribute to fruitful debates. Looking at the titles of the various sessions of the workshop, I would like to share some thoughts with you on three specific topics. The first relates to the consequences of market integration for trade. The second, “closer to home” for a central banker, concerns inflation and output divergences across euro area countries and their implications for policy. The third pertains to the role of the euro in fostering reforms in product, labour and financial markets. The implications of the integration of goods, services and financial markets for trade The first topic – the effects of market integration on trade – is particularly interesting, as it raises a number of issues which sometimes seem to lead to puzzling results. First, the conclusions about what we should expect as the trade effects of deeper integration are, in part, ambiguous – think, for example, of the effects of specialisation. Increased competition achieved by deregulation and the completion of the single market, as well as cross-border price transparency due to the single currency, may foster higher sectoral or industry-specific specialisation. Greater sectoral specialisation, as well as increased financial integration, should lead to increases in trade flows within the euro area. At the BIS Review 46/2005 1 
same time, however, if increased integration were to lead to more similar economic structures and business cycles, this could weaken trade flows within the euro area.  But even if the expected effects of integration are not as ambiguous, appearing instead to be rather straightforward, the evidence available thus far seems not to fully conform with the expectations. Take, for example, the significant progress that has been made in the 1990s regarding product market reforms, which had positive effects on the integration and the degree of competition in goods and services markets in the euro area. One could expect that easing regulations and fostering competition would lead to higher labour productivity growth in the industries concerned, as has happened, for example, in the telecommunications sector. Yet, over the past decade the euro area as a whole has experienced a decline in trend labour productivity growth.  A number of other effects of integration on trade should also be looked at: for instance, whether labour regulations and taxation that hamper technological innovation could lead to a decline in exports within the euro area, as well as resulting in lower exports from the euro area to the rest of the world. As regards the latter effect, it appears that the product composition of euro area exports might involve risks for the future export performance of the euro area, if the under-specialisation in fast-growing high-tech sectors is not adequately addressed. Richard Baldwin’s paper offers a very useful and comprehensive treatment of the issues related to the euro’s trade effects. And what he found – or did not find – should certainly provide fertile ground for a fruitful discussion in the first session.  Inflation and growth divergences in the euro area and policy implications The existence of divergences in growth rates and inflation in the euro area, and the associated challenges posed for economic policy in general, and the single monetary policy in particular, are issues that have been debated extensively and intensively since the creation of the euro. They have again been at the centre of public debate in recent months, partly as a result of the performance of the euro area economies over the past few quarters, and partly as a result of uncertainties and concerns deriving from the ratification process for the Constitutional Treaty. In this context, doubts have even been raised about the sustainability of the single currency. There are four key questions that should be addressed regarding this matter: • Are growth and inflation divergences a real problem in a monetary union? • And, if so, how serious is the problem for the euro area? • Are these divergences likely to get worse or likely to be self-correcting? • What can be done to reduce these divergences and at the same time foster higher growth for the euro area as a whole? It is worth recalling that growth and inflation divergences between member countries are a natural, inevitable phenomenon in any large monetary union, as evidenced by the experience of a long-established one, the United States. And, in general, they may reflect both structural and conjunctural factors that affect differently the monetary union’s countries or regions. Differences in economic structures and/or in market adjustment mechanisms across member countries imply that common or global shocks and common policies will have different effects on their economies. Moreover, growth and inflation differentials may also reflect the impact of asymmetric shocks, fiscal policies and diverging productivity and wage developments. Whether such divergences create problems for the performance and functioning of a monetary union depends on their causes, size and persistence. What are the facts about the relative macroeconomic performances of euro area member countries? And what is the diagnosis about the causal factors and the underlying processes that explain them? I would like to point out two interesting facts that are contrary to popular perceptions. The first is that during the first six years since the creation of the euro, the growth and inflation differentials observed between member countries have not been greater than those recorded in the 25 years before the establishment of EMU. On the contrary, according to some measures, the dispersion in growth rates has recently reached a historically low level. The second fact is that both growth and inflation differentials in the euro area since the introduction of the euro have been broadly of the same order of magnitude as the corresponding differentials observed across regions and metropolitan areas in the United States. These facts would seem to suggest that, at least on the basis of size, the heterogeneity 2 BIS Review 46/2005 
observed in the macroeconomic performance of euro area member countries is not exceptional and thus need not be a cause of alarm. Nevertheless, there are certain other developments that suggest caution and point to the need for a deeper and more comprehensive analysis. One such development relates to the significant and persistent divergences in measures of competitiveness between member countries. The diverging competitiveness is a consequence of various factors and policies as well as of market adjustment mechanisms, which in some cases reflect rigidities in labour markets and the low degree of integration and competition in certain product markets, particularly for services. The persistence of these developments suggests that adjustment mechanisms are functioning slowly and that self-equilibrating forces are not sufficiently strong. The extent and the cumulative effects of differences in competitiveness between some euro area countries raise concerns about their impact on growth. In addition, other factors – some exogenous, such as competitive pressures resulting from globalisation, and some internal, influencing consumer sentiment – affect economic activity and tend to compound the adverse effects of the erosion of competitiveness in some countries or partly offset the benefits from the increased competitiveness attained in other countries. A better understanding of the factors and processes that determine economic fluctuations, inflation persistence and competitiveness developments across the euro area countries will contribute to the diagnosis of the present situation and the assessment of future trends. Two papers in this workshop provide insights and useful results to this end. The extent of synchronisation of economic activity in Europe is examined in the paper by Domenico Giannone and Lucrezia Reichlin, which evaluates long-run tendencies and cyclical fluctuations. Different growth trends may be due to different patterns of specialisation, which can be desirable within the monetary union provided that countries can share risk through capital market integration. This study and other recent research show that European financial integration has resulted in increasing opportunities to share risk. The paper by Ignazio Angeloni, Luc Aucremanne and Matteo Ciccarelli concentrates on determinants of inflation dynamics in different euro area countries, notably the evidence on the price-setting behaviour of firms and on factors explaining inflation persistence. A thorough analysis of aggregate inflation dynamics and of the inertia characterising core inflation is of direct relevance to the formulation of monetary policy and also contributes to the diagnosis of the causes of growth fluctuations and of the high unemployment in Europe. One general conclusion that emerges from the papers prepared for this workshop is that the divergences observed in the euro area are fundamentally the consequence of structural and not of conjunctural factors – even if current divergences may also have been influenced to a certain extent by conjunctural events. The policy implication of this general diagnosis is that more economic reforms are needed to address the structural impediments to growth and the causes of growth and inflation divergences. Of course, structural reforms are not always easy to implement, they may be politically costly, and their positive effects may not be immediately visible – which makes it difficult to communicate them and convince the public at large about their benefits. Nevertheless, only the implementation of appropriate economic reforms can address effectively and permanently the root causes of the euro area’s economic problems. Consequently, the focus of the public debate should be how to speed up the reform process and its beneficial effects and thus strengthen consumer and business confidence. The role of the euro in fostering reforms in product, labour and financial markets Has the euro been of help in pushing the reform agenda? At the time of the launch of the single currency, some observers had seen the euro as a “reform whip” that, together with the completion of the single market, would push in the direction of increased competition, higher productivity growth and greater market flexibility, which are essential for the smooth functioning of monetary union. After all, in a single currency area, the adjustment of domestic imbalances cannot be corrected by exchange rate policy any longer, but rather has to take place via prices and costs. The paper by Romain Duval and Jørgen Elmeskov, which will be discussed tomorrow, will provide empirical evidence about the determinants of the pace of the reform process. Our own ECB research, presented in the paper by Lorenzo Cappiello, Philipp Hartmann, Peter Hördahl, Arjan Kadareja and Simone Manganelli, will dwell on the impact of the euro on the integration of European financial markets, notably the equity and bond markets. This stock-taking exercise and associated analysis should also assist in identifying where, precisely, structural changes are most urgently needed and how to make the necessary reforms a success. BIS Review 46/2005 3 
Concluding remarks The introduction of the euro and the conduct of the single monetary policy have established an environment of price stability in the euro area. The ECB’s monetary policy has acquired credibility and has succeeded in anchoring long-term inflation expectations to price stability, thereby exerting a moderating influence on price and wage-setting behaviour. Both short-term interest rates and long-term bond yields are at historically low levels in nominal and real terms. But, as we know, price stability and favourable financing conditions establish necessary but not sufficient conditions for sustainable growth. There is still some way to go in terms of the implementation of the necessary structural reforms that will result in faster and durable growth in the euro area, through higher productivity growth, increased labour utilisation, and improved competitiveness in the global economy. Which brings me to a final reflection, opening up a broader perspective. The issues to be discussed in this workshop should also be seen against the background of globalisation. The forces and dynamics of globalisation influence economic developments in the euro area (for instance through pressures on firms’ cost structures) and also have an impact on the integration process that has been triggered by the euro. Of course, it is not easy to disentangle the effects of globalisation on the European integration process from those which stem from the creation of the single currency. However, both processes call for mechanisms that facilitate the economy’s efficient adjustment so as to cope with the challenges of a constantly changing environment for firms, consumers and policy-makers. All of which reinforces the urgency to pursue the structural reform agenda in the euro area in a determined and systematic manner. With this wider-ranging reflection, I conclude. Once again, welcome to this ECB workshop. I can rationally predict that it will be a very productive and enriching one. 4 BIS Review 46/2005 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Ensuring price stability and confidence - five ideas English translation of a contribution by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, published in Le Monde, in the edition dated 16 June 2005. *      *      * Europe is experiencing a significant and demanding episode in our profoundly original historic undertaking, namely a voluntary Union of peoples and nations, which began 55 years ago with the launch of the Schuman Plan. More than half a century of economic and democratic construction, with its highs and lows, its latent periods and its periods of acceleration. This is not the first time that a new idea or project has been put aside for some time or rejected. The rejection by France of the European Defence Community in August 1954 was initially regarded as signalling the end of European construction. However, Europe then set itself new objectives, objectives which have proved to be historically successful. Did Jean Monnet not write in his memoirs that “those who never want to do anything because they have no guarantee that things will happen as planned are condemning themselves to immobility”?  The historical evolution of Europe progresses at its own pace, which can be assessed only in the long term. I have confidence in the ability of Europe to overcome its present difficulties and I share the sentiment of confidence and resolve expressed in the joint statement issued by Josep Borrell Fontelles, Jean-Claude Juncker and José Manuel Barroso, the Presidents of the European Parliament, the European Council and the European Commission respectively. The European Central Bank is, in its domain, a totally executive body. Together with the national central banks of the euro area, i.e. the other members of the Eurosystem, it has been tasked with ensuring price stability for our 307 million fellow euro area citizens. I feel it is important today to highlight five ideas. First, there is the issue of responsibility. An independent monetary institution is ultimately responsible to public opinion. It implies that the bank regularly answers questions put to it by the European Parliament. Indeed, at an average of six times per year, I am invited to appear before the European Parliament, more often than my American counterpart appears before the US Congress. And the ECB Vice-President and I are, within the G7, unique among central bank representatives in holding a press conference immediately after every monetary policy decision by the Governing Council, 11 times per year, tirelessly explaining the Eurosystem’s analysis of the situation and the reasons why the Governing Council has taken the decision it has.  The second idea is the importance of being faithful to our mandate – price stability – in the eyes of the citizens of the euro area. I am not just thinking of the Germans, who coined the term “Teuro” to express concern about the “expensive euro”, or the Italians, who consider that price rises remain excessive. I am thinking about all consumers, the 307 million in the euro area, and particularly the least fortunate, who are in all European opinion polls sending us a clear message, asking us to be vigilant. That is the reason why we say to everyone: “If you are hesitant in your decisions as a consumer because you fear the future erosion of your purchasing power, hesitate no longer, as you can count on us to guarantee the purchasing power of your money.” The third idea is that our faithfulness to our mandate also allows us to offer the most favourable financial environment possible for growth and job creation. As all savers and investors in Europe and throughout the world are convinced of our credibility, they are incorporating in their expectations future inflation in line with our definition of price stability, i.e. “below and close to 2%”. This remarkable result is due entirely to the very high level of confidence in the Eurosystem. This result explains in particular why the euro is today recording the lowest rates ever observed and the growth rate of outstanding loans to the private sector is (at 7.4%) twice that of nominal GDP. As I write, ten-year rates on the best ratings have settled at 3.1%. Who would have dared envisage that before the creation of the euro? This is why we are saying to businesses: “Investment is your decision, a decision based on a number of criteria. One of those criteria is the level of interest rates. Is this not the moment to invest?” The fourth idea is that, contrary to a wrongly-held but widespread belief, the euro area has the same characteristics as the United States in terms of interregional differences relating to growth and inflation. In the United States, as in Europe, there are considerable differences from State to State and from region to region, and the growth and inflation differentials are of the same magnitude in the two 
economies. On both sides of the Atlantic the central bank looks at the relevant area’s economy as a whole, for all States or member countries together. I would also like to mention that for each European economy, belonging to the euro area is a "win-win" situation: not only in terms of achieving the concept of the internal market and enjoying the lowest interest rates because all risk premia by comparison with the best-performing currencies are eliminated, which is of particular benefit for those countries which had high market interest rates; but also because all risks associated with exchange rates are eliminated within one vast integrated economy, which is good for all countries, including those whose market rates were already low. Turning to the fifth idea, on the question of whether we can contribute further to growth and job creation while fulfilling the requirements of our mandate, some say: “You should be less demanding in your definition of price stability. 2% is too low. Make it 3%. You could then reduce your intervention rates!” But such advice would backfire: by opting for 3% we would not only lose the confidence of households but also push all rates up, not down, with those rates incorporating the increase of 1% in expectations of future inflation. And that would be totally counterproductive… Others make a more admissible remark and say: “Your definition of price stability is in line with a good anchoring of inflation expectations. This is good for growth. But are you not doing too much? Perhaps you could achieve the same result with lower intervention rates!” Yet this is not what the information we currently have available suggests: if we had been too cautious not only would our fellow citizens share that view (and then they would find the price rises reasonable) but also this would have had an impact on the observed price rises (which would then be significantly lower than our definition of price stability) and above all on inflation expectations, which would then be significantly less than 2%. This is not the case at present. Regarding inflation expectations in particular, all of the public and private surveys and market indicators converge to 1.9% or 2%. We cannot be arithmetically closer to 2%! These objective surveys show that we are doing what it necessary to ensure stability and credibility, no less…no more. And that is why the Governing Council considers our interest rates to be appropriate. We are not biased – I have said that I was not preparing the markets for a rate cut. Nor am I preparing them for a rise in interest rates. We remain vigilant, realistic and pragmatic.  *** A good monetary policy is necessary but not sufficient alone – it cannot achieve everything. European citizens know that the Eurosystem is doing and will do all it can, thanks to and by being faithful to its mandate. A sound budgetary policy which complies with the Stability and Growth Pact is also essential. Structural reforms also have a decisive role to play in strengthening competitiveness, raising the potential growth rate and stimulating job creation.  Behind all this is a key word in today's Europe: confidence. Confidence on the part of households and firms, which must be nurtured and strengthened. We are fortunate to have a European Central Bank which inspires such a level of confidence among Europeans and the rest of the world such that our market rates are at exceptionally favourable levels. Let us maintain this precious confidence which has been entrusted to Europe. 
Philipp Hildebrand: SNB overview of financial market activity Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. *      *      * 1.  Developments in the financial markets Financial market activity has been dominated in recent months by three key developments. Firstly, the US dollar started to strengthen. Secondly, long-term capital market yields declined further despite their already low levels. Thirdly, changes in credit risk premiums in the different debtor categories have been more mixed than in the preceding months. Despite the persistently high current account deficit in the US, the dollar has appreciated since the beginning of the year by roughly 12% against both the euro and the Swiss franc, and by approximately 7% against the yen. The dollar benefited in particular from the willingness of foreign investors to back US financial investments. In 2004, net purchases of US securities were dominated by the strong demand from certain Asian central banks. While such purchases have remained significant so far this year, private investors outside the US, too, have bought more US securities. This surge in demand is due in part to the fact that the markets continue to rate the growth prospects in the US better than those in Europe and Japan. The growing yield spread in favour of dollar investments as well as political uncertainty regarding the future development of the European Union have also contributed to the relative attractiveness of the greenback. At present, there are few indications of any unusually pronounced imbalances between the real exchange rates of the currencies of the large economic blocs. Looking at their development, it becomes apparent that they are all close to their long-term averages (cf. Graph 1). This suggests that the US current account deficit is not primarily a product of exchange rate distortions. It is mainly due to a comparatively high growth momentum and a low savings rate in the US. Yields in the capital markets continued to fall. While this decline was weakest in the US, yields in continental Europe hit historical lows. In Switzerland, for instance, the yields on ten-year Swiss Confederation bonds reached an all-time low of less than 2%. The extraordinarily low capital market yields reflect the market’s low inflation expectations. During recent months, certain concerns about economic growth have triggered a further decline in yields. Both strong demand for long-term debt securities in industrialised countries (driven by demographic factors) and high savings rates in the emerging markets – particularly in China – have probably also contributed to the generally low level of interest rates. While 2004 was characterised by a steady and uniform decline in credit risk premiums in the different debtor categories, the past six months saw a less even trend in the credit risk premiums of individual bonds. In the corporate bonds area, the market’s attention focused on the two major US automakers. Their downgrading to junk bond status sent a small shockwave through the relevant market segments; other segments have so far remained largely unaffected, however. The credit risk premiums of other corporate debtors rose only slightly and have remained at a historically low level (cf. Graph 2). Meanwhile, those of emerging markets have developed in line with the economic fundamentals of their respective countries. 2. Investment policy A large proportion of the SNB’s assets comprise currency reserves. An internationally accepted means of payment in crisis situations, they serve as a safety net for the Swiss economy and the Swiss franc. In order to fulfil this function, these reserves need to be invested in foreign currencies – primarily in the reserve currencies such as the dollar and euro – and in gold. The Bank’s leeway for investment was extended considerably with the entry into force of the new National Bank Act in May 2004. This has allowed the SNB to invest part of its currency reserves in foreign equities and corporate bonds. In mid-February 2005, the SNB – having already invested in corporate bonds since June 2004 – turned its attention to the expansion of its equity portfolios. At present, a little over CHF 3 billion are invested in internationally diversified equity portfolios. As the equities are index-managed by external asset BIS Review 46/2005 1 
managers, the SNB takes no active decisions regarding the weighting of individual sectors or securities. In principle, the National Bank does not invest in Swiss equities and corporate bonds, thus avoiding, from the outset, any potential conflicts of interest which could jeopardise the SNB’s independence. As a shareholder in Swiss companies, the Bank would risk being confronted with structural issues. It could also lead to a conflict between its monetary policy and investment policy goals if an interest rate hike by the SNB were to erode the domestic companies’ profits. Furthermore, such a move could have an adverse effect on prices should the SNB have to liquidate securities of Swiss businesses at short notice. And finally, it is conceivable that the National Bank could gain access to privileged financial market information through its activity in the area of system stability. This would make investing in the Swiss financial sector even more problematic. The influence of equity portfolios and corporate bonds on the National Bank’s risk profile is only moderate. The overall risk attached to assets – as measured by value-at-risk – has not changed greatly since the introduction of these investment options. Gold and exchange rates are still the biggest factors contributing to overall risk. Equities account for less than 5% of the total risk, while corporate bonds contribute only a negligible proportion. The current investment structure and the performance of the SNB’s assets are published online on a quarterly basis in an updated appendix to the Investment Policy Guidelines of the Swiss National Bank. 3. Risk measurement and management The return on the SNB’s assets – particularly on currency reserves – fluctuates dramatically from year to year. The absolute loss can be considerable. While it is true that earnings fluctuations have been reduced by the scaling-back of dollar and gold holdings in recent years along with the improved diversification of currencies and investment categories, it is not possible to continue reducing risks ad infinitum. Hence, hedging the currency reserves’ dollar and gold risks to a high degree, for instance, is impracticable, as these reserves would then no longer serve their intended purpose. Professional risk measurement and management is thus crucial for the SNB. The risks attached to the National Bank’s assets are primarily assessed using the value-at-risk (VaR) method. This widely used risk indicator quantifies the level of loss that will most probably not be exceeded within a specific period of time. The SNB calculates the VaR based on a 95% probability and a time horizon of one year. Value-at-risk analyses are undertaken both for individual portfolios and the total assets. The current VaR for the total assets of approximately CHF 100 billion amounts to roughly CHF 4.5 billion. A value-at-risk analysis gives no indication of how much could potentially be lost beyond the specified level of 95%. Furthermore, it is based on current risk and correlation structures that are not necessarily an accurate reflection of future risks. This is particularly the case at the moment – at a time when market volatility is low by historical standards. The SNB therefore backs up the VaR calculations with stress and scenario analyses. These simulate extreme market fluctuations and examine the impact of such fluctuations on the assets. Scenarios that have an especially severe impact on the SNB’s assets include a fall in the gold price and a depreciation of the dollar and euro. Such scenarios show that serious losses could potentially be sustained. The volatility of the SNB’s earnings therefore remains high despite the new investment universe. Experience has shown, however, that major losses tend to even themselves out in the medium term, i.e. over a period of three to five years.  2 BIS Review 46/2005 
  BIS Review 46/2005 3 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic activity in Switzerland Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen As we have just announced in our press release, the Swiss National Bank is leaving the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.25-1.25%. It intends to keep the rate in the middle of the target range at around 0.75% for the time being. The fourth quarter of 2004 and the first quarter of 2005 saw a stagnation of economic activity in Switzerland, with the high price of oil as well as the depreciation of the dollar in the final quarter of 2004 acting as brakes. These factors also held back economic activity in Europe, as had been expected, thus further weakening the Swiss economy. Despite the sluggish development in the first quarter of 2005, the SNB still expects the economy to recover during the course of the year, with an increase in momentum in the second half. This notwithstanding, the pace of expansion for 2005 is likely to slow further. The SNB thus projects a growth rate of around 1%, as compared with 1.5% at the last assessment. Its expectations with regard to inflation in 2005 remain unchanged from the March assessment, so that average annual inflation for the year is likely to amount to 1%. On the assumption that the three-month Libor remains unchanged at 0.75%, annual inflation is forecast to stand at 0.5% in 2006 and reach 1.4% in 2007. Inflation prospects for the medium term now look more positive than they did at the March assessment. A correction to the expansionary monetary policy pursued by the SNB for a long time now will be necessary if the economic outlook improves. Should the Swiss franc appreciate rapidly, the Swiss National Bank will respond appropriately. What were the most important factors that led to our decision to leave the three-month Libor rate unchanged? Before answering this question, I would like to briefly outline the situation we are facing. I will begin by presenting the economic environment, and then go on to describe the monetary situation. As far as economic activity is concerned, we have revised our evaluation downwards since the last monetary policy assessment. In the final quarter of 2004, the Swiss economy slipped slightly, accompanying a rise in the price of oil and a decline in the dollar in the period from October to December. Both of these factors also had an unfavourable impact on the European economy. Contrary to the expectations expressed at our last monetary policy assessment, economic activity in Switzerland remained restrained in the first quarter. Despite a slight increase in domestic demand, GDP stagnated compared with the previous quarter. This disappointing result was mainly attributable to export developments. Companies were faced with slack demand and consequently limited their volume of investment. This affected employment, and the resulting uncertain labour market situation had a dampening impact on private consumer spending which rose at a below-average rate. The real estate sector, by contrast, benefited from the continuation of favourable financing conditions. Oil prices rose again at the beginning of the year, continuing to act as a brake on the world economy, and the situation remained particularly gloomy in Europe. Given these developments, it is most unlikely that the 1.5% growth for 2005 forecast in the last monetary policy assessment will be attained. However, signs of an improvement in the Swiss economy became evident in the first quarter of the year, with exports picking up in April and May. We expect this trend to be confirmed in the months to come, and now forecast real GDP growth of about 1% for the year 2005 as a whole. This delay in the recovery of the economy will have a dampening effect on price developments in the year 2006. Now I would like to outline my assessment of monetary developments, which remain more or less unchanged with respect to the assessment presented in March. The three-month Libor rate has remained at a low level for a long time now: it has been below one percent for almost three years, since July 2002. Real rates of interest for three month maturities have been negative for two years. Given the unusually low level of interest rates, the willingness to invest in liquid assets remains high and, according to our estimates, the money overhang persists. However, the moderate growth in the M3 monetary aggregate indicates that this situation has not changed since the last monetary policy assessment. Thus, the monetary analysis shows that we can continue pursuing our expansionary monetary policy for the time being, without incurring additional risks. 
Since the first quarter of 2003, the year-on-year growth rate for mortgage loans has exceeded 5%. Mortgage loans to households slowed slightly at the end of 2004, but since then their rate of growth has accelerated to a level higher than that recorded in recent years. Mortgage loans to companies, which had declined over the past five years, have also risen again since the beginning of the year. Prices continue to increase in the real estate market, a development to which, in our view, the low mortgage rates have contributed. Well aware that our monetary policy is still expansionary, we are keeping a close eye on developments in the real estate sector. In view of the above-mentioned developments, we have decided to leave the target range for the three-month Libor rate unchanged at 0.25-1.25%. What were the most important factors that led to this decision? There were three of them. First of all, we needed to downgrade our expectations with respect to the development of the economy. However, there are no signs of any cyclical downturn and the economy continues to recover, even if this recovery is somewhat delayed and muted. Second, the lacklustre economic activity is being accompanied by an improvement in the medium-term outlook for inflation. This means that an increase in the Libor target range appears less urgent. Third, the level of uncertainty has risen. The economic outlook in Europe is more difficult to assess than it was in March. Although the price of oil declined in April and May, it rose again significantly in June, and high prices in the oil market could persist for some time to come. In addition, the decline in the level of long-term interest rates is not very consistent with a recovery in the economy. I will now briefly outline our new forecast for inflation. The graph depicts the current and the previous forecasts. The dashed red curve represents the new forecast, which covers the period from the second quarter of 2005 to the first quarter of 2008. The dash-dotted green curve shows the forecast presented in the last monetary policy assessment. Both forecasts are based on the assumption of a three-month Libor rate of 0.75%. The line representing the new inflation forecast begins slightly above the previous forecast, dropping significantly below it from next year onwards. The decline in inflation rates this year is due to a stabilisation in the price of oil. The lower level of inflation next year is attributable to weaker growth in economic activity. In 2007, inflation will rise rapidly because of the high level of utilisation of resources and the high level of liquidity. This means that, should the three-month Libor rate remain unchanged at 0.75%, inflation would reach 2.4% by the end of the forecasting horizon. This would be above the range which the SNB equates with price stability. The forecast shows that the current level of interest rates cannot be maintained once the economic situation normalises. Since monetary policy has been expansionary for a long time now, there is a greater threat of inflation in the future. If the economic outlook continues to improve, it will be necessary to make adjustments to monetary policy. With our decision to leave the three-month Libor unchanged, we are adhering to our previous monetary policy course for the time being. We continue to support the economy, using the leeway available to us. This policy should guarantee longer-term price stability. As mentioned before, the SNB will respond appropriately if the Swiss franc appreciates rapidly, and is keeping all its options open for this eventuality, as it has done in the past. 
  Observed inflation June 2005    Inflation forecast on March 2005 with Libor at 0.75% and of June 2005 with Libor at 0.75% Inflation forecast of June 2005 (53 kb) 
David Dodge: Adjusting to change Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 15 June 2005.  *      *      * Good afternoon. I'm glad to be back in Winnipeg. The last time I delivered a speech here was in January 2002. A lot has changed since then - in this city and in the Canadian economy. At that time, our economy was recovering from a worldwide economic slowdown and from the impact of the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States. Today, we face more-intense international competition, but we also face new opportunities, as expanding economies become important markets for our products. Like the rest of Canada, Winnipeg and Manitoba are feeling the impact of these international changes. Change is the central theme of my remarks today. First, I will talk about some of the changes that have taken place at the Bank of Canada over its 70-year history. Then, I'll talk about some of the changes that are currently taking place in the global economy, as well as how we see our economy - across Canada and right here in Manitoba - adjusting to these changes. Changes at the Bank of Canada This year marks the 70th anniversary of the Bank of Canada. The Bank opened its doors on 11 March 1935, at a time when the Canadian economy was reeling from the effects of a Prairie drought and a worldwide Depression. In its early days, much of the Bank's work was focused on trying to cushion the economy from the effects of high unemployment and falling prices, and replacing bank notes from different issuers with Bank of Canada notes. Almost every aspect of the Bank's work has changed since that time. But today I'll focus on the changes that have taken place in the conduct of monetary policy.  By the late 1950s, the Bank's monetary policy and the federal government's fiscal policy were trying to find a balance between controlling inflationary pressures in the economy and encouraging high levels of employment. The economic boom of the 1960s and the bitter inflationary experiences of the 1970s eventually led to an increased focus on price stability as the goal for monetary policy. We developed a better appreciation that keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable is the best contribution a central bank can make to the economic welfare of a nation. During those decades, we learned some key lessons. The first is that a floating exchange rate is a tremendous asset in helping an economy adjust to changes, particularly an economy as open as ours. A floating currency gives a country the flexibility it needs to adjust to economic forces that originate from inside and outside its borders. The second lesson we learned is that, for monetary policy to be successful in controlling inflation, a floating exchange rate is not enough. An "anchor" for monetary policy is also needed. Canada first floated its dollar in 1950, but returned to a fixed exchange rate for eight years during the 1960s. After the decision to float the dollar again in 1970, the Bank spent the 1970s and 1980s searching for an appropriate monetary policy anchor. By this, I mean a clear target for monetary policy, a way to help policy-makers keep policy on track, and a way to tie down or "anchor" expectations about future inflation. The outcome of that search was the eventual adoption of inflation targets as the anchor for Canadian monetary policy. In February 1991, the Bank and the federal government announced an agreement on a series of inflation-reduction targets. This agreement has been extended three times, and since 1995, it has called for the Bank to keep inflation at 2 per cent, the midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. This inflation-targeting system, supported by a floating exchange rate, has done more than keep inflation low - it has delivered strong and sustained growth in output and employment in Canada.  Let me quickly stress that our inflation-targeting framework operates in a symmetric way - we care just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about inflation rising above target. If demand for goods and services pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above the target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. And when the economy is operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below the target, 
the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate growth. This symmetric approach helps the Canadian economy adjust to changing circumstances, while maintaining strong, sustained growth in output and employment. The Bank's commitment to the idea of transparency is another way in which our monetary policy has evolved. There was a time when central bankers kept their actions and thoughts shrouded in secrecy, convinced that their policy would be more effective if implemented with an element of surprise. Times have changed, and best practices in monetary policy have evolved. We have found that monetary policy is more effective when people understand what we are doing and why. That's why we communicate regularly with parliamentarians, with markets, and with the public. We do this through our regular Monetary Policy Reports and Updates to those reports. We do this through press releases on fixed announcement dates for interest rate decisions, eight times a year. And we do this through public speaking engagements with audiences across the country.  Our methods of communication also continue to change. Today, we use more tools and more technologies to reach Canadians and explain our work. For example, the audio portion of this speech is being broadcast live on the Internet. And we have just completed a redevelopment of the Bank's website. Since its creation in 1995, our website has been central to our efforts to conduct the Bank's business in an open and transparent manner. The site is visited over 180,000 times a week. In 2003, it was named "Central Bank Website of the Year" by Central Banking Publications in the United Kingdom. We wanted to make the site even better, and so on Monday we launched a new version. It features an attractive graphic redesign, improved navigation, and a lot of new content. I encourage you to visit our new site, and we welcome your comments. Changes in the global economy So that's a quick look at some of the ways that the Bank has changed in 70 years. I'll spend the remainder of my time today discussing some of the major changes afoot in the global economy and how the Canadian economy is adjusting to these developments. I've just returned to Canada from meetings with central bankers in China and Japan. I have also attended meetings in Switzerland, the United States, and Morocco over the past month. And in two weeks, I will head to the United Kingdom. In these countries, and in almost every other nation, people are being affected by the same powerful forces - growing competition from emerging-market economies, such as China and India, and large and growing financial imbalances in the United States and Asia. The growth of emerging-market economies has driven up demand for commodities, and that has pushed up the world prices for oil and many other commodities that we produce in Canada. Meanwhile, the more competitive world environment and productivity improvements in some countries are lowering the prices for a number of consumer goods, communications services, and computer equipment.  All of these forces are causing significant exchange rate movements, including a sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the U.S. dollar over the past couple of years. Higher prices for many commodities produced in Canada means that our terms of trade - that is, the ratio of the prices that Canadians receive for their exports to the prices that they pay for their imports - have improved by about 14 per cent since late 2001. This has contributed importantly to higher real incomes and stronger domestic demand.  How has the Canadian economy been adjusting to these various economic forces? In the Bank's last Monetary Policy Report, published in April, we noted that we have seen increased business investment spending in oil and gas extraction, in other mining activity, and in wood-product manufacturing. These sectors are benefiting from higher world prices for their products. We are also seeing rising investment in sectors that are not very exposed to international trade, such as electric power generation, finance and insurance, and information and cultural industries. In these latter cases, firms are reacting to strong growth in domestic demand. We've also had very strong investment in housing. But in other sectors that are highly exposed to international trade, prices are either falling or are rising very slowly. Here, I am referring to goods-producing sectors, such as auto parts, furniture, and clothing manufacturing, as well as service sectors such as tourism. Firms in these industries are feeling the pressure of the higher Canadian dollar, and they are also facing increased competition from other regions of the world.  
The good news is that many Canadian firms are making the necessary adjustments. Investment spending is being directed towards increased specialization, higher productivity, and lower costs. Since much of the productivity-enhancing machinery and equipment is priced in U.S. dollars, the stronger Canadian dollar has made it easier for firms to invest in equipment that boosts productivity. Stiffer competition is also encouraging firms to seek new markets, increase their specialization, and offer more value-added, customized services.  Other adjustments are also taking place. A growing number of firms are looking to cut costs by importing more inputs. We've certainly seen this type of adjustment taking place among manufacturers of telecommunications equipment. Other firms are phasing out the production of goods and services with low profit margins and concentrating on those that yield higher returns. Current economic developments in Canada and Manitoba  Through its monetary policy, the Bank is helping these adjustments by supporting domestic demand. In our April Monetary Policy Report, we projected that domestic demand would grow by almost 4 per cent in 2005. According to recently released data, it grew by slightly more than expected during the first quarter of the year. So we continue to see evidence that strong domestic demand is offsetting the smaller contribution that net exports are making to economic growth.  On 14 July, we will publish our Monetary Policy Report Update, which will contain our latest views on the Canadian economy. The Bank is in the process of gathering and analyzing the full set of information on the global and the Canadian economies that will feed into our next interest rate decision, and into the Update.  On our last policy-announcement date in May, we decided to maintain the target for the overnight interest rate at 2 1/2 per cent. At that time, we indicated that global and Canadian economic developments had been unfolding broadly in line with our expectations and that our outlook for the Canadian economy through to the end of 2006 was unchanged from the one we presented in our April Monetary Policy Report. The analysis contained in that Report is still relevant. So is our statement that, in line with this outlook for growth and inflation, a reduction of monetary stimulus - that is, an increase in our key policy rate - will be required over time.  Now, let me say a few words about the economic prospects for Manitoba. The provincial economy grew by an estimated 2.3 per cent last year, up from 1.5 per cent in 2003. Like the rest of Canada, Manitoba will rely heavily on domestic spending as an engine of growth in 2005. Private sector forecasters are expecting output growth of about 2.7 per cent this year, largely as a result of strong consumption and investment. Exports should also continue to grow, albeit at a slower pace than in 2004. This projection assumes that agricultural production will increase in 2005. It is too early to predict the impact of the recent floods that have ruined many fields in the province.  Diversification in Manitoba's economy has been helpful. This province's economy is one of the most diversified in Canada - with a good mix of goods-producing and service industries, resources and manufacturing, traditional and new technology. And there is growing diversity and innovation within industries, such as pharmaceuticals, furniture manufacturing, and the transportation-equipment sector. The broadening of Manitoba's economic base has provided stability to the economy and has kept the province's unemployment rate well below the national average. Manitoba has also been helped by continued fiscal prudence. Conclusion Change is rarely made without difficulty, even when we know that the change is for the better. This is certainly true of adjustments in response to the global economic realities of today. In some cases, industries are being forced to rethink the way they do business. Some firms will close, and some jobs will be lost. This type of adjustment is never easy. But economic change creates new opportunities. And in cities like Winnipeg, and all across Canada, individuals, businesses, industries, and public sector institutions are making the adjustments that will help them improve their competitiveness and seize new opportunities. These efforts also make the Canadian economy stronger and more resilient. That is the best way to prepare ourselves and our economy for whatever changes the future may bring.  
V Leeladhar: Banking with technology - the road ahead Keynote address by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IT@BFSI-200 Conclave, Bangalore, 9 June 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I deem it a privilege to be present at this conclave being conducted by the Indian Banks’ Association, on an appropriate topic at an appropriate time and to an appropriate audience who would be the catalysts of change as banking in India is poised for greater leaps in the near future. I am sure that bankers in India are feeling the positive impact of the technological revolution in the way banking is being transformed. Banks need to be ready to take on the challenges unleashed by various external forces such as competition, globalisation, shrinking margins, and internal forces relating to human resources, need for changes in procedures etc. To my mind, a substantial portion of these challenges can be easily addressed by technology; I shall, therefore, dwell a while on the role of technology in the banking of the near future. Banks in India need to be complimented on the inculcation of technology in a large way in their day-to-day operations. Credit must be given to Indian Banks who have brought on the new wave of techno-banking in the country. In a short span of less than two decades, customers of banks have felt the positive impact of technological solutions implemented by banks. The customer of banks of today have a virtual menu of options as far as delivery channels are concerned and all these are the benefits of technology, with the most visible benefits happening in the areas of payments for retail transactions. A variety of cards, Automated Teller Machines, electronic based funds transfers, Internet banking, Mobile banking are all some of the latest technology based payment solutions, which have gained large acceptance amongst the Indian banking public. With technological solutions rapidly evolving, more new products and services may soon become the order of the day. While addressing a critical topic such as Technology which has today become a basic necessity rather than a luxury in the banking sector, I must examine the various components which comprise the building blocks on which banking would be functioning in the morrow. I would, therefore, enlist some of the major aspects which, to my mind, appear to be the corner stones in the road that we are paving so that the highway would ensure free, safe and secure conduct of banking business. The first major aspect which needs to be addressed is that of Consolidation. Banking in India has evolved as a mix of various independent functions. Thus we have credit functions as a separate activity, deposit taking as another different function, a host of payment facilities - each as a distinct activity, other services and so on. It is now time to look at consolidation of all these inter-related functions. Technology has already provided an answer in the form of Total Branch Automation, which has now given way to the Core Banking Systems, and the facility of single-window service at branches. While this traditional approach towards consolidation may be ensuring that the customers of today are retained by a bank, the growth of new clientele will, however, be related to other progressive measures to be taken by banks. An outward looking consolidation holds the key. Consolidation of all types of financial services which a customer of a bank may require needs to be offered by banks. While some steps have been taken by banks in the form of universal banking and the offering of related financial services such as insurance, tax advice, securities market operations, depository functions and the like, the future may witness alliances with service providers who may in today’s context appear to have to relationship with traditional banking concepts. For example, a mobile phone user, who is a customer of particular telecommunication service provider, may switch preferences to another bank if the phone company does not link its services to that of a particular bank with whom the user is banking with. Thus strategic alliances with varied service providers may become a necessity. The next major challenge arises out of the forces of competition. Traditional concepts relating to competition from other players in the same line of business will indeed exist but these will pale into oblivion in the form of competition from hitherto unexplored and unanticipated areas. Easy finance schemes by retailers of consumer durable articles will obviate the need for short term loams by customers of banks, thus resulting in a dwindling retail loan portfolio. Banks can overcome this challenge by providing refinance to the retailer who would be in requirement of funds for improving his business turnover portfolio. The essence of this is that competition may have to be exploited as an opportunity. Planning for the unanticipated and looking for opportunities hold the key to the successful BIS Review 45/2005 1 
bank of the future. In this connection, I draw your attention to the report of the RBI group on rural credit and microfinance and suggest that banks which are first movers would stand to gain substantially in terms of expanding their retail portfolio. Technology implementation comes with its attendant requirements too. A few major aspects which need to be reckoned relate to the • Need for standardisation - across hardware, operating systems, system software, application software to facilitate inter-connectivity of systems across branches • Need for high levels of security - in an environment which requires high levels of confidentiality, security is an important requirement • Once both the above are achieved, the next logical approach would be towards communication and networking - use of networks which would facilitate centralised databases and distributed processing. Exploitation of computer networks by banks would result in savings in cost and increase in efficiency • Need for a technology plan which has to be periodically monitored and also upgraded consequent upon changes in technology itself • Need for business process re-engineering with the large scale usage of computers - the objective is not to merely mechanise activities but to result in holistic benefits of computerisation for both the customer and the staff at branches • Need to address the issue of Human Relations in a computerised environment especially from the point of Human Resources Development • Sharing of technology experiences and expertise so as to reap the benefits of technology implementation across a wider community All these changes have, however, a host of attendant challenges. Prominent among them is the paradigm shift in the concept of security. With the delivery channels relating to funds based services - such as movement of funds electronically between different accounts of customers - taking place with the use of technology, the requirements relating to security also need to undergo metamorphosis at a rapid pace. Various concepts such as digital signatures, certification, storage of information in a secure and tamper-proof manner all assume significance and have to be part of the practices and procedures in the day-to-day functioning of banks of tomorrow. I must at this juncture, add that all these would be added requirements and the well established practices of today may also have to not only continue but also co-exist along with the new requirements. Security requirements have to be provided from a two pronged perspective - first for the internal requirements of the banks themselves and the second relating to the legal precincts of the laws of the land. It will be a matter of satisfaction to note that the INFINET (Indian Financial Network) is a safe, secure and efficient communications network for the exclusive use of the banking sector, which provides for inter-bank communication - which implies that banks have to now function as a group and at the same time competing with one another too. The key advantage of the INFINET is its own security framework in the form of the Public key Infrastructure - PKI, which is in conformity to the provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000. An effective security policy which would offer a shared vision of how the controls in the workplace should be implemented with the objective of protecting data, information and eventually, the economic value of the organisation. This has to be supplemented by education and training in these areas and reinforced by the actions and concerns of the top management so that a culture of security can be created. These controls have to be supplemented by surveillance, monitoring and auditing to detect unusual usage patterns and deficiencies. Banks have to put in place such a policy and ensure that it is being implemented effectively, and then audit the IT related functions so as to ensure that there are no lapses or deviations from the approved Information Security Policy. Another major challenge relates to the bridging the divide caused by distances. Today, banking has broken all geographical barriers and demand from customers relates to ‘anywhere and anytime banking’. Currently, IT based offerings such as Internet and Mobile Banking have provided customers with the means for meeting the requirement of being able to perform banking transactions from anywhere. The death of distances have also necessitated that banks in India do not merely look inward. Developments elsewhere in the world have also a strong impact on the efforts of Indian banks and these have to be factored in an always vibrant world of technology based banking. Added to this 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
is the fact that markets have shrunk digitally and this gap would reduce further in the morrow. It would be necessary to prepare ourselves for functioning in a very small knit shrunk world. Information availability across a large section of people will bring in the challenge of being able to process such large masses of information. This is an opportunity not only for the banking sector but for other sectors including the IT industry as well. Banks will, therefore, brace themselves for co-operation and co-existence and geographical boundaries may move away into oblivion just as sharing of resources (such as ATMs) has already commenced propagation. We have all heard of the digital divide which is a challenge to be overcome by the banking industry as well. While the average Indian customer may be as technology savvy or even better than his Western counterpart, the cultural aspects of his relationships may necessitate a personal touch to the offerings of banks. Further, all the technology based offerings by banks have a bias towards the major towns and cities and the need for reaching the mid size cities as well as the large rural population assumes significance. These pockets hold promises of substantial growth prospects and today with networking capabilities being available at much higher reliability levels than before and at affordable costs, banks may have to pay attention to these segments of the country as well. To achieve all these, banks will also have to re-orient their internal processes and procedures. Just as mechanisation of processes in a manufacturing company required changes in the steps involved in the production cycle, suitable changes in the job processes within banks will also have to be made. No technology implementation is complete without the attendant changes in the basic way of process functions at the organisation where such implementation shave been made, and if technology implementations have to be successful, they have to be accompanied by suitable changes in the process flows across all sectors of the economy, which is at the base of Business Processing Re-engineering. It is essential that banks embark upon Business Process Re-engineering in a large scale and preferable even before the large scale implementation of technology has commenced. The management of external relationships is another requirement which would have to be taken care of by bankers of the future. Convergence of the services of more industries and organisations is emerging so as to provide holistic service offerings to the discerning customer, and banks would be the prime target by customers if they have to provide service levels which match their expectations. This would necessitate that banks operate in an environment which will facilitate ease of inter-operability. Just as inter-operable IT systems and Straight Through processing (STP) will become the order of the day, inter-operable business domains will also prevail and banks have to overcome this challenge in their stride. This will also be observed in managing external functions such as Business Process Outsourcing, management of IT service providers and better vendor management - all of which are hitherto unknown domains for the banks’ personnel. The challenges staring at banking today need not result in a feeling of inadequacy. The I T framework in India is on strong ground and the industry has been showing significant growth rates in the previous years, with the financial sector having benefited immensely from the offerings of IT. Banks, for their part, have proved their mettle and I must add that in the few years since liberalisation, banks in India have proved that they can not only withstand the forces of change but blend the changes gracefully in such a manner as to even provide a challenge to the hitherto existing leaders in the line of business. Banks have commenced to grow laterally and at an exponential rate. We have the best talent of personnel and the best institutes to develop more resources and the best brains to manage these changes. Our society has held a pride of place of being largely knowledge based, ever since the time of the Vedas and the early days of the world. As India develops into a formidable force, it is Information Technology which holds the key to the process of transformation. Our key strengths lie in knowledge processing and as bankers we have been performing this function quite well both for our customers as well as for the growth of our own organisations. This underlying strength will ensure our key to success. As banks are poised for challenging but exciting times ahead, I am sure that this conclave will also provide substantial inputs as the day progresses on the various opportunities which banks will harbour for implementation within their respective confines. I am sure that this conclave will provide the kindling fire of transformation which banks in India will light up with enthusiasm and as Indian Banking transcends all barriers and gains greater coverage, they would make a mark as world leaders in providing unparalleled, efficient service at affordable rates resulting in high levels of customer satisfaction and an overall vibrant economy. Lastly, before I conclude I would like to draw your attention to the two vision documents , one relating to payment system and the other a draft of the BIS Review 45/2005 3 
proposed financial sector technology that RBI have recently put out on its website. These documents set out our vision for the next three years. We welcome your reaction. Need less to say your preparedness should be synchronous with the vision of the Central Bank. I wish the conclave all success. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 45/2005 
Niklaus Blattner: Three nations, two currencies, one economic area Speech by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the Freiburger Montags-Gesellschaft, Freiburg im Breisgau, 6 June 2005. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * The Upper Rhine EuroRegion comprises Baden, the Südpfalz region, Alsace and Northwestern Switzerland. In what shape is the economy in this region? Is it as dynamic as we would like? Are the national borders that transect the region a handicap or have we come to accept them? What are the implications of the fact that the region has two currencies? Firstly, the Upper Rhine EuroRegion is economically sound. This is due not least to the capital goods sector and the pharmaceutical/chemical industry, with the latter ensuring high added value in Northwestern Switzerland in particular. However, the Upper Rhine EuroRegion does not rank among the very best in Europe. While its level of economic added value is perfectly acceptable, its growth in recent years has been significantly lower than that in other regions. The region’s situation is, therefore, no different to that of many other economic areas in Continental Europe. Secondly, cross-border integration in the Upper Rhine EuroRegion is high. The diversity of the economic interrelationships between the national regions is reflected in the brisk trade in goods, capital flow and free movement of persons. It is clear from this economic integration that the fear of the region’s borders considerably compromising economic development cannot be confirmed. Rather, the diminishing, relative importance of intra-regional foreign trade and intra-regional cross-border direct investment is due more to globalisation and the ensuing increase in the influence of Eastern European and Asian economies than to weakening ties within the Upper Rhine region. Thirdly, the most notable aspect of the relationship between the region’s two currencies since the introduction of the euro in 1999 is its stability. That does not mean, however, that the issue of Switzerland’s ascension to the EU is of no consequence. Having its own currency allows Switzerland to conduct an independent monetary policy that is tailored to suit its needs. Finally, the economic policy can help the region thrive further by removing remaining hurdles, such as those in the labour market and in the exchange of goods and services (Cassis de Dijon principle). A well-integrated economic region is the key to a prosperous future. “Three nations, two currencies, one economic area” - the title of the paper - not only describes the reality, it also maps out the way forward. BIS Review 45/2005 1 
Joseph Yam: Hong Kong Institute of Bankers Beijing Representative Office Address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the inaugural ceremony and dinner, Beijing Representative Office of the Hong Kong Institute of Bankers, Beijing, 10 June 2005. *      *      * Chairman Liu, Vice Governor Xiang, Mr Sullivan, Ms Li, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank the Institute of Bankers for inviting me to attend this inaugural ceremony of its Beijing Representative Office. On behalf of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, I would like to extend our warmest congratulations to the Institute for making a major step in its development. As we all know, the savings rate in Mainland China is among the world’s highest, accounting for more than 40% of its GDP. The effective channelling of private-sector savings into fixed-assets investments is a major function of the financial system. Such is also an important responsibility of the many employees engaged in the normal workings of the financial system. The proper functioning of the financial sector, with effectiveness in financial intermediation, is crucial for the promotion of economic growth and development. Mr Deng Xiaoping once said, “Finance is very important; it is the core of modern economics.” Presently Mainland China relies preponderantly on the banking system in intermediating funds. Last year bank financing remained the most important channel for raising new funds for the non-government non-financial sector, accounting for over 90% of total funds raised. There are clear needs for developing other channels of financial intermediation in the longer term, in order to promote diversification and ensure financial stability and sustainable growth. However while the capital markets on the Mainland are still in their nascent stage and face some difficulties in development, the banking system will remain the most important channel of financial intermediation in the foreseeable future. Thus, those engaged in the banking sector will continue, for a long period of time, to play an important role in ensuring the effective intermediation of funds. Given the rapidly changing macroeconomic environment, the banking sector professionals face a difficult task in achieving this mission. The changes involved in this broad picture include supervisory policies for the banking sector, relationship between the regulatory authority and banks, and governance arrangements of individual banks. In line with the government’s reform and open policies and under the supervision of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, Mainland banks have become increasingly commercialized. Banking professionals have progressed from their former mode of following the authorities’ policy instructions to a more active role in assessment of loan applications before making credit decisions. This is not an easy change. It involves both time and considerable adjustment in the thinking. Besides, good tools are a must for a good job: bank employees have to increase their knowledge of the banking business in a market economy and enhance their professional standards. This is precisely one of the objectives of the Institute of Bankers, and with its newly launched Representative Office in Beijing, the Institute will extend its existing good work to the Mainland. It will help promote the training of bank employees on the Mainland, thereby contributing to the effective financial intermediation and smooth functioning of this crucial part of modern economy. The economies of the Mainland and Hong Kong are now highly interdependent. The Institute’s Beijing Representative Office will not only serve to enhance professionalism of the Mainland’s banking sector as a whole, but also contribute to the financial stability and development of both the Mainland and Hong Kong. Let me end this address by wishing the Institute’s Beijing Representative Office every success in its future endeavours. BIS Review 45/2005 1 
Lars Heikensten: Inflation targeting in Sweden - implementation, communication and effectiveness Opening remarks by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Conference on inflation targeting: implementation, communication and effectiveness, Stockholm, 10 June 2005. *      *      * I would like to begin by welcoming you all to Stockholm and to this conference on inflation targeting. The idea of holding this conference was hatched a couple of years ago, when Lars Svensson and I were talking about how the thinking in this area has evolved in recent years both in theory and in practice. Where do we stand today in research terms as well as in practice? And what can we learn from each other on the basis of our experiences? The fact that the conference was planned to take place this year provided added incentive, as it is ten years since Sweden’s inflation targeting regime was fully implemented in accordance with the original decision in 1993. We decided to spread the word in our respective networks: Lars on the academic side and I on the practical side. We are delighted that you, our colleagues and friends, have accepted our invitation, and believe we can look forward to a rewarding discussion of where inflation targeting stands today and how it can be developed further. I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that monetary policy today is, on the whole, being conducted better and more prudently than ever before. In many countries, the key to this success has been inflation targeting. Although the main reason for introducing inflation targeting in many cases - not least Sweden’s - has been frustration over the previous regime and economic performance, it has subsequently proved to work so well that it now stands out as an interesting option also for already well-functioning economies. This is demonstrated in particular by the current debate regarding a possible introduction of inflation targeting in the United States, where the economic performance in recent decades has been remarkably good and monetary policy successful. But first, before I go into a problem that currently feels significant for us at the Riksbank and that I also think is central to the discussion in the United States and elsewhere - the balance between concerns for output stability and inflation stability - allow me to say a few words about my fundamental views regarding inflation targeting policies. Unsurprisingly, I see considerable advantages of having an explicit, symmetric inflation target. It is also my impression that this view enjoys considerable support in the academic literature, an assertion, however, that no assembly is better placed to question than this one. The clear framework encompassing an inflation target, published forecasts and a specified target horizon has generally worked well as a guide for policy. There have been communication problems here and there, but it is not obvious that the situation would have been much better under a different regime. Another benefit of a clear framework, which I think has received too little attention in academic circles, but which in my opinion has been important for the favourable outcome, is that it helps bolster both the internal work and the economic discussion. Other considerations than those purely related to inflation have most likely been put to a more rigorous intellectual test than would otherwise have been the case, which I think has been useful. However, the fact that inflation targeting has worked well does not mean, of course, that all problems have been solved and that there are no more issues worth discussing; if that were so, there would have been no reason to arrange this conference. By way of introduction, I intend to describe some Swedish experiences of a problem area in inflation targeting that I see as one of the more significant, perhaps even the most significant - how to deal with the trade-off between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy. I will focus in this regard on two of the areas central to this conference - how policy is implemented and communicated. The inflation-real economy trade-off Flexible inflation targeting policy It is presumably safe to say that all inflation-targeting countries today conduct what Lars Svensson would call a flexible rather than a strict inflation targeting policy, even though the degree of flexibility BIS Review 45/2005 1 
probably varies somewhat from country to country. In other words, they are not, to use Mervyn King’s well-known expression, “inflation nutters”, i.e. they do not focus only on stabilising inflation but also take account of real economic developments and possibly other factors too. However, the present degree of flexibility in inflation-targeting policies has probably not always been regarded as so obvious as it is today. At least as far as Sweden is concerned, I think I am right in saying that it has been a gradual process that has brought us to where we are today. That is probably also true for many other inflation-targeting countries. Immediately after the announcement of the inflation target in 1993, the Riksbank tended to formulate policy as if the intention was to be anything but flexible. This may have been because the credibility problems in the 1970s and 1980s were considered damaging and were deemed to warrant “tough talk”. Whether it was a wise strategy to begin in this way with a one-sided focus on inflation is perhaps open to question. One could argue that it would have been better to choose a more balanced line from the outset. It might then have been possible to counteract some of the criticism levelled at the Riksbank for supposedly “focusing exclusively on inflation and completely disregarding employment”. From the mid-1990s and onwards, though, the Riksbank tried in various ways to clarify that we were not focusing solely on stabilising inflation. I believe it is correct to say that the implementation of policy also began to become more flexible around that time. One of the examples of this is the fact that we did not utilise the scope for rate cuts that - according to a stricter interpretation - deregulation and other supply factors had created during the last few years of the 1990s. The clearest example of how we attempted to convey that our inflation targeting policy was flexible rather than strict was the clarification of monetary policy that the Executive Board published in 1999. In that, we explained that it may be appropriate in some situations - e.g. in the event of large shocks and deviations from target - to refrain from bringing inflation back to target too quickly in order to mitigate the adverse consequences for output and employment.1 We expressed this in terms of there being reasons to occasionally depart from our simple policy rule - that the repo rate is normally raised if inflation one to two years ahead is forecast to be above 2 per cent, and vice versa if inflation is forecast to undershoot the target. Explicit framework as basis The strategy that we in Sweden have chosen for dealing with the “flexibility problem” could, in simplified terms, be described as that we, when we have found it necessary, have in various ways modified and adapted a framework - mainly represented by an explicit symmetric target, regular publication of detailed decision-support data including forecasts, and a simple policy rule for how the repo rate is normally adjusted against the background of the forecasts. This is probably the key reason why the flexibility on our part can chiefly be said to be reflected in “exceptions” to the policy rule, rather than it being explicitly described in terms of a continual procedure of balancing concerns for output and inflation stability. I do not think this way of handling the flexibility issue is in any way unique to Sweden but instead is fairly typical. One of our experiences is that we have found it quite difficult from time to time to get this kind of message across, at least when the flexibility is reflected in an unchanged or raised policy rate, as opposed to a cut. In such circumstances it seems to be rather hard to debunk the idea that monetary policy should be conducted according to a mechanical rule that says that the policy rate, regardless of what forces are acting on the economy at the time, should always be set to ensure that the inflation forecast at a given time horizon meets the target. On those occasions we have found it appropriate to depart from our policy rule in this regard, our actions have all too seldom been taken in the public domain as a sign that we conduct a flexible inflation targeting policy. Instead, the interpretation at times has been that we have changed our way of conducting monetary policy or that we have decided, for some more or less obscure reason, to maintain a certain line irrespective of what our forecasts tell us.                                                       1 For an overview of what inflation-targeting central banks say about stabilising output, see Kuttner, K.N. (2004), “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence” in Kent, C. and S. Guttman, The Future of Inflation Targeting, Conference Volume, Reserve Bank of Australia. 2 BIS Review 45/2005 
To some extent, the problems we have experienced probably reflect the fact that most people always prefer lower interest rates to higher ones. But it could also be the case, of course, that the way in which we have dealt with and communicated the flexibility problem has simply not been clear enough, despite our best efforts. One could perhaps see it as a sign that we have been too successful in “anchoring” the simple rule that we introduced at an early stage in an attempt to clearly explain our decisions and to create confidence in the new regime. Discrepancy between word and deed Of course, Sweden is not the only country in which the communication of flexible inflation targeting has caused problems. For instance, at the international level there is more general criticism claiming that the central banks in inflation-targeting countries are biased in their monetary policy communication towards stabilising inflation.2 The criticism is hence not levelled at how inflation targeting is conducted in practice; it recognises that the central banks in inflation-targeting countries do take account of the real economy. It does however claim that there is a discrepancy between word and deed that raises questions regarding what status the stabilisation of the real economy really has in relation to stabilising inflation. I should perhaps underline here that this criticism, as I understand it, does not say that there has been greater clarity in countries that do not have specific targets for inflation. In my opinion, the assertion that the communication of inflation-targeting central banks generally tends to focus a lot more on the stabilisation of inflation than of the real economy is essentially correct. Inflation forecasts undeniably have the leading role in the reports published by these central banks, and it is usually on the basis of these forecasts that the banks explain their policy decisions. So why have central banks that pursue a flexible inflation targeting policy chosen to concentrate on inflation in their communication and often been rather vague as regards how they look upon the trade-off between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy? One important explanation, which I already have touched upon, is probably that many of the economies that have adopted inflation targeting policies were previously beset with high, sharply fluctuating inflation. The task, accordingly, was to create broad understanding and credibility for a new policy focused on price stability. It therefore was natural to communicate policy in terms of factors that are relatively easy to measure and comprehend, and to do so according to concrete, relatively simple principles that could serve as a guide for monetary policy and that could contribute to stabilising inflation expectations. Moreover, from the point of view of explaining policy it is good if the overall objective of price stability that has been adopted by elected bodies in many countries can also be used in the implementation of policy and be allowed to play a prominent part in the debate. That the communication still tends to focus so strongly on inflation, despite the considerable confidence in low-inflation policies today, could reflect a perception that it is not all that easy to make substantial changes to the policy rhetoric. Personally, however, I think the problem runs deeper than that. It is quite simply difficult to clearly communicate the kind of varying, subtle deliberations that are involved. Of all inflation-targeting central banks, Norges Bank is perhaps the one that has come furthest in terms of the ambition to clarify the way policy takes the real economy into account, regularly publishing estimates of the output gap parallel with inflation forecasts as well as discussions of how policy takes account of it. It seems an interesting path to take, but at the same time it is evident - on the basis of my ten years’ experience - that far from all the considerations we have faced would be captured by this model. Concluding remarks By way of conclusion, there are a number of issues on which we need to evolve our thinking. I believe that the contributions to this conference have indeed succeeded in capturing the most important and relevant ones.                                                       2  See, for example, Fischer, S. (1996), “Why Are Central Banks Pursuing Long-Run Price Stability”, in Achieving Price Stability, symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. A recent reference that has brought the problem to the fore once again is Faust, J. and D.W. Henderson (2004), “Is Inflation Targeting Best-Practice Monetary Policy?”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 86(4), 117-143. BIS Review 45/2005 3 
One of the most central from my point of view concerns, as I have indicated, the balance between inflation stability and output stability - both in terms of the most appropriate way to accommodate it in the practical policy and the best way to communicate it. Although there is hardly any doubt that “we are all flexible inflation targeters now”, how can we progress as regards concretising this flexibility in action and communication? Another interesting question is whether inflation targeting is better suited than other regimes when it comes to anchoring long-term inflation expectations. I have always thought so myself, but it is of course an issue that requires empirical investigation. One might also ask whether inflation targeting, even if it should have succeeded in anchoring long-term inflation expectations, can become better than it is today at facilitating the formation of expectations in the near and medium term? This relates to an issue that is addressed in several of the contributions, namely how we should best communicate our expectations and plans regarding the future conduct of policy. Recently, a number of central banks have begun to depart from the assumption of an unchanged policy rate in their forecasts, choosing instead to work with paths for future interest rate developments. What kind of interest rate paths should we use in that case - “exogenous” paths based on implied forward rates or “endogenous” paths that reflect the central bank’s own expectations and plans, and what are the advantages and disadvantages of both options? And could, for example, an excessive degree of openness and detail as regards the central bank’s own expectations risk increasing market volatility instead of facilitating economic agents’ planning? These are just a handful of the issues that are addressed in the contributions to the conference and that I hope will provide the basis for a rewarding discussion. Once again - you are all very welcome! 4 BIS Review 45/2005 
William Ryback: Launch of two-factor authentication for internet banking in Hong Kong Speech by Mr William Ryback, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the launch of two-factor authentication for internet banking, Hong Kong, 30 May 2005. *      *      * Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. A very warm welcome to all of you to today’s press conference, which marks the launch of two-factor authentication by the banking industry in Hong Kong. It is a great pleasure that I am joined this afternoon by Mr He, Chairman of the Hong Kong Association of Banks, and Mr Man, Senior Superintendent, Commercial Crime Bureau, Hong Kong Police Force. They will be sharing with you shortly about the benefits of two-factor authentication to bank customers and its effectiveness in combating Internet banking frauds. We will be happy to answer your questions afterwards. The acceptance of Internet banking services has been growing rapidly in Hong Kong over the past years. At the end of 2004, over 2.7 million personal Internet banking accounts (an increase of 23% from a year ago) and 107,000 business Internet banking accounts (an increase of 60% from a year ago) were established in Hong Kong. To date many of the banking services are available online. In view of the growing acceptance of Internet banking services and sophistication of Internet banking frauds reported locally and overseas, the banking industry in Hong Kong reached a general consensus last year to strengthen the Internet banking security by implementing two-factor authentication. The HKMA endorsed this consensus and issued a circular in June 2004 requesting banks to implement such security measure by June 2005 for high-risk retail Internet banking transactions (such as fund transfers to non-designated accounts). Two-factor authentication is a security measure recognised by the information security industry to combat Internet banking frauds. In addition to the normal login ID and password, a customer needs a second factor which is in his or her physical possession for additional identity verification. This second factor should be difficult to be stolen together with the customer’s login ID and password by fraudsters over the Internet. We believe that this is an effective way in tackling the latest Internet banking frauds such as fake bank websites, phishing e-mails and Trojan software. We understand that a number of banking supervisors in other financial markets are currently reviewing the implication of the latest Internet banking frauds and consulting their banks in relation to the adoption of two-factor authentication for Internet banking. Hong Kong is one of the first places to offer such security measure to bank customers. So far the implementation of two-factor authentication has been progressing satisfactorily. All banks offering high-risk retail Internet banking transactions will allow customers to apply for two-factor authentication from next month. Individual banks may offer different two-factor authentication methods to customers. Three common methods being adopted by banks in Hong Kong are digital certificate, security token-based one-time password and SMS-based one-time password. To help you better understand the various methods, we will have a brief demonstration to illustrate these methods towards the end of the press conference. A series of promotional activities will be launched by the banking industry and individual banks from June 2005 onward to help customers to fully understand this security measure. Mr He will highlight the key features of the consumer education programme to you. Two-factor authentication strengthens the security controls of Internet banking and protects bank customers from Internet banking frauds. We are confident that with the joint efforts of the banking sector, bank customers, the Police and the HKMA, Internet banking will continue to flourish under a safe and sound environment in Hong Kong. BIS Review 44/2005 1 
Ardian Fullani: A brief look at the Albanian banking system Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Black Sea Business Day, Yerevan, Armenia, 6 June 2005. *      *      * Distinguished Ladies and gentlemen, Dear participants, It’s a great pleasure for me having the opportunity to participate in this regional meeting of Black Sea countries. I have always appreciated this initiative as a special opportunity for all the countries being involved in. In my long career, I have realized that the success of this business consists generally in the ability it has to gain public confidence. Nevertheless, the overall economic, political and social environment of the country is playing also an important role. During my career, I have been witness of many events which directly or indirectly have damaged the banking system. The monetary collapse of the banking system at the end of the communist era, the flourishing and degenerating of the fraudulent investment schemes, as well as many other social, political and economic problems that have associated the Albanian transition, made the banking system “suffer” for a long time. However the reputation of the Albanian Banking system is in place recently. It’s enough if I just refer to the latest problematic episode occurred in Albania, in early spring of 2002, when due to the lack of public information and to political speculation with the introduction of the deposit guarantee scheme, the confidence of households was traumatized, leading to a considerable deposit run from the banking system. Having a look at all the statistical indicators, it results that the banking system at that time it was sound and growing continuously. But, all this was insufficient since the memories of year 1997 (the collapse of fraudulent schemes) were still present and households sensitivity to them was very high. Inspite of the recent significant achievements I would like to stress that still there is a high potential of fragility in our economy and the entire region as well. As a consequence, I think that we have to be much more prudent and much more diligent when speaking about the financial stability of the country. This episode suggests, inter alia, the necessity to associate the reforms with concrete preparatory steps and, certainly, combined with back-up plans in the case of failure. For this purpose the market needs to be intensively prepared and elaborated since in early stages of the implementation of reforms. It is imperative that the decisionmakers should themselves know in advance the market behavior and sentiments. Last spring, a joint assessment of the Albanian financial sector conducted from both the International Monetary Fund and World Bank (FSAP) concluded that: the financial sector consists mainly of a regulated and supervised banking system. The Stress-Test indicated that the level of different risk exposure to the banking system is rather low, an argument that supports this conclusion. The banking system has experienced remarkable developments over 2004. After the licensing of Popular Bank, with Albanian capital, the number of banks increased from 15 to 16, and a preliminary license is granted to Union Bank, which is expected to raise the number of banks to 17 over 2005. The system assets have further increased by 14 percent while there was an increase of banking products and an expansion of their network. During this year there will be sold the public shares of both the Italian Albanian Bank and United Bank of Albania, which will lead to an increase of effectiveness and banking competition, paving the way to the processes of selling, merging and acquisitions towards a new consolidation of the banking system. The lending activity increased by 38 percent where one can distinguish inter alia the significant growth of medium-term and long-term loans compared to short-term loans. The map of coverage of the country with the banking system has further expanded, including new areas ever covered before. At the end of 2004, the total number of branches reached 88, or 11 branches more that the end of the previous year, while the number of agencies recorded for the first time a full three-digit number, 100 and the number of the employed people increased by 26 percent. BIS Review 44/2005 1 
The high increase of the number of branches relative to agencies shows that banks are not interested only in providing the service of collecting deposits but also in providing other products like crediting to the economy. These developments, besides their positive contribution in enhancing the financial intermediation speak for a better perception of the investing potential from banks, in Albania. An outstanding development is mainly related to the client service, which is accompanied through electronic terminals by the increasing number of electronic cards in circulation. Banks offer already debit and credit cards in co-operation with international companies such as Visa and MasterCard. Six banks provide the ATM service and the number of ATMs reached 108 by the end of February 2005. The banking system results to have a profit level, which has been increasing to Lek 5.1 billion. Return on equity (ROE) was estimated at 21 percent while problem credits represent only 4.2 percent, from 4.6 percent in the previous year. On the other hand, for the rest of the financial sector the FSAP reports indicates many problems, which simultaneously contain many themes including essential issues such as their supervision. Although, due to their small dimensions, these problems do not present imminent risks for the time being, they still should be carefully examined and resolved. Returning to the assessments made under FSAP in other countries similar to Albania (I mainly refer here to South East European Countries, SEEC) and to many other financial reports referring to this region, we realize that these problems are similar and these countries suffer more or less similar symptoms. If one has a look back at the history, it realizes that it can not happen differently. The regional tradition is poor, of little inheritance in institutions, market rule and behaviour, and financial intermediation. However, today, about 15 years after the big collapse of the communist regime it seems that South East European Countries (SEEC) have been engaged in an irreversible process of their stabilization and integration with the rest of Europe. 2 BIS Review 44/2005 
Simon Topping: Improving the management of risk through implementation of Basel II Speech by Mr Simon Topping, Executive Director, Banking Policy, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the ACIHK The Financial Markets Association Basel II Seminar, Hong Kong,  27 September 2005.  *      *      * Only a few years ago it might have seemed a bit strange to invite a regulator to speak on the subject of risk management. After all, a regulator was supposed to have the same relationship to risk as the preacher did to sin: he was against it. Historically, regulation and risk management were opposites. Regulation was supposed to be all about stopping banks from taking risks. Risk management, by contrast, was concerned with how you take on risk and how you manage it. Regulation has been criticised, rightly in my view, for taking insufficient account of modern risk management techniques such as credit risk and operational risk modelling, stress-testing, and portfolio management. Thankfully we are beginning to move away from the days when regulators were perceived as regarding taking any sort of risk as "a bad thing." Regulators care, above all, that the banking system should be sound and stable. One of the most important factors in a sound banking system is that banks should be profitable; and regulators recognise that without risks there is no chance of banks making money. What matters are not the risks that banks take, but how good they are at identifying, monitoring and controlling them. Hopefully we are also moving away from the days when regulators set regulations which have no real relation to how banks themselves look at risk, and how they manage risk. Basel II is a major step in this direction. It aims to link the way regulators look at risk to how banks themselves look at risk; to encourage the use of modern risk management techniques; to encourage innovation; and to encourage banks to ensure that their risk management capabilities are commensurate with the risks of their business. As a result Basel II brings regulation into the 21st century. Previously, regulators' main focus was on credit risk and market risk. Basel II takes a more sophisticated approach to credit risk, in that it allows banks to make use of internal ratings based systems - or "IRB systems" as they have become known - to calculate their capital requirement for credit risk. It also introduces, in addition to the market risk capital charge, an explicit capital charge for operational risk. Together, these three risks - credit, market, and operational risk - are the so-called "Pillar 1" risks. But Basel II goes much further than this in looking at risk. As you will I am sure know, as risk management professionals, these three risks are only scraping the surface. Banks' risk management functions need to look at a much wider range of risks than this - interest rate risk in the banking book, foreign exchange risk, liquidity risk, business cycle risk, reputation risk, strategic risk. The risk management role of helping identify, evaluate, monitor, manage and control or mitigate these risks has become a crucial role in modern-day banking. Indeed, it is probably not exaggerating the importance of this to say that the quality of a bank's risk management has become one of the key determinants of a success of a bank. Basel II recognises the importance of these risks - and of the quality of risk management - by means of what is known as "Pillar 2". Under Pillar 2, there is an assessment firstly of all the risks a bank is running and, secondly, of its ability to manage these risks. This can lead to the bank being required to hold more capital to cover these risks, or to make improvements in its risk management. Pillar 2 therefore encourages banks to improve risk management, and gives capital incentives to do so.   1/5  
I will say some more about this later on, but it is probably time at this point that I said a little about how Hong Kong is implementing Basel II. Hong Kong implementation We took a strategic decision early on in the Basel II process that Hong Kong should implement Basel II in accordance with the timetable recommended by the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision for its own members. This means adoption of most of the approaches under the new framework from the start of 2007, and the more advanced approaches from the start of 2008. Thus Hong Kong will adopt Basel II at the same time as other major international financial centres, such as London, Frankfurt and Tokyo. From a regional perspective, the implementation timetable in Hong Kong is broadly similar to that being adopted by Australia and Singapore. For several years now the HKMA has been developing its supervisory approach along Basel II lines, and this is leading to some significant changes in how supervision is conducted. Central to this is the issue of "process versus rules". Process versus rules The original Basel Capital Accord was developed when risk management was still very much in its infancy. It reflects what might be called a "rules-based" approach to regulation in the sense that it sets prescriptive standards that banks are required to follow. It relies largely on the application of simple, mechanical formulas for assessing how much capital a bank should hold. The essence of the old Capital Accord was that it represented an attempt to monitor the prudential soundness of banks by using a standardised risk measurement framework, which was applied to all institutions and which employed data based on a snap-shot of their balance sheets at certain specified reporting dates. The approach was standardised since regulators specify the precise form in which the calculation of capital adequacy is to be performed - for example, the specific risk categories into which assets are to be assigned. There are, of course, still plenty of rules-based aspects to the new capital framework: it's difficult otherwise to understand what the many hundreds of pages of the Basel II document are needed for. However, the point I want to stress is that the advanced approaches, and especially IRB, introduce a new element into banking supervision. For want of a better term, I'll call this process-regulation. Whereas the old Accord focused on rules, the IRB approaches focus instead on the processes by which risks are managed. Rather than prescribing detailed rules for assessing capital adequacy, supervisors will in future need to assess the adequacy of the internal processes used by firms to manage their risks. This is reflected, for example, in the approach that we propose to take to the validation of IRB systems: we will not be prescribing specific numerical standards that we expect internal risk measurement systems to achieve. Rather, we will discuss with each individual IRB bank how its system performs in relation to the bank's own internal objectives and appetite for risk. IRB will require us to engage in a dialogue with AIs to understand how they go about developing and approving their IRB models. As a result, the future for banking supervision is likely to take the form of an active discussion with our counterparts in the risk management and credit control functions. It will be less a matter of us setting hard and fast rules, and more a matter of us holding a dialogue with risk managers. Of course, the dialogue cannot be open-ended: at some point we will have to draw our conclusions and make our assessment. But those of you in IRB banks can expect us to show a different level of engagement, and a greater intensity of interest in, your risk management systems than we have previously shown.   2/5  
Pillar 2 As I mentioned earlier, much of the focus on Basel II has been on IRB, and thus on Pillar 1. Now, credit risk remains, of course, one of the most fundamental risks in banking. However, we in the HKMA determined at an early stage in the Basel II process that it would be desirable to broaden the focus so as to bring into the equation the various "Pillar 2 risks." The case for this is, in our view, self-evident, as risks such as concentration risk, interest rate risk in the banking book, and liquidity funding risk can be every bit as devastating for the financial health of a bank as credit risk can be. In the run-up to final agreement on Basel II, therefore, we issued a series of guidance notes to give encouragement to AIs to upgrade their ability to manage these risks appropriately. We knew that for the coming few years AIs and their risk management specialists were likely to be preoccupied with Pillar 1 and thus we wanted to make sure that these "Pillar 2 risks" were adequately addressed as a priority, and not as an afterthought. In theory, Pillar 2 requires banks to have a formal process for allocating internal capital against the wide range of risks that are not explicitly part of Pillar 1. This formal process is sometimes referred to as the Capital Allocation Assessment Process or "CAAP". However, it has to be acknowledged that very few banks currently have such a process in place, and only the largest and most sophisticated institutions have been able to devote the resources necessary to building these types of formal capital allocation systems. Consequently, as a regulator, we do not plan to require all banks to develop internal capital allocation models, at least initially. The need for such models must be commensurate with each institution's scale and sophistication. In place of requiring all AIs to develop these models, the HKMA has developed its own internal Supervisory Review Process, or "SRP". As you may know, the HKMA has for a long time set capital ratios on a bank-by-bank basis. This has been with the aim of trying to ensure that the capital ratio reflects the risk profile of an individual AI, taking into account the full range of risks to which it is potentially exposed. We intend to use the SRP to bring greater rigour into the process of setting AI-specific minimum capital ratios. In effect, the SRP is our own credit scoring system. It takes a large number of variables, each carefully chosen to reflect a different aspect of risk, and combines them to produce a single overall "score" for each AI. The score is in turn mapped onto a particular range of capital ratios. Among the factors that this process will consider are the Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 risks that I have already mentioned. In addition, the SRP will take into account a variety of other factors such as reputation risk, strategic risk, and the quality of corporate governance. The inputs into this process will be derived primarily from our existing supervisory arrangements, such as off-site and on-site examinations. We believe that the SRP is capable of replacing the current, relatively subjective, approach to setting AI-specific minimum capital ratios with something more rigorous and objective. Like all good credit scoring systems, there will still be scope for expert judgement and, in my experience, there is no substitute for the supervisory smell-test. On the whole, however, we intend to base each AI's capital ratio on the output of this process. Once we have derived a score, and thus a corresponding capital ratio, for an individual AI, we will discuss the results of the SRP with the AI. Again, as in the review of IRB systems, the concept of supervisory dialogue will be important. It will be our aim to understand how each AI approaches the range of risks that exist outside Pillar 1, and to understand the mechanisms they have in place for identifying, monitoring and controlling those risks. If an AI is able to demonstrate to us that it has a better way of allocating capital against these risks than our own SRP model, then we will be open to discuss with it a corresponding adjustment to its capital ratio. Thus one aim of this approach is to give banks an incentive to come up with a better mousetrap. There will be capital benefits from having a good internal capital allocation process.   3/5  
Implementation challenges I'd like to say a few words next about the implementation challenges associated with Basel II. Although preparations for the implementation of the new capital framework are well advanced in a large number of jurisdictions, including in Hong Kong, the process has not been without its critics. It has recently been claimed that too much regulation is now itself the greatest source of risk in the global financial system, and the implication that is supposed to be drawn is that regulators are somehow engaged in a self-defeating exercise. At the root of this criticism is the compliance burden that arises from Basel II implementation taken in combination with other recent developments, such as the adoption of International Accounting Standards. The first point I should make is that the timing of these various initiatives is not completely under our control: the accounting profession, for example, has tended to plough its own furrow independently of any of the banking regulators. This has been the case in many leading international financial centres, not just in Hong Kong. Efforts are now underway in a variety of contexts to try to secure better coordination in these various initiatives, but it has to be admitted that in an ideal world they would not be quite so clustered together. That said, I would be the first to acknowledge that Basel II requires heavy investment in risk management systems and IT infrastructure, as well as radical changes in the risk management culture at some banks. However, this is a healthy development. I suspect that banks would have in any case needed to make most of the so-called "Basel II-related" investment if they wanted to stay at the top of their game. By agreeing to accept banks' internal risk management systems as the basis for the calculation of regulatory capital requirements, the Basel Committee has provided a powerful incentive for banks to upgrade their risk management systems. But this is only what they otherwise would have needed to do to be able to compete with the best. There are, however, some quite specific challenges for Asian banks in using the more advanced approaches under Basel II. One of the most important is the availability of data. Historically, many Asian banks have not collected the data needed to develop the type of models needed for IRB purposes. Some are only now starting to do so, and it will be several years before they have sufficiently rich data that it can begin to inform their credit risk management processes. A second, related, factor is that even where the data has been collected, in many countries the default experience is distorted by the 1997-98 financial crisis: the question for banks is to what extent this experience should be factored into their risk management systems. A third issue is the extent to which off-the-shelf models that have been developed primarily for the US market can capture the behavioural characteristics of Asian borrowers. None of these problems are in principle insurmountable. However, they do suggest that a degree of caution is in order before banks make the leap to IRB. That is why we have been advising those banks that are considering using IRB approaches to "look before you leap." The most important consideration is for banks to make sure that their IRB systems are robust and well-founded, and that they are integrated with their overall systems for identifying, managing and controlling risk, for making credit decisions, and for product pricing. We are willing to allow banks as much time as they need to achieve these objectives. The implementation dates for the IRB approaches should not be taken as a deadline. Banks that feel they need longer to work on their systems will have our full support. Getting it right matters more than a specific date in the calendar. Looking ahead, both the regulators and the industry will continue to face many challenges over the coming months and years. Putting Basel II in place has been demanding for everyone involved, and will continue to be so. However, I am confident that once the process is complete we will be able to look back with satisfaction on what has been achieved. There is no doubt in my mind that Basel II will produce a step-change in risk management practices   4/5  
around the world, with the result that the global banking system will become both more efficient and more robust. Through all the pain of the transition, we need to keep our eyes firmly on that prize.    5/5  
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Stimulating the growth of microfinance in the Philippines Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the National Capital Region (NCR) Stakeholders’ Forum on Microfinance, Manila, 19 September 2005. *      *      * Introduction  Good morning.  I am happy and honored to be part of this Stakeholders’ Forum which aims to look at the role of microfinance in job generation and entrepreneurial growth, specifically in the National Capital Region (NCR). The NCR continues to have the highest unemployment rate nationwide, resulting in poverty and inequality.  It is indeed an opportune time to conduct a forum such as this to address these pressing problems.   Microfinance: Benefits beyond one household  In the face of these problems, one possible intervention is the provision of microfinance services.  Although microfinance is not a panacea, it has been proven, here and around the world, to be a powerful intervention in tackling the various facets of poverty. As most of you already know, the practice and provision of microfinance has been growing in the Philippines. This increase is driven by the numerous empirical evidence and many success stories that demonstrate microfinance as an effective tool for economic development.  Microfinance provides the necessary push for microenterprises to help them grow.  This bears significance for the Philippines where micro, small and medium enterprises make up 99.6% of our total industries and employ 70% of our workforce. It becomes even more significant when we learn that around 4.1 million families belonging to the lowest income strata are engaged in microenterprise activities.  Without access to financial services, these microenterprises are forced to rely on more expensive sources of credit such as informal money lenders which limits their capacity to grow their businesses.  It is clear therefore that by invigorating these microenterprises, microfinance can have a direct contribution and impact for economic development and poverty alleviation.  Microfinance can then empower the many Filipinos living in poverty to increase their economic activity and income, build up assets, prepare against emergencies and better invest in education, health, and housing thereby improving the overall quality of their lives.  In addition, the benefits go beyond the client’s household.  These microbusinesses generate the much needed employment and increase the economic activity in local economies.    Growth of the microfinance industry  Given these benefits of microfinance and its potential for far reaching gains, the question that is asked of us today is how we can further develop and stimulate the growth of microfinance in the country.  Growth in the microfinance industry may be characterized by an increase in the breadth and depth of outreach of existing microfinance institutions, heightened competition among microfinance service providers, diversification of product and service offerings, and the presence of private and commercial funds for microfinance activities.  There is no standard blueprint to show us how to achieve these characteristics and to ensure the growth of the microfinance industry.  To a large extent, the growth will be, and should be,   1/4  
market driven.  But there are some enabling factors and necessary conditions that must be present to achieve such growth.  Necessary conditions for growth  First and foremost, there must be an enabling policy and regulatory environment that supports and promotes the development of sustainable and viable microfinance institutions that will best serve the microfinance clients.  The Philippines is among the few countries in the world with a national strategy for microfinance.  The national strategy envisions a viable and sustainable private microfinancial market with the main objective of providing low income households and microenterprises access to financial services.  Anchored on the national strategy, a policy framework was created and several laws and issuances were passed to promote greater involvement of the private sector, the non-participation of government line agencies in credit programs and the adoption of market oriented financial and credit policies.  These are the Social Reform and Poverty Alleviation Act, Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act, Executive Order 138 which rationalized government directed credit programs, the General Banking Law of 2000 and the Baranggay Micro Business Enterprise Act.  The General Banking Law in particular has paved the way for the flourishing of microfinance within the banking sector.  The Bangko Sentral was mandated to recognize microfinance as a legitimate banking activity and we have, since then, taken a pro-active stance in developing a “microfinance-friendly” policy environment, in increasing the capacity of the BSP and the banking sector as well as in engaging in promotion and advocacy efforts.  I am happy to note that these initiatives have played a catalytic role for banks to engage in microfinance.  Before the year 2000, there were about 55 banks claiming that they had microfinance operations. Today, we have 187 banks engaged in microfinance covering all the regions of the country.  That is well over a 200% increase in just less than five years. With this increase in banks providing microfinance, we will see more of the unbanked yet bankable receive the much needed access to financial services.  The BSP is committed to continue to support this development with the primary objective of creating a policy environment that will allow banks to have a wider scope for their microfinance operations, while protecting their depositors and the financial system.  In some cases, it may entail more flexible provisions, while in other cases it may entail more rigorous standards. What is essential is that the policies and regulations seriously consider the needs of banks with microfinance operations in order to increase in outreach and sustainability.  Aside from the laws, issuances and national strategy, the Philippines also boasts of a clear regulatory framework for microfinance institutions. This framework focuses on the key areas of transparency, portfolio quality, efficiency and outreach. The regulatory framework was established to support the diverse set of microfinance institutions, whether bank, NGO or cooperative, recognizing the strength of each type of institution in delivering quality microfinance services.  This enabling policy and regulatory environment has led to a burgeoning interest in microfinance and an ever-growing number of microfinance institutions.  This brings us to the second necessary condition to ascertain that the growth of microfinance can be a sustainable and viable one.  This second factor is the need for microfinance institutions to adopt and subscribe to performance standards in their operations.  The Bangko Sentral as a member of the National Credit Council worked very hard in finalizing a set of performance standards that can be used by microfinance institutions across the banking, non-governmental and cooperative sectors to facilitate assessment and   2/4  
evaluation of their performance. The standards go by the acronym P.E.S.O., which stands for Portfolio Quality, Efficiency, Sustainability and Outreach.  As the microfinance industry develops, these standards become more relevant. A recent study of the Consultative Group to Assist the Poorest (CGAP), a consortium of 29 donors, have shown that world capital markets have been challenged in recent years and that investors are increasingly searching for alternative ways of boosting their returns and spreading their risks. They have identified that microfinance fits neatly into this trend.  With clearer standards, and possibly industry benchmarks and rating systems in the future, interested investors will be better equipped to evaluate microfinance institutions as potential partners for growth.  This will be beneficial for the microfinance industry.  Oikocredit International, a social investor increasingly engaged in microfinance, expressed that channelling commercial capital to microfinance institutions is key in establishing the conditions for sustainability and for the scaling-up of microfinance institutions.  Commercial capital pushes microfinance institutions to have more rigorous financial discipline and management.  The challenge now is for practitioners, regulators and policy makers to uphold and adhere to these standards to ensure a more transparent and sustainable commercial microfinance industry in the country. At the end of the day, only commercially viable institutions are able to expand their reach to wider geographical areas and provide a more extensive range of financial services to their clients. With more of these institutions in play, the ultimate benefit goes to the microenterprises because there will be more responsive products and services, innovative methodologies and competitive prices.  The third necessary condition is the presence of a comprehensive credit information system.  With more and more players engaged in microfinance, the problem of credit pollution and multiple borrowings is also increasing.  The sharing and disseminating of credit related information will be able to address this problem.  Credit bureaus are useful in reducing risks in lending and in encouraging a more responsible attitude towards credit by borrowers which will ultimately lower delinquency and strengthen the credit and financial system. In addition, the presence of a credit bureau will foster lending to the previously neglected sector such as the micro, small and medium enterprises due to less reliance on collateral based credit decisions.  Despite the many benefits of having a credit bureau, many have not participated or availed of these services due to fear of losing clients to competition, confidentiality issues and effectiveness of current credit bureau services. At present, there is a proposed bill in both houses of congress which aims to fully institutionalize a credit information system in the country. Conclusion  The continuous growth of the microfinance industry presents us with promising opportunities. It is important that we seize these opportunities as there still remains a large and unmet demand for microfinance services in our country.  As long as there remains nearly 40% of our population living in poverty, there is an urgent need for microfinance to provide them with opportunities to increase their economic activity, foster their spirit of entrepreneurship, facilitate employment and improve the quality of their lives and that of their community. As some microfinance practitioners say, one microfinance loan can change the future on an entire family. Several loans can change a community. Thousands of these loans can transform an entire economy.  Let us remain focused and unrelenting in our commitment to see this become a reality.    3/4  
On our part, we at the Bangko Sentral will continue to be an active advocate of microfinance in our country.   Thank you and good day to all of you.       4/4  
I J Macfarlane: What are the global imbalances? Speech by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Economic Society of Australia Dinner, Melbourne, 28 September 2005. *      *      * 1.  Introduction  I have given a number of speeches to the Economic Society over the years, and it is a pleasure to be doing so again tonight. The last time I gave the closing address to the Conference of Economists was in 1997 in Hobart. The subject I want to speak about tonight is one which has loomed particularly large in international macro-economic discussion in the period since then. I refer to the subject of global imbalances in international payments.  Most of the discussion, at least until quite recently, focussed on the large US current account deficit and questioned its sustainability and the risks it posed to the world economy. Tonight I would like to approach the subject of global payments imbalances from a broader perspective. In doing so, the focus of attention is shifted towards Asia, recognition is given to the weakness of Europe, and the United States is cast into an accommodating role, rather than an initiating one.  When we look at the global economy over the past half dozen years, there are a number of developments that have been difficult to satisfactorily understand and explain. I suggest that the following five developments are the central ones in need of an explanation. 1. Why did the US current account deficit start to widen sharply after 1997, reach such a high percentage of GDP, and yet has been relatively easily financed?  2. Why has Asia run such large current account surpluses and built up such a high level of international reserves?  3. Why did the world's central banks push short-term interest rates to their lowest level for a century, and why has this apparently easy monetary policy not led to an appreciable pick-up in inflation?  4. Why have bond yields been so low, and why have they stayed low even when short-term interest rates have been raised?  5. Against this background of wide payments imbalances, why have the margins for risk in corporate and emerging market debt been so exceptionally low?  A number of explanations have been put forward to account for each of these developments. The most common explanation has started with the widening US current account deficit, and attributed it mainly to excessive spending and borrowing and insufficient saving by US households and the US Government.1 While this explanation is consistent with the widening US current account deficit, it has a number of shortcomings because it is inconsistent with some other developments we observe in the global economy. For an explanation to have any plausibility, it must be consistent with all the five simultaneous developments listed above.  In my view, the most promising explanation at present is one which starts with the surplus countries and focuses on why national savings are so much higher than national investment in those countries.2                                                       1  See Mann (1999 and 2002), Obsfeld and Rogoff (2000 and 2004) and Peterson (2004). 2  Ben Bernanke, while a Governor of the US Federal Reserve Board, gave the best explanation along these lines. He originally called it the “glut of savings” argument, but it could more appropriately be called the “dearth of investment” argument because there has not really been an increase in world savings, only a redistribution. Alternatively, we could call it the “glut of savings in surplus countries” argument. See Bernanke (2005A, 2005B).   1/10  
Although it is not, in itself, a complete explanation of everything that has happened, it is the most plausible in that it is consistent with all the five developments listed above.  2.  The excess of savings in the surplus countries  The best starting point for any explanation is to recognise that there is a wide disparity between saving rates in different countries. Broadly speaking, Asian countries tend to have high saving rates, Anglo-Saxon ones low saving rates, and other countries somewhere in between (row 1 of Table 1). For balance of payments purposes, this would not matter if investment rates in each country matched the saving rate, but this is not the case (row 2 of Table 1). In countries with high saving rates, investment rates, while high, are not as high as the saving rate, and these countries run a current account surplus. The opposite applies in the low saving countries. To understand developments in current accounts, we have to understand developments in saving and investment ratios in different countries and regions.     In short, Asian countries have more savings than they wish to invest in their own countries, and so they have to invest or lend abroad. This is the most basic of all balance of payments identities. Other countries that invest more than they save have to finance their investment by using the savings of foreigners. The actual channel can take many forms, but that is not crucial to the story.  To complicate the story slightly, it is not only Asian countries that are running surpluses at the moment. As a result of the high oil price, the Middle East and Russia are also doing so, as are the Latin American countries for different reasons. While acknowledging these surpluses, I intend to leave them out of the rest of my account on the grounds that they are a good deal smaller than in Asia, and that, on past experience, they are likely to be temporary. For those who want to follow them up, I recommend a recent paper on our website.3  Returning to Asia, we can ask why these countries do not invest more in themselves, and can find several explanations which I will outline later. Whatever the explanation, we should probably accept that in the medium term, a surplus of Asian saving over Asian domestic investment will be a fact of life; hence, Asia will run large current account surpluses and therefore will have an excess supply of savings to be invested abroad.  Given that this is going to happen, some other countries must run deficits – this is another important balance of payments identity which must hold. If no other country was prepared to run a deficit, then the world economy would enter a downward spiral with ex ante saving greater than ex ante investment. Clearly, the countries that will run the deficits will be those where consumers, businesses                                                       3  For a fuller account of these developments, see Orsmond (2005) and IMF (2005).   2/10  
and governments are most willing to spend and whose financial systems are most efficient at intermediating the flow of world savings.  For ease of exposition, we can focus on three main regions of the world – Asia, the Euro area and the anglosphere (mainly the United States, but also the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand). Asia runs a large current account surplus, and we might expect it to be balanced by deficits in the other two regions. In fact, the entire deficit shows up in the Anglosphere, with the Euro area in approximate balance. While balance sounds like a good thing, the Euro area has achieved this largely because of weak domestic demand and high unemployment over recent years. So what appears to be a balance in European payments, is in fact an important imbalance in the global economy.    As explained before, the Asian surplus has to be invested in the rest of the world, and it will tend to flow to those regions which offer the highest return on capital. While foreign investment flows both ways, in net terms it has flowed from Asia mainly to the United States and has underpinned the level of the US dollar, despite the US current account deficit, and provided easy access to finance for US borrowers in the business, household and government sectors.  3.  How does this explanation fit the five questions?  (i)  The ease of financing the US current account deficit  There have been widespread fears expressed over the past half dozen years that the United States would have difficulty financing its deficit, that the US dollar would fall sharply, and that real interest rates in the United States would rise as borrowers competed for funds. In fact, the US current account deficit has been relatively easily financed despite it continuing for fifteen years and reaching 6 per cent of GDP. The US dollar in real effective terms today is at or slightly above its level of fifteen years ago when the recent run of deficits started (Graph 1). Although it has fallen in net terms since its early 2002 peak, this has only unwound its rise since the mid 1990s. This is not what one would expect for a country having difficulty attracting the funds to finance its deficit. Similarly, the real interest rate at which borrowing has occurred is a lot lower than a decade ago, a subject I will address later. Overall, the US experience is consistent with a plentiful supply of internationally-mobile savings rather than one where it has had to struggle to find the funds to finance its spending.    3/10  
   (ii)  The continuation of Asian surpluses  This is the starting point of my explanation, not something that has to be explained by the other developments. Even so, it is of some interest to know why Asian countries seem content with the situation.  Although there are some common factors among these countries, there are also some interesting differences. Japan is the easiest to deal with as it has had a large surplus for a long time, as you would expect from a high-income country with a rapidly-ageing population. But the situations of China and other East Asia are more interesting as they have only moved into significant surplus over the past half dozen years.    4/10  
   In the case of other East Asia , I think it is very clear that this occurred as a reaction to the pain they suffered during the Asian crisis of 1997/98. Both the Asian private and government sectors cut back sharply and this shows up as a fall in the investment ratio of about 7 or 8 per cent of GDP to a lower level, at which it has stayed (see Graph 3). The governments of the region reached the conclusion that they “had to make their economies more resilient to international capital flows. The simplest way of doing this was to cut expenditure (particularly investment expenditure), keep savings high, run current account surpluses and build up international reserves”.4                                                       4  Macfarlane (2005).   5/10  
  In China 's case, the story is more complicated.5 It did not suffer in the Asian crisis, but it still absorbed the same lesson as the countries that did. That is one of the reasons that China has chosen to run current account surpluses and build international reserves. But a more over-riding reason is the awareness by its government that, as a result of its economic liberalisation, it has to create about 20 million jobs per year just to absorb the exodus of workers from the countryside. In other words, it has to run its economy at an exceptionally fast pace, and is reluctant to adopt policies which might run counter to this aim in the short run, even if they would contribute to maintaining longer-run sustainability.                                                       5  See Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and Garber (2003 and 2005) for an interesting account of the Asian approach to balance of payments adjustment.   6/10  
  I think historians will regard the economic liberalisation of China as the major economic event of the past 30 years, with its effects showing up in countries and economic variables that at first sight seem remote from it. To date, the size of the Chinese surpluses have been smaller than for Japan and other East Asia , but China 's influence in other ways has been greater. All Asian countries are acutely aware of their level of competitiveness vis-à-vis China, both in international trade and investment, and this is an additional reason why they have resisted appreciations of their own currencies. The rapid increase in Chinese manufactured output and exports, based on its exceptionally low labour costs, has affected its competitors in Asia as much as its customers such as the United States.  (iii)  Low central bank interest rates  The high supply of Asian savings is not the explanation for the sharp fall in central-bank-determined interest rates in 2001 and 2002. That fall was a response by central banks in the developed countries to the collapse of the global equity market boom and associated recession that occurred in most of their countries. But the interesting question is why did those interest rates go so low; for the United States , Japan and the Euro area they fell below their 1930s levels. And why have they stayed so low, even accepting that the United States has gone some way to restoring them to a more neutral level? The answer has to be that inflation has remained so low. If inflation had picked up in the way that it did in earlier cyclical recoveries, central-bank-determined interest rates would have risen more by now.  So the real issue is why have inflationary pressures stayed so low? An ex ante excess supply of world saving means that it would be unlikely for a situation of generalised excess demand in the world's goods markets to occur, and hence for inflationary pressures to emerge. Another way of thinking about this is to remember that a surplus of savings in a given country means that the country is producing more goods and services than it absorbs in domestic spending. In China's case, there has been a massive increase in its capacity to produce manufactured goods, and its domestic spending has not kept pace with the expansion in supply. The result has been a rapidly growing supply of low-cost manufactured goods supplied by China to the rest of the world. The same has been true on a smaller scale for other Asian countries running surpluses. The increased productive capacity in China and other parts of Asia can be seen as part of the mechanism by which their trade and current account surpluses have been exerting downward pressure on global inflation.    7/10  
(iv)  Why bond yields have remained at historically low levels  The fact that bond yields have remained low despite rising oil prices and the Fed raising short-term interest rates is really the nub of the issue. If excessive US spending and inadequate saving were the main story affecting the world economy, bond rates would be rising not falling. Clearly, developments in the bond market are far more consistent with a world of plentiful saving than one of excessive spending and borrowing.    The low level of nominal interest rates may be partly explained by the forces already cited which have held down inflation. But real interest rates have also fallen to extremely low levels.6 (Graph 5). Thus, it is not only inflation and inflationary expectations that are at work – the real demand and supply for borrowed funds must have changed. In economic terms, a fall in price suggests that the supply curve of saving has moved outwards relative to the demand curve.  (v)  Why risk margins have narrowed  Again, this is entirely consistent with a world of excess supply of funds looking for attractive yields. With yields on high quality government paper having been driven down to low levels, investors have been attracted to other securities that can offer something higher. Thus, margins on all grades of corporate debt and emerging market debt have been driven down. This has occurred despite the recent history of US corporate scandals and the default by Argentina, which would normally have heightened perceptions of risk in these securities. Of course, this search for yield has not just affected debt; it also explains rising prices on assets of all types from houses to equities as investors take advantage of low borrowing costs and seek alternative investments.                                                        6  Only in periods of unanticipated sharp rises in inflation have they been lower.   8/10  
4.  Two counterfactuals  Some observers may think that in my explanation of global developments, US profligacy and excessive reliance on debt have been let off too lightly. What, they may ask, would have happened if increased US spending and reduced savings had not been accommodated by Asian saving and lending? The answer is that the increased US spending and lower US saving would not have occurred, or would only have occurred on a greatly reduced scale.  If the excess world saving had not been available, the global economy would have been in the opposite position, namely excess demand in goods and capital markets. US demand for funds would have pushed up bond rates, inflationary pressures would mean US monetary policy would be tighter, and the US Government would have difficulty funding its budget deficit. Businesses and households in the United States would face tougher monetary and fiscal policies and spending would be more restrained. Despite higher US interest rates, the US dollar would probably be weaker because foreign demand for US assets would be lower. The US current account deficit would be smaller due to the weaker domestic demand and lower US dollar.  It is not clear whether the world economy would be weaker or stronger. On the one hand, the extra Asian spending would have pushed up world demand. On the other hand, higher inflation, higher world interest rates and reduced US spending would have held it down. But the imbalances in international payments would have been smaller.  I do not want to give the impression that the large US current account deficit is not an imbalance, or that it can go on rising forever. Clearly, that is not the case. My view is only that we should not start our analysis with the US current account, or look to its remediation as the key to unwinding the imbalances. For example, the most commonly heard prescription is for the United States to reduce its call on world savings by reducing its fiscal deficit. However, if my analysis is correct, a reduction in the US fiscal deficit by itself would be unlikely to have a major impact on international imbalances.7 In the absence of policy changes in Asia, the Asian countries would be likely to continue running surpluses, and so a fiscal contraction in the United States would only add a contractionary influence to a global economy already characterised by surplus saving and unusually low interest rates.  Another view that has recently been put is that it was excessively loose monetary policy rather than saving/investment imbalances that was at the heart of the problem. This view is generally bolstered by some reference to excessive liquidity, although the concept is left undefined. I do not find this argument at all convincing. There is no doubt that world interest rates have been exceptionally low, but does that of itself mean that monetary policy has been exceptionally loose? To maintain this view, you would have to believe, for example, that monetary policy in Japan and Europe , where there has been weak demand growth and negligible inflation for a number of years, should have been tightened, i.e. European and Japanese interest rates should have been raised. This would make no sense. The low level of interest rates in most developed countries is not the first cause of the global imbalances, it is the result of them.  5.  Conclusions  In making Asia the focus of my account, I hope I did not give the impression that I am blaming Asia for the imbalances. This is not the case, partly because I have never been a pessimist about the sustainability of the imbalances, and partly because I can sympathise with much of the recent Asian experience, particularly during the Asian crisis. My account takes its form purely from the fact that it is the only one that seems to me to be consistent with the five questions I posed at the beginning. It is the only one that explains why there is downward pressure on CPI inflation and interest rates, and in consequence upward pressure on asset prices. As a central banker, I cannot complain about these events because they have made my central task of maintaining low inflation easier. Similarly, as an                                                       7  Bernanke (2005A) reported a Federal Reserve study which estimated that balancing the federal budget would reduce the current account deficit in the medium term by less than 1 per cent of GDP. The IMF estimate that a permanent 1 percentage point of GDP improvement in the US budgetary position would lower the current account deficit by ½ of one per cent of GDP.   9/10  
Australian, I can see that the impressive economic development of Asia has benefited our complementary economy in many ways.  I have not provided any assessment of the risks involved in the current situation because that would involve another talk at least as long as tonight's. But, if it is any reassurance, I think we are seeing some early signs of a return to normality, even if they are small and the process likely to be a long one. The Fed's policy of gradually moving up US interest rates towards neutrality is the most obvious sign. The other one is China 's abandonment of its fixed parity to the US dollar. Although its upward movement so far is extremely modest, they have clearly set the direction for the future. To me, it is an extremely significant move and suggests that they will countenance policy changes which in the short run might slightly restrain demand, but in the long run increase the chances of sustainable growth.     10/10  
Toshihiko Fukui: Reflections on what is happening in the global economy today Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2005 IIF Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 25 September 2005. *      *      * Introduction  It is a pleasure to appear before you this morning and share my thoughts on what is happening in the global economy today.  Before I go any further, let me express my deepest condolences for the great suffering caused by Hurricane Katrina just a few weeks ago.  My remarks will be divided into three parts. In the first, I will comment on the currents of structural changes in the global economy from a long-term perspective. Against the backdrop of these changes, I would then like to say a few words on the changing role of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)--a medium-term issue for all of us in this room. Finally, I will comment briefly on a conjunctural issue--the state of the Japanese economy and the monetary policy of the Bank of Japan. I hope to answer a few questions, if we have time before I have to head to Dulles Airport to catch my plane to Tokyo.  Structural changes in the global economy  The global economy has undergone significant structural changes in the last decade. Of those changes, in my view, three are most important. The first is the entry of emerging market economies into the market-based economic system. The second is the progress we have observed in information, communications, and telecommunications (ICT) technology. The third is the aging of the population, especially in mature industrialized economies. Let me take up these developments in turn.  Since the 1990s, emerging market economies--China, India, and countries in Central and Eastern Europe--have progressively been integrated into the market-based economic system. Taking advantage of their relatively low wages and foreign direct investment (FDI) and technology transfers from mature industrialized economies, these countries have increased their supply of goods and services to the global economy. In this process, these countries have broadened their exports as well. They are now exporting not only light industry products, such as textiles, but also heavy and high-tech industry products. Exports now also include services, such as operating call centers.  The advances in ICT technology, such as the widespread use of the Internet, have significantly reduced the costs of processing and transmitting information. This has, in turn, enabled firms to expand their operations globally. Production of goods and services is now spread out over many economies. At the same time, ICT technology has also enabled firms to enhance efficiencies of so-called middle-management functions, resulting in the flattening of corporate organizations. The confluence of these developments with the integration of emerging markets into the market-based economic system has reduced the costs of doing business worldwide, and enhanced competition in the global marketplace.  Meanwhile, the importance of the third structural change that I just mentioned--the rapid aging of the population especially in the industrialized economies--is just beginning to sink in. We now realize that the shift in demographics may have profound effects on various aspects of the global economic system. For example, it may change the savings-investment balance; it may change flows of money through financial intermediaries; and it may influence asset allocation among investors.    1/6  
Today, I have chosen to focus on these issues, because various developments in the global economy--sometimes puzzling developments--flow out from these changes. One is the subdued rate of consumer inflation, which has defied extremely elevated price levels of commodities and raw materials such as crude oil. Another is the relative stability of long-term interest rates.  At the end of August, crude oil prices reached US$70 a barrel. Though prices have come off the peaks, this starkly illustrates the rapidly rising prices of commodities and raw materials. Factors such as political unrest in producer countries and bad weather have certainly influenced such developments. Looking at crude oil, production capacity for petroleum products is constrained, because not enough money was invested in exploration, extraction, and refining in the wake of collapsing prices after the Second Oil Crisis. Nevertheless, the most significant factor seems to be the tightness in supply and demand conditions caused by strong demand. In particular, the combination of relatively high growth and relatively inefficient energy use in emerging market countries seems to be contributing to higher than expected growth in crude oil demand.  As I noted a few moments ago, emerging market countries are now being integrated into the market-based economic system. Being new members of the system, however, their economies are still evolving. There remain rigidities, such as price controls. Consequently, they are not able to use resources as efficiently as mature industrial economies. Given this environment, it seems we will have to live with higher prices of commodities and raw materials, at least for the time being.  While input prices are thus rising, pass-through to output prices is rather limited. In fact, since the 1990s, we are observing significantly lower rates of consumer price index (CPI) inflation around the globe. Productivity growth in the corporate sector is providing some cushion. However, the most important factor behind this development is again the integration of emerging market countries into the market-based economic system. With increasing integration, more goods are brought onto the market. In turn, competition is enhanced globally, producers' pricing power is weakened, and consumers benefit from downward pressures on prices.  Lower inflation is accompanied by smaller fluctuations of the economy. Not only are we seeing lower inflation rates, we are also seeing lower inflation volatility. The volatility of growth is also declining. The increasing importance of services, the demand for which is less volatile than that for goods, is one contributing factor. As individual firms take advantage of ICT in managing their output, economic activity at the macro level may see less fluctuation. At the same time, greater flexibility in products and labor markets may help firms adapt smoothly to changing business conditions.  Obviously, factors other than structural changes have also lowered inflation and volatility of inflation and growth. Central banks have also contributed to enhancing stability. Independent central banks, pursuing price stability through monetary policy, have successfully tamed inflation. This has enhanced the credibility of monetary policy, and, in turn, stabilized inflation expectations.  In financial markets, low and stable rates of inflation have led to lower long-term interest rates around the world. Since I do not wish to repeat Chairman Greenspan, I will merely say that the structural changes I have touched on today are definitely influencing interest rate developments.  The three broad trends--globalization, ICT, and aging--will be sustained for some time. Considering that there are still millions if not billions of underemployed workers in emerging market countries, the integration process will probably continue for many more years. Since human ingenuity is unlimited, we will find new and innovative uses for ICT in the years ahead. Institutional changes to mitigate the effects of rapid aging have only just begun.    2/6  
As a result of the interactions between these trends, we are sure to see economic developments that we would never have imagined before. We have no crystal ball to accurately identify the changes ahead of us or their consequences. This means that our well-being will only be maintained if we can efficiently and effectively adapt to the changing environment. We must monitor events closely as they unfold, and be ready to respond flexibly. I am optimistic that central banks can adapt to changing economic conditions, as they have done so over many years.  The changing role of the IMF  Structural changes are not confined to the real economy. The forces of globalization are influencing the international monetary system as well.  Yesterday, at the meeting of the IMF Council, we discussed the results of the Strategic Review of the IMF, initiated by Managing Director, Rodrigo de Rato. Rodrigo's project was extremely helpful, drawing up a comprehensive list of issues that we have to address. The consensus on where we stand was already described by Gordon Brown yesterday, and I will not repeat it here.  The Strategic Review was necessary and useful in defining what needs to be done today. It is, however, the first step.  Sixty years ago, the Fund was created to maintain a network of exchange rates anchored on the U.S. dollar backed by gold. There was also a mechanism to facilitate adjustments. Member countries were obliged to enter into annual consultations. In this process, the Fund identified economic policies that would undermine the network of fixed exchange rates. The Fund then suggested remedies, and lent money if necessary to buy time for policy adjustments to take effect. If exchange rates really fell out of line with economic fundamentals, it was possible to tweak the rates.  Fast-forward to today, and we no longer have fixed exchange rates, particularly between systemically important countries. As a result, policy advice from the Fund is losing the force and urgency it once had. At the same time, we are witnessing increasingly stronger and more mobile private capital flows. These flows are, of course, generally beneficial. Though it is hard to measure precisely, private capital has played a significant role in the robust investment-led growth of many countries.  Private flows are not only getting bigger, they are getting more nimble. In the seventies and eighties, banks were the main financiers for emerging market economies. On the other hand, much of today's private capital flows are in the form of bond issues. Compared with banks, bondholders tend to react very quickly. Bankers cannot call a loan until it is due. On the other hand, when bondholders sense a problem brewing, they can sell their bonds immediately. If everyone heads for the exit at once, bond prices will collapse and exacerbate problems for the issuing country. There will also be coordination problems. You can cram a few dozen bankers into one room and cut a deal, but we cannot do the same for bondholders.  No wonder that emerging market and developing countries tapping the international financial market sometimes feel so insecure and helpless. The welcome rug could be pulled quickly from under their feet, as many of them found out in the late 1990s. They can turn to the Fund for help, but private flows could even overwhelm the Fund. Fund quotas, essentially equivalent to paid-in capital, total about US$330 billion. This is only a fraction of global financial flows.  In our recent efforts to reform the international monetary system, we have tried to deal with these changes. As I said a few minutes ago, the Strategic Review is an important milestone. Nevertheless, the recommendations will soon be overtaken by developments in the international financial landscape. The three trends I mentioned in the first part of my talk--globalization, ICT, and aging--will continue. This means that capital movements between   3/6  
economies will accelerate, broaden and expand. The Fund must continue to evolve, if it is to remain relevant in tomorrow's international monetary system.  Though we cannot predict the exact consequences of the structural changes, a general idea of what we can expect seems to be clear enough. If private flows become increasingly important, we should emphasize private solutions as well as public interventions. There are two significant developments in this context.  One is the collective action clauses (CACs) in bond covenants, advocated by the G-10 countries in September 2002. Now almost all new international bond issues are governed by CACs. In the near future, when bonds without CACs are all retired, CACs would govern the resolution of sovereign debt crises. A typical CAC allows the terms of a bond issue to be changed with the consent of 75% of bondholders. This means that if a country cannot pay its debts in full, it needs to come up with a restructuring plan that satisfies 75% of the lenders. The clear and transparent rules also reduce the chances for holdouts or rogue investors to disrupt an orderly workout process. In turn, the market can more appropriately price the risks and costs of defaults.  Another notable development is the "Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring in Emerging Markets," released about a year ago. I know that Managing Director, Charles Dallara and his colleagues at the IIF worked hard to see its publication. The Principles offer a framework for enhancing flows of information between borrowers and lenders. They also provide guidance for productive engagements between them. These improvements should enable lenders to assess and price risks more precisely, enhance the stability of flows to developing and emerging market countries, and facilitate resolution of problems when they occur.  These developments, especially the Principles, would strengthen market discipline. Borrowing countries would be encouraged to improve their institutions and adopt sound economic policies. As a result, we should see fewer international financial crises. In the unfortunate and hopefully rare event that problems do arise, a borrowing country and private lenders can negotiate orderly settlements, under the framework of CACs. The public sector, including the Fund, would only be called on in the rarest cases, where the speed and magnitude of the problems might overwhelm efforts to formulate private solutions.  What does this mean for the Fund?  In terms of giving out policy advice, the Fund's role would be more relative. If private lenders become more important, borrowing countries would be inclined to listen to what the market wants. The Fund is facing formidable competition, but I think it can build on its excellent reputation. I am especially looking forward to the efforts currently underway to enhance the Fund's work related to financial issues.  Meanwhile, as I noted a moment ago, Fund lending will be necessary only when there is a rapidly unfolding crisis of considerable magnitude. We should, therefore, consider if the current rules for releasing Fund resources could appropriately cope with such a situation. In the jargon of the Fund, this is a question of improving the rules for exceptional access. To say that the Board is responsible for approving such lending is sidestepping the question. Can the Board form a consensus quickly enough? Is the Board representative enough so that members can subscribe comfortably to its decisions? Who is going to be held accountable if something goes wrong? Answering these questions will tax our imaginations to the fullest extent, but we must not dodge them. Disasters do happen.  Recent developments in the japanese economy  Before closing my remarks, let me briefly speak on the Japanese economy and the monetary policy of the Bank of Japan.    4/6  
If we put aside quarter-to-quarter fluctuations in the rates of growth, the Japanese economy has been on a recovery track for three and a half years, since the beginning of 2002. Nevertheless, from the summer of 2004, we had a period of sluggish growth in exports and industrial production. This pause in growth was brought about by the global adjustment in the ICT sector.  The Bank of Japan stated all along that slower growth was temporary, and that the Japanese economy would eventually regain momentum. There were, however, concerns that Japan had slipped back into recession. Fortunately, recent developments seem to indicate that the pause in growth is finally over: the adjustment in the ICT sector is almost complete; domestic demand components, private capital investments, and household consumption in particular, are generally showing firm growth; and exports, which were flat for some months, seem to be regaining traction.  I believe that this trend will be sustained for some time. The Japanese economy should remain on a moderate but enduring growth path, supported by both domestic and external demand. There are two particularly encouraging factors.  The first is that Japanese firms are at last seeing the end to structural adjustments necessitated by the bursting of the bubble economy. For more than a decade, the Japanese economy was under the yoke of "three excesses"--excess capacity, excess employment, and excess debt. Japanese firms worked very hard to get rid of these excesses. They are now adopting new strategies that enhance efficiency and competitiveness. As a result, they are becoming more profitable. In fact, measured by the profits-to-sales ratio, Japanese firms are more profitable than they were in the end of the 1980s, at the peak of the bubble economy. Against this background, the growth of capital investment is relatively strong, not only at large manufacturing firms but also at manufacturing small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and at non-manufacturing firms.  The second encouraging factor is that households are increasingly benefiting from the recovery in the corporate sector. Employment is growing, and the jobless rate has dropped to a seven-year low of 4.4%. Looking past the headline numbers, we see even more encouraging signs. Until recently, Japanese firms hired part-time and temporary workers in order to keep labor costs in check. Today, firms are stepping up their efforts to hire permanent workers, against the background of improving profitability and thus business confidence. Consequently, employee income, which was depressed by the rising proportion of part-time and temporary workers, is rising moderately. The promising employment and income environment is firmly supporting personal consumption, in both goods and services. These trends in employment, income and consumption are expected to continue for the time being.  Coming back to the broad trend, the Japanese economy grew by 2.7% in 2004 and is expected to grow by 2.0% in 2005 according to the Fund's World Economic Outlook (WEO). This is not as spectacular as the United States, which grew by 4.2% in 2004 and whose WEO growth forecast is 3.5% for 2005. Nevertheless, it is a respectable growth path compared to some other mature industrialized economies. I believe that this moderate growth trend can be sustained for some time.  What does this mean for monetary policy?  The Bank of Japan is maintaining the policy framework of quantitative easing. As you know, under this framework, the Bank supplies liquidity far in excess of required reserves, creating an environment where short-term interest rates stay very close to zero. Another element of our present policy framework is a firm commitment to maintaining that environment until year-on-year inflation, as measured by core CPI, is stably zero or above.    5/6  
Currently, Japanese core CPI is still declining slightly, and the Bank of Japan steadfastly adheres to the commitment I have just explained. By doing so, we are supporting the Japanese economy's return to a stable and sustainable path of growth.  Thank you for your attention. It has been a pleasure speaking to you.     6/6  
Alan Greenspan: Economic flexibility Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, to the National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Chicago, (via satellite), 27 September 2005. *      *      * Today I should like to reflect on some of the ways in which economic policy both affects and is affected by the increasing flexibility of the U.S. economy. For this country's first century and a half, government was only peripherally engaged in what we currently term the management of aggregate demand. Any endeavor to alter the path of private economic activity through active intervention would have been deemed inappropriate and, more important, unnecessary. In one of the more notable coincidences of history, our Declaration of Independence was signed the same year in which Adam Smith published his Wealth of Nations. Smith's prescription of letting markets prevail with minimal governmental interference became the guiding philosophy of American leadership for much of our history. With a masterful insight into the workings of the free-market institutions that were then emerging, Smith postulated an "invisible hand" in which competitive behavior drove an economy's resources toward their fullest and most efficient use. Economic growth and prosperity, he argued, would emerge if governments stood aside and allowed markets to work. Indeed, within a very few decades, free-market capitalism became the prevailing stance of most governments' economic policy, even if it was often implemented imperfectly. This framework withstood the conceptual onslaughts of Robert Owen's utopians, Karl Marx's communists and later, the Fabian socialists. The free-market paradigm came under more-vigorous attack after the collapse of the world's major economies in the 1930s. As the global depression deepened, the seeming failure of competitive markets to restore full employment perplexed economists until John Maynard Keynes offered an explanation that was to influence policy practitioners for generations to come. He argued that, contrary to the tenets of Smith and his followers, market systems did not always converge to full employment. They often appeared to settle at an equilibrium in which significant segments of the workforce were unable to find jobs. In the place of Smith's laissez-faire approach arose the view that government action was required to restore full employment and to rectify what were seen as other deficiencies of market-driven outcomes. A tidal wave of regulation soon swept over much of the American business community. Labor relations, securities markets, banking, agricultural pricing, and many other segments of the U.S. economy became subject to the oversight of government. The apparent success of the economy during World War II, which operated at full employment in contrast to the earlier frightening developments during the Depression years, led to a considerable reluctance to fully dismantle wartime regulations when the hostilities came to an end. However, cracks in the facade of government economic management appeared early in the post-World War II years, and those cracks continued to widen as time passed. At the macro level, the system of wage and price controls imposed in the 1970s to deal with the problem of inflation proved unworkable and ineffective. And at the micro level, heavy regulation of many industries was increasingly seen as impeding efficiency and competitiveness. By the early 1980s, the long-prevalent notion that the centrally planned economy of the Soviet Union was catching up with the West had begun to be discredited, though it was not fully discarded until the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 exposed the economic ruin behind the Iron Curtain.   1/5  
Starting in the 1970s, U.S. presidents, supported by bipartisan majorities in the Congress, responded to the growing recognition of the distortions created by regulation, by deregulating large segments of the transportation, communications, energy, and financial services industries. The stated purpose of this deregulation was to enhance competition, which had come to be seen as a significant spur to productivity growth and elevated standards of living. Assisting in the dismantling of economic restraints was the persistent, albeit slow, lowering of barriers to cross-border trade and finance. As a consequence, the United States, then widely seen as a once-great economic power that had lost its way, gradually moved back to the forefront of what Joseph Schumpeter, the renowned Harvard professor, had called "creative destruction"--the continual scrapping of old technologies to make way for the innovative. In that paradigm, standards of living rise because depreciation and other cash flows of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent technologies are marshaled, along with new savings, to finance the production of capital assets that almost always embody cutting-edge technologies. Workers, of necessity, migrate with the capital. Through this process, wealth is created, incremental step by incremental step, as high levels of productivity associated with innovative technologies displace less-efficient productive capacity. The model presupposes the continuous churning of a flexible competitive economy in which the new displaces the old. As the 1980s progressed, the success of that strategy confirmed the earlier views that a loosening of regulatory restraint on business would improve the flexibility of our economy. No specific program encompassed and coordinated initiatives to enhance flexibility, but there was a growing recognition that a market economy could best withstand and recover from shocks when provided maximum flexibility. Beyond deregulation, innovative technologies, especially information technologies, have contributed critically to enhanced flexibility. A quarter-century ago, for example, companies often required weeks to discover the emergence of inventory imbalances, allowing production to continue to exacerbate the excess. Excessive stockbuilding, in turn, necessitated a deeper decline in output than would have been necessary had the knowledge of the status of inventories been fully current. The advent of innovative information technologies significantly shortened the reporting lag, enabling flexible real-time responses to emerging imbalances. Deregulation and the newer information technologies have joined, in the United States and elsewhere, to advance flexibility in the financial sector. Financial stability may turn out to have been the most important contributor to the evident significant gains in economic stability over the past two decades. Historically, banks have been at the forefront of financial intermediation, in part because their ability to leverage offers an efficient source of funding. But in periods of severe financial stress, such leverage too often brought down banking institutions and, in some cases, precipitated financial crises that led to recession or worse. But recent regulatory reform, coupled with innovative technologies, has stimulated the development of financial products, such as asset-backed securities, collateral loan obligations, and credit default swaps, that facilitate the dispersion of risk. Conceptual advances in pricing options and other complex financial products, along with improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs of, and expanded the opportunities for, hedging risks that were not readily deflected in earlier decades. The new instruments of risk dispersal have enabled the largest and most sophisticated banks, in their credit-granting role, to divest themselves of much credit risk by passing it to institutions with far less leverage. Insurance companies, especially those in reinsurance, pension funds, and hedge funds continue to be willing, at a price, to supply credit protection.   2/5  
These increasingly complex financial instruments have contributed to the development of a far more flexible, efficient, and hence resilient financial system than the one that existed just a quarter-century ago. After the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000, unlike previous periods following large financial shocks, no major financial institution defaulted, and the economy held up far better than many had anticipated. If we have attained a degree of flexibility that can mitigate most significant shocks--a proposition as yet not fully tested--the performance of the economy will be improved and the job of macroeconomic policymakers will be made much simpler. Governments today, although still far more activist than in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, are rediscovering the benefits of competition and the resilience to economic shocks that it fosters. We are also beginning to recognize an international version of Smith's invisible hand in the globalization of economic forces. Whether by intention or by happenstance, many, if not most, governments in recent decades have been relying more and more on the forces of the marketplace and reducing their intervention in market outcomes. We appear to be revisiting Adam Smith's notion that the more flexible an economy, the greater its ability to self-correct after inevitable, often unanticipated disturbances. That greater tendency toward self-correction has made the cyclical stability of the economy less dependent on the actions of macroeconomic policymakers, whose responses often have come too late or have been misguided. It is important to remember that most adjustment of a market imbalance is well under way before the imbalance becomes widely identified as a problem. Individual prices, exchange rates, and interest rates, adjust incrementally in real time to restore balance. In contrast, administrative or policy actions that await clear evidence of imbalance are of necessity late. Being able to rely on markets to do the heavy lifting of adjustment is an exceptionally valuable policy asset. The impressive performance of the U.S. economy over the past couple of decades, despite shocks that in the past would have surely produced marked economic contraction, offers the clearest evidence of the benefits of increased market flexibility. We weathered a decline on October 19, 1987, of a fifth of the market value of U.S. equities with little evidence of subsequent macroeconomic stress--an episode that hinted at a change in adjustment dynamics. The credit crunch of the early 1990s and the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000 were absorbed with the shallowest recessions in the post-World War II period. And the economic fallout from the tragic events of September 11, 2001, was moderated by market forces, with severe economic weakness evident for only a few weeks. Most recently, the flexibility of our market-driven economy has allowed us, thus far, to weather reasonably well the steep rise in spot and futures prices for oil and natural gas that we have experienced over the past two years. The consequence has been a far more stable economy. * * * In perhaps what must be the greatest irony of economic policymaking, success at stabilization carries its own risks. Monetary policy--in fact, all economic policy--to the extent that it is successful over a prolonged period, will reduce economic variability and, hence, perceived credit risk and interest rate term premiums. A decline in perceived risk is often self-reinforcing in that it encourages presumptions of prolonged stability and thus a willingness to reach over an ever-more-extended time period. But, because people are inherently risk averse, risk premiums cannot decline indefinitely. Whatever the reason for narrowing credit spreads, and they differ from episode to episode, history cautions that extended periods of low concern about credit risk have invariably been followed by reversal, with an attendant fall in the prices of risky assets. Such developments apparently reflect not only market dynamics but also the all-too-evident alternating and infectious bouts of human euphoria and distress and the instability they engender.   3/5  
Therefore, because it is difficult to suppress growing market exuberance when the economic environment is perceived as more stable, a highly flexible system needs to be in place to rebalance an economy in which psychology and asset prices could change rapidly. Indeed, as I have pointed out in the past, policies to enhance economic flexibility need to be as integral a part of economic policy as are monetary and fiscal initiatives. Relying on policymakers to perceive when speculative asset bubbles have developed and then to implement timely policies to address successfully these misalignments in asset prices is simply not realistic. As the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) transcripts of the mid-1990s duly note, we at the Fed were uncomfortable with a stock market that appeared as early as 1996 to disconnect from its moorings. Yet the significant monetary tightening of 1994 did not prevent what must by then have been the beginnings of the bubble of the 1990s. And equity prices continued to rise during the tightening of policy between mid-1999 and May 2000. Indeed, the equity market's ability to withstand periods of tightening arguably reinforced the bull market's momentum. The FOMC knew that tools were available to choke off the stock market boom, but those tools would only have been effective if they undermined market participants' confidence in future stability. Market participants, however, read the resilience of the economy and stock prices in the face of monetary tightening as an indication of undiscounted market strength. By the late 1990s, it appeared to us that very aggressive action would have been required to counteract the euphoria that developed in the wake of extraordinary gains in productivity growth spawned by technological change. In short, we would have needed to risk precipitating a significant recession, with unknown consequences. The alternative was to wait for the eventual exhaustion of the forces of boom. We concluded that the latter course was by far the safer. Whether that judgment continues to hold up through time has yet to be determined.   * * *  Flexibility is most readily achieved by fostering an environment of maximum competition. A key element in creating this environment is flexible labor markets. Many working people equate labor market flexibility with job insecurity. Despite that perception, flexible labor policies appear to promote job creation. An increased capacity of management to discharge workers without excessive cost, for example, apparently increases companies' willingness to hire without fear of unremediable mistakes. The net effect, to the surprise of most, has been what appears to be a decline in the structural unemployment rate in the United States. Protectionism in all its guises, both domestic and international, does not contribute to the welfare of American workers. At best, it is a short-term fix at a cost of lower standards of living for the nation as a whole. We need increased education and training for those displaced by creative destruction, not a stifling of competition. Moving forward, I trust that we have learned durable lessons about the benefits of fostering and preserving a flexible economy. That flexibility has been the product of the economic dynamism of our workers and firms that was unleashed, in part, by the efforts of policymakers to remove rigidities and promote competition. Although the business cycle has not disappeared, flexibility has made the economy more resilient to shocks and more stable overall during the past couple of decades. To be sure, that stability has created some new challenges for policymakers. But more fundamentally, an environment of greater economic stability has been key to the impressive growth in the standards of living and economic welfare so evident in the United States.   4/5  
   5/5  
Datuk Zamani Abdul Ghani: Role of development financial institutions in the financial system Speech by Datuk Zamani Abdul Ghani, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the International CEO Forum of the Development Finance Institutions 2005, Kuala Lumpur, 12 September 2005. *      *      * I would like first of all to express my sincere appreciation to the Association of Development Finance Institutions of Malaysia for inviting me to say a few words this morning on "The Role of Development Financial Institutions (or DFIs) in the Financial System". It is indeed an honour to address such a distinguished gathering of CEOs and senior officials of DFIs from many parts of the world. Before going further into the subject at hand, allow me to congratulate the organisers for jointly putting up this international forum. This forum provides a platform for CEOs and senior officials to exchange views and ideas on SME development and just as important, the roles of DFIs in this endeavour. I would also like to specifically welcome the foreign participants to Malaysia and wish that you will have a pleasant and enjoyable stay in Kuala Lumpur.  My remarks this morning will consist of three parts. The first provides an overall perspective on the universal establishment of DFIs in many parts of the world; the second will look at the prospects and some of the challenges for DFIs in carrying out their roles; and the final part will provide an insight into the roles of DFIs from the Malaysian perspective. There are at present approximately 550 DFIs worldwide. These are special financial institutions established and mostly owned by governments aimed at promoting and supporting national economic development agenda. Indeed, o ver the years, history has shown, and reinforced the view, that DFIs do have an important role to play in a country's socio-economic development. For instance, in Europe, the advent of development banking can be traced back to the mid-nineteenth century, and was established to meet the increased demand for medium to long-term capital by new and emerging enterprises during the industrial revolution. The years following World War II saw the establishment of DFIs in many developing countries to provide, in particular, medium and long-term financing that was identified to be so critical in supporting the economic development agenda of these countries.  In a laissez-faire economy, an efficient financial intermediation system mobilises and allocates scarce resources towards activities that would optimise the rates of return. On this basis, the commercially-driven and profit-maximising banking institutions would often tend to take a short-term view and consider solely the private benefit of a project, at the expense of the potential long-term social benefit that could be derived from financing a particular project. This has, therefore, created a gap in the market place whereby certain segments of the economy have been underserved by the banking system. These include development projects which involve high potential risk and long gestation period, but yet have significant long-term benefits to the overall economic development of a country. Similarly, there are also some sectors or groups of businesses which, due to their business characteristics and lack of track record, limited credit history and inadequate collateral, do not have adequate access to financing from the banking system. These are clearly instances of market failure, and the establishment of the DFIs is indeed an attempt to rectify this shortcoming.  In this regard, in achieving national policies for economic and social development, the DFIs are established as a strategic conduit to bridge the gaps in the supply of financial services, by channelling the resources and funds in the financial system to areas and sectors that are deemed as strategic for long-term economic development purposes. In essence, the DFIs are complementing the banking institutions in meeting the financing requirements of the   1/5  
economy, particularly in supporting the economic and social development of a nation. The establishment of DFIs is part of the national development plan itself.  As policy-based financial institutions, the DFIs have roles and mandates which are linked closely to the country's national development objectives. This is evidenced from the establishment of DFIs with specific purposes to promote development of identified sectors, ranging from industrial and agriculture sectors to areas such as export promotion, infrastructure development as well as the small and medium enterprises (SMEs).  It is notable that the roles of DFIs have evolved in the course of a country's economic development and transformation. This is important in ensuring that the DFIs remain relevant to support the changing financing needs of the economy. In some instances, the DFIs have widened and diversified their scope of activities, to cater to the financial needs of new growth areas, such as information and communication technology (ICT), and biotechnology. Many of them have expanded their financial products to include providing short-term working capital loans, equity participation and investment banking. While operating with the widened scope of activities, it is observed that the majority of DFIs continue to maintain the provision of medium to long-term finance and project finance as the core of their activities. At the same time, the DFIs still fundamentally remain complementary, especially in supporting strategic sectors such as the SMEs and agriculture.  As reflected by the term, "development financial institution", DFIs are not only expected to provide development finance for nation building, but also to undertake a higher degree of developmental role to nurture and develop the targeted sectors. With regard to this, the DFIs have been demonstrating outstanding performance in their developmental role. For instance, the KfW Mittelstandbank, a prominent DFI in fostering SME development in Germany, is providing credit facilities to not only the established SMEs but also the new start-ups. Another example is the Organisation for SMEs and Regional Innovation of Japan which focuses on providing advisory and consultancy services, and training to nurture and develop the SMEs.  Let's now look at the prospects and challenges for DFIs, i.e., the second part of this presentation.  With the growing and changing global economy, I have no doubt that DFIs will remain important and relevant to meet the increasing developmental needs of their respective countries. This development, indeed, presents both opportunities and challenges to the DFIs in the way forward. While the expanding economies, both in the developed and developing countries, would create greater business activities for the DFIs, this also means that they have to remain innovative in their products and services by exploring new ways of doing business, to be able to respond effectively to the different financing and developmental requirements. DFIs must continuously evolve and review their areas of comparative advantage in order to remain relevant, effective and strategic.  To drive performance, one important aspect is to clearly identify key performance indicators for the DFIs, in order to measure efficiency and effectiveness in performing their mandated roles. Recognising DFIs' developmental role, the performance measurement of a DFI should go beyond the standard financial measurement to encompass quantitative and qualitative non-financial indicators that evaluate the economic and social contribution of DFIs, consistent with their objectives of establishment. For DFIs that are involved in SME development, the key performance indicators should include the number of new start-ups financed, the extent of borrowers receiving advisory services and the number of SMEs that have "graduated" from the DFIs.  An important aspect to highlight is the need for DFIs to be financially sound and sustainable in their operations. This is critical so that the DFIs could fulfill their roles without continuously drawing resources from the government and the public sector. It is indeed heartening to note that many DFIs have been successful in balancing the challenge to fulfill developmental roles, while ensuring that their operations are financially sustainable. For instance, the   2/5  
Development Bank of Japan, which is focusing on the provision of supplement long-term funding to qualified infrastructure projects, has shown favourable financial performance with a return on equity of 6.5% in 2004. Similarly, the Business Development Bank of Canada, a leading SME development bank in the country, has also recorded encouraging performance with an average return on equity of 7.1% in the past five years.  The experiences of these DFIs have proven that despite the specific mandates to finance development activities, business operations of DFIs can be financially sustainable. These success stories essentially share several key factors, including a high focus on their mandates; dynamic leadership and proper accountability within the DFIs; continuous development of human resource capability; intensive use of information technology to improve efficiency; and last, but not least, the adoption of sound and prudent financial principles as well as best practices in their operations.  At the same time, given their relatively limited access to funds, it is recognised that financial support from the Government is important to enable the DFIs to play their role on a sustainable basis. This, however, does not mean that DFIs should solely rely on government funding. In order to remain relevant and effective in meeting the growing financial needs of an expanding economy, DFIs need to increasingly draw funds from alternative sources, such as the capital market. Sourcing funds directly from the market would also help instil certain form of discipline on the operations of the DFIs.  Allow me this opportunity to now share with you an overview on the roles and developments of DFIs in Malaysia. There are currently 14 DFIs in Malaysia. Like those found in other countries, the DFIs were established and funded by the Government to develop and promote identified strategic sectors, in line with the overall industrialisation and economic development objectives of Malaysia. The first DFI was the Malaysian Industrial Development Finance Berhad (MIDF), which was established in 1960, to provide medium to long-term financing to promote the development of private industrial enterprises. Subsequently, several major DFIs were established, including Bank Pertanian Malaysia (or the Agriculture Bank of Malaysia) to promote agricultural development, Bank Pembangunan Malaysia Berhad (or the Development Bank of Malaysia) to promote Bumiputera indigenous community development in commerce and industry, Bank Industri Malaysia Berhad (or the Industrial Bank of Malaysia) to support development in the industrial and manufacturing sectors, as well as the Export-Import Bank of Malaysia (EXIM Bank) and the Malaysia Export Credit Insurance Berhad (MECIB) to promote international trade and support export diversification and expansion, especially to the non-traditional markets.  Over the years, the DFIs in Malaysia have evolved in tandem with the country's economic transformation, especially to support developments in the strategic and new growth areas such as high technology, infrastructure, SME development and micro finance. Bank Pembangunan was entrusted by the Government to support infrastructure development in expediting economic recovery following the financial crisis in 1997. Likewise, in line with the strategy to promote capital-intensive and high technology industries, Bank Industri was entrusted with the task of supporting advanced industrial development, such as engineering activities and computer software development.  In the Malaysian financial system, the banking institutions form the largest component of the financial system, constituting about 51% and 78%, respectively, of the total assets and loans of the financial system. In contrast , the total assets and loans of DFIs as a group, respectively accounts for about 5% of the financial system. Nevertheless, these DFIs have been instrumental in providing the complementary financial services needed to support development of the targeted sectors and activities.  One particular notable development is the support provided by the DFIs for SMEs. Like many other economies, in Malaysia, the SMEs form the backbone of the economy with high potential in fostering the forward and backward linkages of activities along the value chain. While SMEs constitute about 90% of total establishments in the manufacturing sector, at the   3/5  
moment they only provide about 30% of employment in the sector and contribute about 6% to Malaysia's GDP. Clearly, there is room to further unlock the potential of SMEs in Malaysia.  While the banking system remains the main provider of funds to support the activities of the SMEs, there is the tendency for this system to focus on the more established SMEs. It can also be argued that the banking institutions also lack the appropriate skills and experience to develop and nurture the SMEs. This is where the presence of DFIs is so critical, that is to provide the complementary services, both financial and non-financial, particularly to support viable but smaller SMEs which are unable to obtain financing from the banking institutions.  In Malaysia, there are at present two major DFIs specialising in supporting the development of the SMEs. These are Bank Pembangunan dan Infrastruktur Malaysia Berhad and the Credit Guarantee Corporation (CGC). Each of these DFIs has been assigned the specified mandated roles in assisting the SMEs in Malaysia. Bank Pembangunan is entrusted with the mandate of promoting entrepreneurial development by not only providing financial services to the SMEs, but also assume the nurturing and developmental role through the provision of advisory and consultancy services to this targeted group.  Meanwhile, the CGC is mandated to assist the SMEs that lack track record and collateral to have access to financing, by providing credit guarantees to enhance the SMEs' accessibility to credit facilities. To supplement its guarantee schemes, the CGC, under its Business Advisory Service Entity programme, has identified and engaged a panel of consultants to assist the SMEs, particularly in drawing up business plans and other financial documents.  Bank Negara Malaysia recognises the important complementary role of DFIs in the financial system and their developmental role in supporting the national socio-economic agenda. As such, Bank Negara Malaysia in its Financial Sector Masterplan (FSMP) has drawn out the roadmap on the development of the DFIs, with the objective of developing a group of DFIs that are able to perform their mandates in an effective and efficient manner at minimal cost to the Government. In order to achieve this objective, three broad development thrusts have been outlined for the DFIs, namely, strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework of the DFIs, capacity and capability building as well as institutional efficiency enhancement of DFIs. A total of eight recommendations have been formulated premised on these development thrusts.  One of the significant milestones in the strategies to strengthen the DFIs is the enactment of the Development Financial Institutions Act 2002 (DFIA). The Act provides a comprehensive regulatory and supervisory framework for DFIs, with the primary objective of ensuring that the DFIs perform their mandated roles and that their activities are carried out prudently, effectively and efficiently. Bank Negara Malaysia was appointed as the single regulatory and supervisory body for DFIs under the Act. In carrying out the regulatory and supervisory function, the Central Bank's focus is primarily to promote the development of sound and robust DFIs capable of performing their mandated roles effectively. Seven DFIs are currently placed under the purview of the Act.  Recognising the unique characteristics of each DFI, regulations and policies have largely been tailored-made to suit the different roles and functions of each DFI with the view of facilitating and strengthening their operations. In general, the DFIs are required to ensure that their operations and activities are in line with their mandated roles, underpinned by good corporate governance and best practices. They are required t o operate with transparency, especially with regard to information disclosure on their corporate performance, in order to enhance credibility and to harness greater confidence from the public that they serve as well as from the Government.  Strategies formulated have also been focussed on enhancing the clarity in the roles and functions of the DFIs, with a view of minimising the overlapping of functions and increasing DFIs' effectiveness in serving the targeted sectors. This has led to a number of initiatives to realign and enhance the strategic focus through the restructuring of selected DFIs. One is the merger of the EXIM Bank and MECIB to enhance their synergy in export promotion. The   4/5  
other important initiative is the rationalisation of Bank Pembangunan and Bank Industri, which will result in the establishment of an SME Bank. The SME Bank, a specialised agency dedicated to the promotion of SME development, will commence operations in October 2005 and is envisaged to better serve the needs of SMEs through the provision of a comprehensive range of financial and non-financial services. In particular, the SME Bank will focus on nurturing the SMEs and promoting entrepreneural development, through the provision of financial and business advisory services, including financial management, business diagnosis and marketing support.  Recognising the importance of human resource development as part of the capacity and capability enhancement strategy, several initiatives have also been undertaken to enhance the skills of DFIs, particulary in the provision of advisory services and micro financing. In collaboration with the Japan International Cooperation Agency, Bank Negara Malaysia is currently embarking on a project to enhance the capabilities of DFIs in providing advisory services to the SMEs. It is envisaged that the provision of quality advisory support can be used to supplement the financial services of DFIs, in order to enhance their effectiveness in supporting the development of the SMEs. In addition, Bank Negara Malaysia has developed and distributed a set of micro finance manuals to DFIs engaging in the provision of micro finance, for use as reference to acquire the knowledge of micro finance principles and best practices. This is to ensure a sustainable provision of micro finance by these DFIs.  Going forward, the role of DFIs would not diminish, but continue to remain important and relevant, providing greater complementary and developmental role in addressing the nation's development strategies. Nevertheless, it is envisaged that the DFIs are expected to evolve from being the direct financiers to function as a strategic conduit to facilitate financing by the banking system, especially through the provision of credit enhancement. In addition, the DFIs would also increasingly become specialised institutions to render advisory and business support services, in order to increase their effectiveness in meeting the financing and developmental needs.  At the same time, the need for DFIs to remain financially sustainable while performing their mandated roles cannot be over-emphasised. This would require continuous capacity and capability enhancement of the DFIs, especially the strengthening of human capital skills and institutional efficiency, together with the adoption of good corporate governance and best practices by the DFIs. In addition, to ensure that available resources are channeled adequately and appropriately to support the targeted sectors, DFIs would need to strategically reduce the channeling of funds to the sectors and businesses that have matured and, on their own, would be able to obtain financial resources from the banking institutions or the capital market.  In conclusion, I must say that the theme for today's forum on "Revving up the SMEs as the engine of growth" is both timely and appropriate given the importance and potential economic contributions of SMEs, particularly in the developing countries. Therefore, it is important that the SME sector continues to receive adequate and appropriate financial and ancillary support to ensure their sustainable development towards meeting a nation's development objectives. In this regard, the DFIs play an important role in providing the necessary financial and developmental support to complement the banking institutions in the promotion of SME development.  I am pleased to note that we have distinguished speakers and panellist here to share their views on various issues relating to DFIs and their roles in SME financing. I am confident that your endeavour to learn and share, as well as to exchange views on areas that are of particular interests and benefits to you, will, in the final analysis, be very rewarding.     5/5  
Lucas Papademos: Financial structures, credit growth and house prices in the new EU Member States - policy challenges on the road to the euro Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the Conference held by Latvijas Banka, Riga, 19 September 2005. *      *      * I. Introduction It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this conference organised by Latvijas Banka, in a country that has played such an important role as a major trading centre in European history. Initially, that role partly reflected its geographic location on one of the oldest trading routes in Europe – the so-called “Route from the Vikings to the Greeks”, which was used to trade, among other things, Latvian amber – a route dating back to the times of the Ancient Greeks and the Roman Empire. And then later, the city where we have gathered today, Riga, became one of the most significant members of the Hanseatic League, which controlled trade on the bustling Baltic Sea in the 14th and 15th centuries. Today, Latvia has a modern and dynamic economy, again occupying an important position in European trade, having achieved a remarkable transition towards a successful market economy after gaining independence in 1991. Trade and finance have always gone hand in hand. Therefore, it is no surprise that just as the Latvian economy has undergone an impressive transformation, so too has the Latvian financial system. Latvia has made substantial progress in the development of its financial structure and has created the institutional and legal frameworks necessary to support a market-oriented financial system.1 Today, its financial markets are developing rapidly in new directions and are providing valuable services to both households and the corporate sector, underpinning the functioning of a modern high-growth economy.  As I am addressing a distinguished audience with expert knowledge of the Latvian economy, I consider it appropriate to take a broader and more comprehensive view, and look at the development of the financial sector not only in Latvia, but in the new EU Member States as a whole. After an overview of certain salient features characterising the financial structures of these countries, I will concentrate on two issues that have recently received considerable attention from both policy-makers and the media: strong credit growth and rapidly rising house prices. This will bring me to the focal point of my remarks: the challenges arising from these developments and the appropriate policy responses. II.  Features of the financial structures in the new Member States  Many of you have witnessed at first hand the remarkable transformation of the economies and financial systems of the new Member States in Central and Eastern Europe over the past decade. The convergence of the financial structures of these economies with those of Western Europe has also been significant. The modernisation of a country’s financial structure – that is, of the whole set of financial markets, instruments and institutions – is of crucial importance for actual and potential economic growth, and has received a lot of                                                  1  See European Central Bank, “Financial Sectors in EU Accession Countries”, July 2002.   1/7  
attention from both academics and policy-makers.2 Financial structures differ from country to country, reflecting the influence of various factors and of different traditions; but those structures also change over time as the processes of economic development and financial integration evolve. Looking at the financial structures of the new EU Member States today, five key characteristics are apparent.  First, the overall degree of financial depth in the Central and Eastern European countries is still lower than in the euro area. This applies in particular to financial intermediation by banks and to the household sector. For example, bank financing represents a much smaller share of GDP than in the euro area.3 It may be argued that if the low degree of financial intermediation persists, this could impede the efficient channelling of savings to investment, and that further financial reforms would therefore be needed. Second, the capital markets in these countries remain relatively underdeveloped. As a result, the issuance of quoted equity and debt securities by non-financial corporations in order to finance their investments and operations is not as important as in the euro area. This may come as a surprise, given that the stock markets in the new EU Member States have experienced very strong and, indeed, accelerating growth over the past few years. The average annual returns on equity in most of these countries have outperformed significantly those of the stock markets in the euro area. On the one hand, the substantial increases in equity prices in the new Member States may have reflected a rise in the fundamental values of the shares. On the other hand, this development may also reflect supply constraints: the limited issuance of new equity by firms and the relatively small number of companies listed. For example, the share of the five biggest listed companies in total market capitalisation and turnover is very high in most of the new EU Member States. Thus, since liquidity in these markets is relatively low, price movements in a small number of companies might influence to a relatively large extent the overall price level of the stock market.  Overall, financing through banks remains the dominant form of intermediation and a key feature of the financial structure in the majority of the new Member States. That said, equity financing has grown steadily over the past few years, even though the amount of corporate funds raised through capital markets remains rather limited. Furthermore, financial account data, which have been collected and compiled by the ECB in close collaboration with the new Member States, indicate that, in terms of amounts outstanding, shares and other equity are an important source of financing for non-financial corporations, mainly owing to the large contribution of non-quoted equity. This form of equity financing, for example family capital invested in small companies, also contributes to the large share of equity financing of euro area non-financial corporations.4 For the six new Member States for which data on unquoted equity is available, its share in total equity financing is 80% or more.  Third, in the new EU Member States we observe a significant degree of foreign involvement in the financial sector in terms of ownership, financing and investment. This is particularly visible in the banking sector, which is predominantly under foreign ownership in practically all of those countries. But it also extends beyond that. For example, a substantial share of                                                  2  See, for example, B. Amable and J.-B. Chatelain, “Can Financial Infrastructures Foster Economic Development?”, Journal of Development Economics, 64(2), April 2001, pp. 481-498; J. Bonin and P. Wachtel, “Financial Sector Development in Transition Economies: Lessons from the First Decade”, Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments, 12(1), February 2003, pp. 1-66; and L. Ndikumana, “Financial Development, Financial Structure, and Domestic Investment”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 24(2), June 2005, pp. 651-673. 3  With the exception of Cyprus and Malta, which are in this respect somewhat more comparable with the euro area. 4  ECB Monthly Bulletin, “Characteristics of corporate finance in the euro area”, February 2001, pp. 37-50.   2/7  
government and enterprise financing comes from abroad and many major firms are listed on stock exchanges outside these countries.  Fourth, most new EU Member States have experienced significant consolidation in the number of financial institutions, particularly banks. This process has contributed to the soundness and stability of these countries’ banking sectors. Consolidation has also affected stock markets. For example, the three Baltic stock markets recently merged with the Scandinavian OMX markets and use a common trading platform.  Finally, it is clear that in several new Member States, further improvements in the legal frameworks and market infrastructures may be needed in order to establish more transparent and efficient financial markets. This also applies to the greater transparency of counterparties in financial transactions, which would undoubtedly promote the further integration of these countries’ financial markets with those in the euro area.  From this overview, it is evident that, despite the significant progress made in previous years, the convergence process of the financial structures of the new EU Member States with those of the euro area is not yet complete. I will come back to this issue – and how we see the road ahead for the new Member States – later. At this stage, allow me to address two issues that are very topical for both the Latvian economy and several other new Member States: strong credit growth and rapidly rising house prices.  III.  Credit growth Let me start, on the question of credit markets, by pointing to three characteristic facts. First, dynamic credit growth to the private sector can be observed in a number of the new EU Member States, well above the average rate in the euro area. The growth of credit to the private sector has been especially strong in the Baltic countries and Hungary, where it has reached annual rates of between 30% and 50% in recent years. In other countries, such as the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the rate of credit growth to the private sector has been more moderate, but has picked up recently, while in Poland it has slowed down considerably, following peaks reached around the turn of the decade. Second, credit-to-GDP ratios in Central and Eastern European countries still remain well below the euro area level. Third, credit expansion has, in most of these countries, been financed by both domestic and external sources. In the early stages of credit expansion, a rise in domestic savings, partly reflecting increased confidence in banking systems and the overall financial deepening of these economies, was a particularly important source of banks’ financing. Subsequently, as interest rates have declined and the propensity to consume has increased, banks have progressively relied more on external sources.  Looking at the sectoral breakdown of credit growth, it is fairly clear that the main driver of credit dynamics has been loans to households – largely in the form of mortgage lending. Intense competition in this market segment has encouraged banks to substantially expand their lending to households. By contrast, bank credit growth to the corporate sector has lagged behind. This can be partly explained by the fact that an important share of investment by the non-financial corporate sector has been financed by retained earnings and foreign capital, including credit from banks in other countries and foreign direct investment.  Another striking – and potentially worrying – feature of credit growth in some of the new Member States is the high share of foreign currency-denominated loans. These loans are mostly euro-denominated, although loans in other currencies have also been gaining in importance recently. They have typically been granted to non-financial corporations, though also to households in the Baltic countries and Poland. Borrowing in foreign currency has been driven by lower borrowing costs and stimulated by the financial liberalisation in some countries prior to EU entry. The majority of foreign currency loans are held by larger multinational firms, which generate the greater part of their revenues in foreign currency, and can therefore also be considered as a hedging instrument. In general, borrowing in foreign   3/7  
currency has been more widespread in countries with fixed exchange rate regimes or exchange rate targets, particularly the Baltic countries. Nevertheless, the external net liability position of the banking sectors of most Central and Eastern European countries continues to be limited, with the exception of Estonia and Latvia, where the external net liability positions reached levels corresponding to 23% and 17% of GDP respectively at the end of 2004. IV.  House prices As you are well aware from the Latvian experience, rapid credit growth has gone hand in hand with strong increases in house prices, especially in certain segments of the housing market, such as apartments in major cities. That said, the picture is quite diverse across countries, and it is difficult to discern general patterns. Some countries, including the Baltic countries, have experienced double-digit increases in house prices, whereas in others, for example the Czech Republic, house price developments have been more moderate. In general, however, house prices in many new Member States have risen more strongly in recent years than the average in the euro area, albeit admittedly from a much lower base. Moreover, housing construction is picking up throughout the region, reflecting buoyant housing demand. Of course, property prices have also increased at a fast pace over the past few years in several euro area countries, as well as in other countries around the world, notably the United States and the United Kingdom. So this phenomenon is not characteristic only of the new EU Member States. When discussing trends in house prices, it is important to keep in mind a number of specific features of the housing markets of the new Member States. I am thinking in particular of the generally high – and still rising – degree of owner-occupancy or the fact that institutional arrangements associated with more developed housing markets, such as the legal framework, the easy transfer of property, the different types of available insurance, good valuation methods or alternative forms of mortgage finance, are still in a rather embryonic stage in some countries. This may explain why the volume of transactions relative to the total housing stock is still relatively limited in many new Member States. That said, it is a positive development that in several countries considerable efforts are being made to improve the institutional arrangements and the financial services on offer. How can we explain the observed house price developments? Very favourable financing conditions and perceptions among households that house prices are likely to continue to rise in the future have contributed significantly to strong housing demand. The supply side of the housing market, as recently suggested by indicators such as building permits granted and the number of housing completions, has partly and gradually responded to the strong price signals. If the supply of new houses continues to increase, this will alleviate some pressure on the market and contribute to a moderation in house price increases. V.  Policy challenges From this tour d’horizon of the salient features of financial structures and, in particular, of credit and housing markets, I see a number of pertinent policy questions arising: How should we assess the risks to financial stability that may be associated with these developments and market characteristics? What are the main challenges for policy-makers, that is, for governments, central banks and supervisory authorities? What are the issues to watch out for concerning the evolution of financial structures in the years to come? Let me provide some answers to these questions. I shall start with the potential implications of rapid credit growth and strong increases in housing prices for financial stability in the new EU Member States. Strong credit expansion can be a cause for concern, not least because banking crises have often been preceded by episodes of excessive credit growth. This statement is supported by theoretical arguments and extensive empirical research. That said, I should stress that a banking crisis is not the   4/7  
inevitable consequence of an episode of excessive credit expansion. However, a number of theoretical explanations have been put forward to elucidate why credit booms are associated with a higher probability of banking distress, notably the procyclicality of bank lending behaviour. Risks may be underestimated during the expansionary phase of the credit cycle, thereby resulting in a lowering of credit standards and of the average “quality” of borrowers. This may lead to higher credit losses when the next economic downturn occurs. Risks may also be underestimated as a consequence of the so-called “financial accelerator” mechanism, whereby over-optimism about future returns may boost asset valuations and thus firms’ net worth, which then feeds back into higher investment and credit demand and a further increase in asset prices.  So much for the theory: what should be our concern in the specific circumstances of the new Member States? First, there is a danger that rapid credit expansion may strain banks’ ability to monitor and assess risks properly. This is especially relevant for the new Member States, where banks’ credit risk assessment is burdened by measurement difficulties in forecasting potential future credit losses, owing to the lack of sufficiently long credit histories. This problem may be even more pronounced in the case of market segments that were previously underserviced, such as households and small and medium-sized enterprises. Second, the relative importance of foreign currency lending for the domestic private sector in some countries may have increased the vulnerability of households and unhedged  non-financial corporations to adverse exchange rate movements. Third, since mortgage loan contracts in several new Member States typically have floating interest rates, rising interest rates would have a negative impact on households’ debt-servicing ability in those countries.  Furthermore, since mortgage lending has been the major growth area in most new Member States, the evolution of house prices – as mentioned before – is, of course, a relevant factor which requires careful monitoring. The upward trend in real estate prices can be expected to continue over the medium and longer term, partly as a result of the gradual convergence with price levels in the “old” EU Member States. However, it would be comforting to think that such a “natural” development would not result in excessive and unsustainable house price increases. In this respect, it would be useful to monitor the extent to which strong mortgage lending and house price increases may lead to mortgage equity withdrawals, which in turn may stimulate consumption even more and thus fuel further GDP and credit growth.  When assessing the balance of risks to financial stability, a number of mitigating factors should also be taken into account. To begin with, credit risk should be contained, because the ratio of the debt-servicing burden of firms and households relative to income is still considerably lower than in the euro area. Moreover, a favourable growth outlook and improving prospects for household disposable income which are associated with the catching-up process, and the current low interest rate environment, are likely to make it easier for private sector borrowers to service their debts. In addition, the improved profitability of banks in most new Member States has helped them to maintain a solid capital base, which should also improve their shock-absorbing capacity. Finally, the ratio of  non-performing loans to total loans has, in most countries, decreased or remained at a low level over the past few years. Let me stress, however, that banks’ asset-quality indicators are typically backward-looking. Since risks may build up during the boom phase, a deterioration in credit quality may become visible only with a significant time lag if general economic conditions worsen. As most new Member States have been enjoying relatively high rates of economic growth in recent years, the resilience of loan portfolios to negative output shocks remains untested until now. Notwithstanding the overall positive near-term outlook for financial stability in the new Member States, potential risks implied by rapid credit growth call for continued vigilance by national authorities. Reflecting these concerns, central banks and supervisory authorities have taken several measures in response to rapid credit growth. The most commonly applied measures can be classified under the category of “moral suasion”. These include enhanced central bank communication concerning the risks related to fast credit expansion, through   5/7  
Financial Stability Reports or by other means, and recommendations made by prudential supervisors aiming to increase banks’ risk awareness. In some countries, the tightening of monetary policy, for example in Latvia, and fiscal measures aiming to reduce the incentives for borrowing, such as those introduced in Estonia, have also been used to moderate credit growth. Nonetheless, these measures have not yet proved sufficient to moderate the pace of credit growth in the Baltic countries, which has remained very high through the middle of 2005. Financial regulation and prudential supervision should therefore ensure that sound asset quality is maintained. Furthermore, fiscal policy can also contribute to macroeconomic stability and thus help to moderate volatility in financial markets.  Finally, let me address one issue that is somewhat “closer to home”. Since robust bank credit growth may continue in the period leading up to the accession of some new Member States to the euro area and even in the years following the adoption of the euro, it is pertinent to consider whether this could have a bearing on the euro area as a whole in the future. Given the strong ownership and other links between euro area banks and banks in the new Member States, it could be argued that there might be a risk transmission channel within the EU. However, bearing in mind that banking sectors in new Member States represent a relatively small fraction of the total assets of euro area banking groups, such a potential contagion risk seems rather limited.  VI.  The outlook for financial structures and the risks to financial stability What is the outlook for financial structures and what are the potential risks to financial stability in the coming years? Broadly speaking, the expected catching-up of the economies of the new Member States in financial and real terms is likely to have two main implications for their financial structures. First, it is expected to lead to a deepening of financial intermediation and a further development of capital markets to levels comparable to those of the euro area. Second, it is likely to promote an increased role for non-bank financial intermediaries, such as pension funds and life insurance companies, whose presence is very limited when compared with the euro area countries. As a result, financial sector balance sheets are expected to expand substantially in most of the new Member States over the next decade. Similarly, bond and stock markets are likely to develop significantly, along with life insurance companies and pension funds. Against this background, a key policy challenge in the new Member States is to safeguard the soundness of the banking system and the robust and stable development of financial markets. In fact, there are several potential stresses that could arise as financial systems expand, especially in an environment of capital mobility and financial market integration. Experience in a number of emerging market economies has shown that financial market exuberance can drive risk premia on external debt and domestic financial instruments to levels lower than are warranted by fundamentals. Under such circumstances, strong capital inflows, rapid credit growth and buoyant asset prices may lead to episodes of sizeable real exchange rate appreciation – with potentially serious repercussions for the real economy if expectations are at some point not fulfilled. It is important to guard against such potential risks. After all – to paraphrase slightly what Larry Summers once said – “the new finance is like a highway. It gets you to where you are going better and faster, but the accidents may be worse.” VII.  Concluding remarks  Let me conclude. Our review of the financial structures in the new Member States has showed that substantial progress towards convergence with the euro area has been achieved, but also that there is still a need to improve the financial infrastructure and to strengthen the legal framework. I highlighted two major issues which are currently attracting our attention in a number of Member States: robust credit growth and rapidly rising house prices. While these developments could pose, in certain circumstances, significant risks to   6/7  
financial stability, we see such risks as being rather modest at this juncture, bearing in mind that the situation varies considerably from country to country. Nevertheless, it is important that authorities and market participants be vigilant and take measures that can help to reduce the likelihood of risks materialising and increase the resilience of the financial system. To this end, the implementation of sound macroeconomic policies is key – particularly the implementation of prudent fiscal policies that can contribute to moderating unsustainable aggregate demand increases and contain large current account deficits. Fiscal measures should also aim to eliminate tax distortions that can fuel property price dynamics. Moreover, the further strengthening of supervisory mechanisms and practices and the enhancement of the risk management methods employed by banks will help both to limit some potential risks and to improve the shock-absorbing capacity of the financial system. What should be clear, however, is that supervisory authorities cannot take financial stability for granted. The British statesman and political theorist Edmund Burke once remarked that you can never plan the future by the past. This is an observation that should not be forgotten, particularly in the fields of financial stability and prudential supervision, and especially given the fact that the modern financial history of the new Member States is still rather short. Thank you very much for your attention.    7/7  
Jean-Claude Trichet: Testimony before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the European Parliament, Brussels, 14 September 2005. *      *      * Madame la présidente, Mesdames et Messieurs les membres de la Commission économique et monétaire, j’ai l’honneur de paraître devant votre Commission aujourd’hui dans le cadre de notre dialogue régulier. À cette occasion, je voudrais rendre hommage à Wim Duisenberg, qui est décédé à la fin du mois de juillet. Le premier président de la Banque centrale européenne a apporté une contribution considérable à la construction européenne. Il a joué un rôle décisif dans la mise en place des institutions monétaires en Europe, dans le lancement réussi de la nouvelle monnaie, dans l’affirmation de la crédibilité de notre monnaie unique – l’euro – et dans l’instauration de la confiance placée en elle. Nous le regrettons profondément. Je commencerai mon intervention aujourd’hui par une évaluation de la situation économique et monétaire actuelle. Ich möchte außerdem zu aktuellen Themen der Fiskalpolitik und zu den Fortschritten im Bereich der Strukturreformen Stellung nehmen. Abschließend möchte ich die Position der EZB zu den Folgeaktivitäten hinsichtlich des EU-Aktionsplans für Finanzdienstleistungen erläutern.  Economic and monetary issues  At the time of my last appearance before the European Parliament in July the underlying trend in real economic growth in the euro area remained modest. Looking ahead, we expected that positive fundamental factors – notably strong global demand and robust earnings in the euro area – would contribute to a certain pick up and a broadening of economic activity.  The latest data and indicators have not changed this assessment. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter rate of 0.3% in the second quarter of this year, compared with 0.4% in the first quarter of 2005, confirming that the underlying growth dynamics remained subdued in the first half of 2005. At the same time, the most recent survey indicators have, on balance, supported the view that economic growth could improve in the second half of this year. Looking further ahead, conditions continue to be in place for positive fundamental factors to influence the outlook and for economic activity to pick up beyond the short term. On the external side, ongoing growth in global demand and improvements in euro area price competitiveness should support euro area exports. On the domestic side, investment should benefit from the exceptionally low level of both nominal and real market interest rates prevailing across the entire maturity spectrum, as well as from the robust growth of corporate earnings and ongoing improvements in corporate efficiency. Consumption growth should gradually rise, broadly in line with expected developments in disposable income. This picture is consistent with the most recent ECB staff projections, which envisage euro area real GDP growing at rates of between 1.0% and 1.6% in 2005 and between 1.3% and 2.3% in 2006. Compared with the June projections, the ranges projected for real GDP growth have been adjusted slightly downwards. For 2005, this mainly reflects slight downward revisions of past data, while for 2006 this reflects the projected effects on disposable income of increases in oil prices. This outlook for economic activity is subject to a number of downward risks, relating mainly to higher oil prices, low consumer confidence and concerns about global imbalances. In particular, the potential further dampening impact of oil prices on the outlook for growth is being monitored very closely. Oil prices have continued to rise, increasing considerably since the beginning of the year, and developments in futures prices suggest that market participants expect the current tightness in oil markets to persist. Obviously, the situation has been further complicated by the tragic effects of Hurricane Katrina. All our thoughts are with the people of the city of New Orleans and all affected neighbouring areas and we are touched by the wave of global solidarity helping them to cope with   1/3  
their immediate needs. At the same time, it remains difficult to assess the full extent of the damage and the period of time necessary for its repair. Normally, despite the significant wealth destruction resulting from such storms, the economic impact at the national level is limited to the short term and is increasingly offset by the positive impacts of rebuilding activity. At the moment, we consider that the global impact will most likely remain limited and temporary, but we will of course continue to monitor very closely any available further evidence.  Turning to price developments, recent increases in oil prices have pushed headline inflation rates to levels in excess of 2% over the last months. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.1% in August, compared with 2.2% in July, and inflation rates are expected to fluctuate around current levels over the next few months, with some further increases towards year-end. At the same time, when analysing underlying domestic inflationary trends, there continues to be no significant evidence of upside pressures building up in the euro area. In particular, wage increases have remained contained over recent quarters and this trend should prevail for the time being, given the current labour market situation. This picture is broadly in line with the new ECB staff projections. ECB staff project average annual HICP inflation to lie between 2.1% and 2.3% in 2005 and between 1.4% and 2.4% in 2006. These projections constitute significant upward revisions to the Eurosystem staff inflation projections published in June, mainly reflecting the fact that oil prices have once again increased by more than was suggested earlier by forward rates.  Upside risks to this new baseline inflation scenario remain, relating to potential further rises in oil prices, administered prices and indirect taxes. More fundamentally, the main risks to the inflation outlook stem from potential second-round effects in wage and price-setting behaviour triggered by ongoing oil price rises. In this respect, it is essential that the social partners continue to meet their responsibilities. Against this background, we will continue to monitor inflation expectations very closely. Particular vigilance is required in order to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well-anchored in the euro area. Turning to the monetary analysis, money and credit have continued to grow robustly in the euro area over the last few months, mainly driven by the prevailing low level of interest rates. In particular, the growth of mortgage borrowing remains very strong. In this context, price dynamics in housing markets need to be monitored closely. The liquidity situation in the euro area remains ample by all plausible measures, indicating risks to price stability over medium to longer horizons. In conclusion, oil price developments have again led to upward revisions of inflation projections for the year ahead. At the same time, medium-term domestic inflationary pressures still remain contained, while the balance of risks to the baseline inflation scenario is tilted to the upside. Cross-checking the economic analysis with the monetary analysis confirms the need for particular vigilance in order to keep medium-term inflation expectations firmly anchored at levels consistent with price stability. By achieving this, monetary policy is making a significant contribution towards economic growth and job creation in the euro area.  Turning to fiscal policies, the latest available information suggests that the pace of fiscal consolidation in many euro area countries remains unsatisfactory. It is of particular concern that targets for correcting excessive deficits are at risk in some cases. Moreover, countries that have recently breached the 3% deficit limit are being granted relatively long periods to correct the situation in what constitutes a very generous application of the reformed Stability and Growth Pact. Against this background, it is important to recall that the best contribution that fiscal policies can make to stability, growth and cohesion in the euro area is to effectively tackle existing fiscal imbalances as part of a determined and well-designed economic reform programme. In this context, a rigorous implementation of the new rules is needed. This would reinforce the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact, boost expectations of sound fiscal policies and thereby help to increase confidence in economic growth prospects.  As regards structural reforms, the European Commission has recently presented the “Community Lisbon Programme”, which contains a list of measures at the EU level to relaunch the Lisbon strategy. The ECB fully backs this initiative, in particular the measures to further open EU markets and to simplify the regulatory framework within which business operates. Progress at both the Community and the Member State level is crucial to addressing the economic challenges facing the EU.   2/3  
Financial services policy  I would now like to say a few words about the European Commission’s Green Paper on Financial Services Policy for the period 2005-2010. As already expressed in its contribution to the Commission’s public consultation, the Eurosystem supports the key policy orientation of the Green Paper, which highlights the need to focus on the consolidation and consistent implementation of the legislative framework for financial services. To this end, the potential of the Lamfalussy framework should be exploited to the extent possible.  As regards the area of financial regulation, the Eurosystem concurs with the emphasis placed by the Commission on the objective of rationalising the existing framework. The proposal for “better regulation” based on open, transparent and evidence-based policy-making is fully supported. The Eurosystem also supports the suggestion by the Commission to launch a feasibility study on the development of one body of consistent law. We regard such a “financial services rulebook” as a tool to rationalise the existing set of EU rules for financial institutions and, in particular, to reduce complexity and legal uncertainties and to eliminate possible inconsistencies.  Still in the context of financial regulation, the completion of the current FSAP legislative work is also important. In that connection, I would like to mention in particular the Capital Requirements Directive, on which, I am informed, work is proceeding smoothly. Also, I would like to make a specific reference to the issue of securities clearing and settlement, to which the Eurosystem attributes great importance. An efficient securities clearing and settlement infrastructure is of fundamental importance to the integration and smooth functioning of financial markets. To this end, the Eurosystem supports the Commission’s intention to put forward a proposal for a directive on securities clearing and settlement. On the question of new regulatory initiatives, we share the view that asset management and retail financial services are areas where regulatory intervention could be considered.  In the area of financial supervision, the Eurosystem fully supports the Commission’s view that the current institutional set-up should be exploited to the maximum extent before any potential structural change is considered. In particular, the Eurosystem agrees that the main policy objective in the area of financial supervision is two-fold: first, to enhance the competitiveness of EU financial markets and institutions and to facilitate the development of cross-border finance both in terms of institutions and in terms of products and services – the so-called financial integration angle; and second, to ensure the effectiveness of standards for oversight and supervision in a more integrated financial system – the so-called financial stability angle. In this respect, we attach particular importance to the consistent implementation of financial services legislation and the pursuit of supervisory convergence, as well as to the effective cooperation between home and host authorities. We are of the view that it is important that home-host coordination be developed on a robust and consistent basis for the financial groups involved in a way that both ensures effective supervision and reduces compliance costs. The Level 3 Committees play a very important role in this respect. Furthermore, we see a need for the current regime for the supervision of liquidity risk to be reviewed against the background of financial market developments, including the introduction of the euro. As regards financial stability, which represents an area of particular interest to the Eurosystem, we are of the opinion that the refinement of financial stability arrangements should remain a key priority for the EU. There are three broad areas where the Eurosystem sees room for enhancing the present arrangements, namely financial stability assessment, the management of financial stress and deposit insurance. In this respect, let me recall that the provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance is a central banking function and that there is an agreement within the Eurosystem on how this facility operates in the euro ara. Thus, there are no specific issues relating to the provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance that need to be addressed in the context of the post FSAP work. Finally, let me stress again that the Governing Council of the ECB is very strongly attached to the full completion of the single market for banking services and to a level playing field making absolutely no difference between nationalities. I am now ready to answer your questions.    3/3  
Rakesh Mohan: Communications in central banks - a perspective Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Mumbai, 9 September, 2005. The annexes and references for this speeech are available on the RBI’s website at www.rbi.org.in. *      *      * I. Introduction Communication is part of the professional hazards that central bankers face as a routine. The responses as well as measures are mostly ‘measured’. Financial markets watch our pauses, and some punctuation marks in the text of a statement have the distinct possibility of getting transmitted through the movement of a few points in the yield curve. Faced with such grave consequences that can be measured in millions of rupees or dollars, communication in central banking becomes really a very serious matter. Is it true for central banking only? Perhaps not: after all, communication in general is a complex process. While we all attempt to communicate among ourselves all the time, nonetheless, the expression of intentions in oral or written mode often do not get transmitted correctly to the reader or listener. Words have different connotations - so have paragraphs or lengthy documents. The reader or listener often ascribes motives to expressions used and a wedge is created between what is said and what is perceived. What a person perceives is often very dependent on what she expects to hear, or she wants to hear. It interesting to refer to what William Poole has noted in context of central bank communication,  “Accurate communication requires settled meanings for words. For any given word, we can consult a dictionary and we usually discover that each English word has several meanings, which can be quite different. There is no dictionary in which we can look up the several meanings of a paragraph. The meaning of a policy statement — preferably only one — must be established by the central bank, through consistent practice over time and through more extended discussion of what the language means” (Poole, 2003). Furthermore, expression of intention is not a one-off affair; on the contrary there are elements of incrementality in communication and reputation plays a role. Illustratively, my children often start reacting to any directions only after a reminder: their normal reaction to my directions is to see whether I was serious to begin with. My credibility is constantly at stake. Communication in central banking is a far more difficult process. It is not that long ago that central banking was shrouded in mystery. Books like “Secrets of the Temple” (Greider, 1989), and expressions like “monetary mystique” (Goodfreind, 1985) bear testimony to this. It was in fact widely believed that communication from the Central Bank needs to be couched in terms of “constructive ambiguity”, a term coined by Chairman Gerry Corrigan of the New York Fed. One is reminded of what Alan Greenspan said, “The undeniable, though regrettable, fact is that the most effective policymaking is done outside the immediate glare of the press" (Greenspan, 2002). It was felt that earlier that policy effectiveness depended on the degree of surprise with which the market was taken by central bank policy announcements. In fact, it is quite remarkable to note that prior to 1994 the target Federal Funds Rate was not even announced by the US Federal Reserve: the market was left to infer the rate from the timing, sequence and magnitude of its open market operations (Woodford, 2005). Now, however, the U.S. Federal Reserve not only announces its current target Fed Fund Rate but also provides a clear indication of the likely trajectory of future interest rates. Such has been the revolution in Central Bank communication practice over the last ten to fifteen years.   1/9  
Since the late 1980s and early 1990s the widely perceived iron wall of central banks’ communication has become much thinner, along with the fall of the iron curtain. From the current vantage point we can clearly discern three reasons for this change: • First, the clamour for and attainment of central bank independence has imposed a great degree of responsibility on the central banks – a major one being the attainment of transparency in communication. • Second, adoption of inflation targeting by a number of central banks since the 1990s made effective communication an integral part of policy making. Monetary policy committees were formed and minutes started being published.  • Third, the innovations in information and communication technology made the speed and form of communication from central banks quite revolutionary. From the print medium and television the new entrants of transmission have been the web-sites of the central banks and the wire agencies like Reuters and Bloomberg. This change in thinking has occurred with the enhanced perception that "central banks affect the economy as much through their influence on expectations as through any direct, mechanical effects of central bank trading in the market for overnight cash" (Woodford, 2005), or through their specific announcements on the intervention rate. Woodford goes as far as to say that "Central Banking is management of expectations". When a central bank changes its intervention / policy rate, its effectiveness in influencing key variables such as the inflation rate depends crucially on its effect on other financial market prices such as the exchange rate, equity prices and the longer term interest rates. Thus, apart from the specific action related to the overnight policy rate, the central bank has to use all the means at its disposal to achieve its policy aims. Now that direct credit controls, or other quantitative direct instrument are not available, and that financial markets have deepened even in our countries, effective communicative of central bank policy objectives, instruments and action has gained prominence. In fact, presently there is now perhaps an abundance of information that gets transmitted from the Central Banks to the public. This goes to the extent that the Economist (July 22, 2004) recently raised the question: “Do communicative central banks make financial markets lazy?” and concluded that, “It’s not always good to talk.” The issue at hand for our countries relates to our understanding of the depth and sophistication of our financial markets and of the public at large. Should our communication strategies be similar to that of our counterparts in more developed countries? Should our mode of monetary policy making, e.g. inflation targeting, be similar to the current vogue elsewhere? How confident can we be of our powers of modeling and forecasting? These are the questions that we have to deal with and to then fashion our communication strategies accordingly. It is in this context that I attempt to review the rationale, forms and practices of communication in central banking and try to evaluate the Indian experience in this address. The rest of the address is orgranised as follows. Section II looks into the general issues relating of communication in central banks. Section III presents the Indian practices and some of my personal reflections in this regard. Section IV gives the concluding observations. II. Necessity of Communication from the Central Bankers The issue of communication in central banks is intimately interlinked with the mandate of the central bank. The more complex is the mandate of the central bank, the more difficult as well as more important is the communication. Illustratively, if the mandate of the central bank is either inflation targeting or exchange rate targeting (as in a currency board arrangement) then the objective of central bank is amply clear to the public. Hence communication is necessary to express the commitment of the central bank which is reflected through   2/9  
continuous action to maintain its credibility for achieving these objectives. On the contrary, if the mandate is complex as it is, for example, for the US Federal Reserve and the Reserve Bank of India, then the objectives may not be clear. Moreover, even if the objectives are known, when there are multiple objectives there could be lack of clarity among the relative weights and the changing relative weights of these objectives. In all such cases, the central bank needs to communicate the objectives on a continuous basis. Thus, benefit of central bank communication depends crucially on the adopted policy approach (Bernanke, 2004). Specifically if the central bank follows a simple feedback policy, then the private sector can easily infer its future policies. In that case, there is no necessity of extensive communication by the central bank except when the central bank decides to deviate substantially from the rule. Central bankers in modern times hardly follow a simple feedback rule – all central banks, including the inflation targetors, take into account a wealth of information in deciding the future course of monetary policy and follow what is termed as the ‘forecast-based approach’. In this case, the public are not able to infer the likely course of policy so easily and need guidance about the central bank’s perception of outlooks, risk assessments, and objectives. Clear and transparent communication plays an important role in this case. The need for communication from the central banks also comes from another distinct source. Since the early 1990s, there is an increasing emphasis on central bank independence. In a democratic polity, a good deal of trust is placed in the central bank. Various countries in the world have attained varying degrees of independence of their central banks. In this context, questions of accountability and transparency are often raised. Communication is at the heart of accountability. There is, thus, a need to understand motives and procedures. When the political authorities give a clear mandate to the central banks in bestowing independence then the communication policy of the central bank is reasonably clear. A crucial issue about communication policy is when and whom to communicate. Interestingly, when a central bank is not independent, then it can communicate only to the controlling authority. In case of an independent central bank the communication has to go to various actors, viz., (a) public, (b) legislature or executive, (c) market participants. The mode and method of communication to the participants would be distinctly different for these three entities.  In a globalised world, it is not possible to formulate monetary policy independent of international developments. Monetary policy formulation has, thus, became more complex and interdependent (Mohan, 2002). Furthermore, in a globalised world with increasing communication from the regulatory clubs like BIS or IMF, sophistication of the staff is perhaps not too different among the countries. The question, however, is: how sophisticated is the audience in understanding delicate nuances of the announcements of the central banks. In fact, the effectiveness of monetary policy will crucially depend on how well the public and market participants understand the central bank signals. A related question is: do the central banks need to communicate to different agents differently? What is good for the public may not be good for the market participants. After all, “the markets thrive on volatility, while the public dislike it quite intensely” (Blinder et al., 2000).  Monetary policy is most effective when markets anticipate it correctly. Thus, a general consensus in the literature is that more is the transparency, better it is. More open public disclosure of central bank policies may enhance the efficiency of markets, through the following two channels: • First, greater information about how a central bank makes policy decisions helps to reduce financial speculation. • Second, clearer decision rules help to reduce the volatility of markets, and, thus, enhance the predictability of future movements of financial assets. Furthermore, as the rational expectations literature has taught us that the effects of a given policy action have to be defined within a treatment of policy expectations. It is argued that an assumption about public understanding of the future course of policy is a precondition for any coherent analysis of current policy. Monetary policy is no exception to this general rule.   3/9  
Besides, this literature also showed that monetary authorities cannot utilize the short-run trade-off by “fooling” the public systemically, and thereby established the necessity of transparency in communication of central banks.  The forex market, because of its special nature, could be an exception to this general rule of ‘more the merrier’ in case of transparency. Communication in the area of exchange rate policy is special due to a number of reasons (Blinder et al., 2000). First, apart from central banks, governments in a number of cases have joint responsibility for exchange rate policy. Second, in case of some exchange rate arrangements (such as, pure pegs and pure floats), the need for central bank communication is absent. Third, in the some instances where central banks decide to intervene in the foreign exchange market in pursuit of monetary goals, secrecy may be defensible on the grounds of effectiveness. I shall turn to this issue in the Indian context in somewhat greater detail. Another general issue is despite the multiplicity of objectives there is only one instrument with the central banks, viz., a variant of the short term interest rate. Central banks all over the world try to change the short term interest rates on the assumption that it will influence the medium and long term interest rates - after all it is the medium and long term rates that affect expectations and asset prices (Blinder, 1998). To a large extent, this happens through explanations or forecasts. The effectiveness of these will crucially depend on the degree of sophistication of the financial market participants and the interlocutors.  The extent of transparency in central bank communication has been dictated by the norms of openness in the body-politic as well. Illustratively, Bank of England (BoE)’s information dissemination is governed by the Freedom of Information Act 2000 of the U.K. This Act places an obligation on public authorities to adopt and maintain a publication scheme. Furthermore, with effect from January 2005, the Act provides a general right of access to all types of recorded information held by public authorities and sets out exemptions from that right. Similarly, in the U.S, as per the Freedom of Information Act one can request information from the Fed. Do central banks talk in an obscure language? Is communication an exercise in obfuscation? Many of the central banks have traditionally been portrayed as ‘tight-lipped, secretive, and cryptic’. It is often alleged that central bank executives use complicated words to convey little meaning. Blinder and others have alleged that, “Chairman Alan Greenspan is credited with raising Fedspeak to a high art … even characterizing his own way of communicating as mumbling with great incoherence” (Blinder et al, 2000). In one particular incident, Chairman Greenspan is reported to have told a US senator, who claimed to have understood what the chairman had just said, that “in that case, I must have misspoken”. Notwithstanding such allegations, there have been great moves in fostering transparency in central communication in recent years. A case in point is the publication of minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England. According to the Bank of England Act, 1998, the BoE is supposed to "publish minutes of the MPC meeting before the end of the period of 6 weeks beginning with the day of the meeting." Until October 1998 the minutes were published about five weeks after the meeting. The Monetary Policy Committee announced in 1998 that it would publish the minutes of its monthly meetings on the Wednesday of the second week after the meetings take place. Apart from the Minutes, they publish the voting pattern of the individual members as well. Besides, central banks are increasingly learning to communicate ‘perception of uncertainty’, as different from ‘ambiguity’. In terms of communication there are various ways to tell the public that ‘we do not know for certain’, which are clearly preferable to couching a statement in ambiguous language. Illustratively, the BoE publishes its growth or inflation forecasts with a differing margin of error – what is popularly called the “fan chart”. The fan chart with its increasing lighter shade (at the outward direction) is a mode which clearly communicates the extent of uncertainty and the degree of ignorance of the forecaster.    4/9  
Another important hallmark of modern communication is the emerging roles of web-sites and wire agencies. While the speed of communication is still slightly slower than light, wire agencies put the communication from the central banks on an almost real time basis. This has great ramifications on the transmission of news and formation of expectation in the financial markets.  Having delineated the general principles let me now turn to the Indian specifics on central bank communication. III. Communication in RBI I have already pointed out that more complex is the mandate for the central bank more is the necessity of communication. The Indian case would perhaps approximate that of a complex objective. After all, apart from pursuing monetary policy, financial stability is one of the overriding concerns of the RBI. Within the objective of monetary policy, both control of inflation and providing adequate credit to the productive sectors of the economy so as to foster growth are equally important. This apart, Reserve Bank acts as a banking regulator, debt manager, government debt market regulator and currency issuer. Faced with such multiple tasks and complex mandate, there is an utmost necessity of clearer communication on the part of the Reserve Bank of India.  What do we need to communicate? In a central bank, there is necessity of three kinds of communication, viz., (a) policy measures, (b) reasons behind such policy measures and (c) analysis of the economy. RBI is engaged with all these three kinds of communication. In fact, by international standards the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has a fairly extensive and transparent communication system. The bi-annual policy statements have traditionally communicated the Reserve Bank’s stands on monetary policy in the immediate future of six months to one year. As of July this year, we have now begun a system of quarterly reviews in addition to the bi-annual statements. The present practice of attaching a review of macro economic developments to the annual policy and mid term review, and to the quarterly reviews gives an expansive view of how the central bank sees the economy. In the  bi-annual policy meetings with the leading bankers, the Governor while announcing the policy explains the rationale behind the measures at length. These policy meetings are not one-way traffic. Each banker present in the meeting interacts with the Governor to express his or her reaction to the policy announcement. After the policy announcement is over, the Governor addresses a press conference in the afternoon. The Deputy Governor in–charge of the Monetary Policy Department normally gives live interviews to all the major television channels on the same day. Governor also gives interviews to print and electronic media over the next few days after the monetary policy announcement. The only thing we still do not have is a live telecast of Governor’s monetary policy announcements. Apart from these policy statements communication of RBI policy takes place through speeches of the Governor and Deputy Governors. These speeches are devoted to issues concerning the economy as well as articulation of the RBI’s policies. Interestingly, globally it has been found that the speeches of the Governors of the central banks have been an important determinant of the movement of the term structure of interest rates as changes in the repo rate (Fracasso, Genberg and Wyplosz, 2003). The typical mode in which RBI’s policy is communicated to the regulated entities is departmental circulars. Depending on the domain of operations the concerned department will issue a circular which then is placed in the website without any delay. A typical complaint about the circulars is often that they are written in the language that is not easily comprehensible, and one needs to translate them into normal understandable language. But that is a complaint against any formal statement couched in semi-legal language. I do believe, however, that we can all do a much better job of writing circulars in plain English shorn of tedious jargon.   5/9  
The other major mode of dissemination of RBI policy as well as its views on the economy is its Reports. Over the years these Reports have turned out to be more analytical, transparent and forward looking in their outlook. The two statutory reports of the Bank, the Annual Report and the Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India have evoked immense interest among the public, market participants as well as in academia. The theme based Report on Currency and Finance is a platform to articulate the research findings on an issue of topical interest. RBI Occasional Papers has also emerged as a professional journal of refereed research output of the RBI staff. Over the years Committee Reports have emerged as another plank of communication from RBI. The plethora of committees formed by the RBI tries to communicate to the financial sector participants or markets. Interestingly, many of these committees are conceptualized during the process of either the annual or the mid-year Review of monetary policy, so that by the time of the next policy its recommendations are available for consideration or for implementation. While the general public is quite cynical about the formation of any committee, as long as the authorities are serious about a transparent acceptance or rejection of the recommendations of the committees, they remain a major vehicle of the collective policy thinking.  An important feature of the RBI communication policy is the almost real-time dissemination of information through its web-site. The results of the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) of the day are posted in the web-site by 12.30 P.M of the same day, by 2.30 P.M the reference rates numbers are also placed in the web-site. By the next day morning the press release on money market operations are out. Every Saturday by 12 noon the weekly statistical supplement is placed in the web-site, giving a fairly detailed recent data-base on the RBI and the financial sector. By the first of every month, the RBI Bulletin of the month is out. All the regulatory and administrative circulars of different Departments are placed on the web-site within half an hour of its finalization. I think such a high speed of dissemination is possible due to the professional skills of the internal staff of the RBI.  Another significant step towards transparency of monetary policy implementation is formation of various Technical Advisory Committees (TACs) in the RBI with representatives from market participants, other regulators (like SEBI or IRDA) and experts. Over the years, three such Technical Advisory committees have emerged – one on the money, forex and G-Sec markets, the other on regulation, and a recent one on monetary policy. These fora act as platforms where RBI comes to know about the needs of market players and where the RBI is able to communicate its stand on these issues that may not be strictly feasible in the formal modes of circulars. Many of the agenda notes prepared for these meetings form the background of the bi-annual monetary policy announcements. These apart, the Resource Management Discussions before the Annual Policy act as another mode of a two-way communication between management of commercial banks and RBI management. Meeting with the State Finance Secretaries is another platform of communication. I have tried to give a quick run-down of the various means and modes of communication strategy and policy of the RBI. Needless to say, in tune with the global trends the RBI too has become more transparent, articulate and fast in communicating its policies and views on the economy. Nevertheless, questions remain. What else could have been done? Could the RBI have done better? What are impediments and hazards of communication in a central bank? How fast does the market react to central bank’s announcements? Let me now turn to some of these issues.  How fast does the central bank communication influence the market? An interesting illustration of the impact of central bank communication is perhaps the episode in stock market on May 17, 2004. On this day, in the wake of change of Government, stock markets in India witnessed a record fall in price, which triggered the index-based circuit breaker twice during the day. The index-based circuit breaker triggered for the first time at 10:16 AM when the Sensex touched a low of 4516. When trading resumed after one hour at 11:15 AM, the   6/9  
Sensex opened at 4448 before touching the day's low of 4227 at 11:19 AM – which triggered the circuit breaker for around two hours. In normal circumstances, the Reserve Bank does not take a view about the stock market. However, when confronted with the possibility of a spill-over in money, G-Sec and forex markets RBI intervened on that day and two separate press releases were issued by the Bank indicating, (a) constitution of an internal Task Force under the Executive Director, Financial Market Committee to monitor the developments in financial markets, and (b) assuring availability of Rupee and Forex Liquidity (Annex). Thus, it was communicated that RBI was keeping in touch with major settlement banks and the stock exchanges to ensure that payment obligations on the exchanges were met and gave assurance of selling dollars through agent banks in order to augment supply or intervene directly to meet any demand supply imbalances. These press releases were placed on the web-site around 2.00 P.M, but were released to wire agencies half an hour earlier and were flashed in all the tickers by 1.30 P.M. Trading had resumed by that time at 1:16 PM; subsequent to the flashing of the press release, the market witnessed a quick recovery, before closing at 4505. Whereas I am not claiming the entire recovery in the sensex on that day to be solely due to the communication from the RBI, it is important to understand the role and power of such communications when there are occasions when central bank communication can have immediate impact on the market - that too on a market that is not strictly under its jurisdiction. Central Bank communication has its flip side too. The modern day paparazzi-syndrome haunts central bankers as well. I am sure that many of the central bankers must have at some point of time must have bitterly surprised to find in the next day’s newspaper some statement that was ascribed to him or her – whereas the truth could be entirely opposite. Let me illustrate this with a personal experience – one among the few I have experienced during my stay in RBI. On August 14, 2004 I was at the Annual Citibank-Fitch Debt Market Conference. On my entry I was chased by the journalists and one of the questions I was asked was about the future rate of inflation. To the best of my recollection I said that the present rise in inflation was predominantly driven by supply-shocks and that we were monitoring the developments carefully. To my utter surprise, a pink paper in the next day (i.e., August 15, 2004) reported a story with the photographs of the President of India and mine side by side, with the following catch lines: • “President APJ Abdul Kalam said on Saturday that sustaining a high eight per cent growth and containing inflation, now at 7.61 per cent, were the major challenges for the country.” • “Meanwhile, Reserve Bank (RBI) deputy governor Rakesh Mohan on Saturday reiterated that the authorities were expecting inflation to fall to the earlier levels of five per cent.” The story implied that a Deputy Governor of the RBI differed with the President of India on the stance of inflation on the eve of the Independence Day! However, I was absolutely in a catch-22 situation and was unable to issue a letter of protest as it would have given the signal that the RBI is expecting the inflation to go up. Such are the travails of central bank communication! Similar experience is often found in interpretation of various reports and policy statements. I am told that in recent years, the Bank of Canada has instituted a media “lock-up” arrangement in which the media can read key reports of the Bank of Canada and write their stories prior to the official publication time. There are regular media briefings during this lock-up period, where officials can deal with technical questions and clarify other issues (purely on an unattributed basis) for the media. In Canada such practice have resulted in a clear improvement in the in the quality of the reporting. I am aware that in RBI as well, the Reports are released to the media a day earlier to the release date but without any technical briefing. Perhaps we can think of introducing this media lock-up arrangement inclusive of technical   7/9  
briefing in RBI. This could reduce the work of issuing rejoinders about some perceived misgiving on central bank policies. In common parlance, often central communication is seen in an insider-outsider context. It is assumed that central bank communication refers to what the central bank chooses to tell the general public, market participants, experts, or the media. What happens to the communication internally? Or, to borrow from the management literature, how do we “sell the brand inside” (Mitchell, 2001)? While information is doled to the employees in form of memos, news letter, many an occasion the employees of an organization are unable to realize the uniqueness of the brand. Central banks are no exception to this general trend of the corporate world. The policy and research wings of the RBI would need to pay particular attention to the dissemination and effective communication of the RBI policies to internal staff and play a pro-active role. I put forward the following ideas in this context: • It would be useful in this context to arrange internal seminars / talks in all regional offices and training colleges of the RBI after monetary policy announcements or publication of important Reports – whether regular (e.g., Annual Report or Report on Currency & Finance) or Committee Reports. • Another idea could be to release FAQs (frequently asked questions) on any policy matter in the website. There could be educational resources as well as done in FED (such as, “In Plain English: Making Sense of the Federal Reserve”, or material on personal financial education). • Still another idea could be to introduce a working paper series with a clear disclaimer that ‘these are the finding of the individual researcher and not of the RBI’. The unfortunate thing about the domestic Press is that they often choose to disregard the disclaimer, and start ascribing any research finding to the RBI.  • Finally, many of the internal notes of various departments are of immense analytical value; subject to the caveats of confidentiality (which I am sure would be exceptions rather than rules), many such notes could be made available internally. Departmental sites in the RBI Intranet could be effectively utilized in this.  While the management normally makes policy statements to the outside world, in an increasingly liberalizing economy, staffs often act as ambassadors of the institution – in that sense internal communication could act as a conduit for external communication as well. A look at the communication policy of the central banks in advanced countries brings out two important features. Many of the central banks have a monetary policy committee with some form or the other, and many of them have an inflation report and a financial stability report. The question is how far do we need them? While the Inflation Report is a hallmark of many inflation targeting economies, it is by no means universal – the same is also true for financial stability report. Nevertheless, a critical question in this context is publication of the central bank’s forecasts. Almost all central banks have some internal forecasts about the inflation and growth rate of the economy. The inflation targeting countries tend to attach heavy emphasis on the publication of forecasts. These forecasts are based on some economic models, and buttressed by the policy maker’s expectation of future. Thus, when and if, we think in favour of introducing an inflation report for India, we need to sort out the prerequisite of a detailed macro model as well as commitment to a band of inflation – not just a point of time (which in any way is announced in the bi-annual policy statements), bur a path for the year(s) to come. As far as financial stability report is concerned, it is heartening to note that Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2003-04 has introduced a chapter on this topic. As the Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India is a statutory report, the question arises whether we need to introduce an additional financial stability report, or we need to couch the contents of this report suitably, so that it effectively becomes the financial stability report.   8/9  
As far as the monetary policy committees are concerned, it may be noted that the Advisory Group on ‘Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies’ (for the Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes), with Shri M. Narasimham as Chairman and Shri S.S. Tarapore as a member, recommended setting up of a monetary policy committee in RBI.  Consequently, in order to further strengthen the consultative process in monetary policy, the RBI has set up a Technical Advisory Committee on Monetary Policy in July 2005 with external experts in the areas of monetary economics, central banking, financial markets and public finance. The Technical Advisory Committee comprises the Governor as the Chairman, the Deputy Governor in charge of Monetary Policy as an internal member, and four external members in the committee. Other Deputy Governor(s) and any expert depending on the requirement of the subject will be special invitees. The Committee would meet at least once in a quarter. The Technical Advisory Committee is a right step towards enhanced transparency for communication from the RBI. IV. Concluding Observations Central Bank communication has come a long way. From the secretive central bankers, allegations are now made that they are talking too much. Central banks have become more transparent and today there is abundance of material about the central banks’ intended action plan. What is the message then? While nobody doubts that necessity and transparency of central banks communication, the question is how do we go about it? In conclusion, I can do no better but to quote from Adam Posen of the Institute of International Economics, who succinctly summarized the need for central bank communication: “Think of the relationship between a central bank and the attentive public as analogous to the relationship between a married couple. Good communication is key if the relationship is to cope well with the bumps and bruises of everyday life. While familiarity removes the need for too much explicitness in communication, changing surroundings and personal needs over time make it dangerous to take too much previous understanding for granted. Presumably, the relationship is for the long-term, and day-to-day misunderstandings do not imperil the relationship, but they can make it less pleasant or mutually beneficial" (Posen, 2002, p. 3).    9/9  
Ardian Fullani: Experiences of the Bulgarian National Bank in its road towards the ESCB Opening speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor and Chairman of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop Experiences of the Bulgarian National Bank in its road towards the ESCB, organised in cooperation with the Bulgarian National Bank and the GTZ Office, Tirana, 5 September 2005. *      *      * Dear participants, First of all, I would like to say good morning to all of you. Today’s meeting with our Bulgarian friends takes place in the context of several activities that we have recently organised with a clear focus on the future challenges related to the integration process. I am pleased that the fall season of this year starts with this activity and first of all, I avail myself of this opportunity to extend my gratitude to the representatives of the Bulgarian National Bank, the GTZ and to my friend, Professor Bolle. Since the very first days of my appointment to this position, I have publicly declared that Bank of Albania’s institutional preparation in its road towards the ESCB remains our main challenge. Meanwhile, in all the meetings that I have had with the representatives of the regional central banks, as well as with high officials from Brussels and the ECB, I have underlined the idea that the future of the EU will be both more prosperous and unproblematic if the countries on its periphery look not only towards Brussels, but also if they start looking to each other. We – the central banks of the region – should represent an example in this direction. As pioneer institutions of progress, the central banks of the region should cooperate with each other in order to expand the road for a further political, social and economic integration. I believe that the chances for a rapid and secure process of European integration could be accelerated if we will have – among others – a healthy and safe financial and banking system, which should be able to advance the economic development of the country. Nevertheless, in order to materialise the objective for the approximation of their model with that of the EU member states, we hold the opinion that the central banks of the transition countries have more difficult “homeworks” than the classical responsibilities carried out by a central bank. Speaking in more concrete terms, this has to do mainly with the challenges related to the development of markets, with the unification of different norms and standards and with enhancing credibility in the country, thus aiming at the creation of an atmosphere that inspires confidence to foreign investors. Even though they have passed into the consolidation stage, our banking systems still remain fragile, and as such, they require greater commitment and care. Regardless statistical developments, the scale of financial intermediation is relatively low, whereas time after time the shadow of shocks on the economic equilibra shows up itself in different countries. Future changes will not be simple at all, but all of us together, by exchanging experiences and necessities for change, will build a safer environment, which I hope will make future challenges somewhat easier. Granting independence to central banks represents one of the most relevant steps in the financial system reform in the countries of our region, as an important precondition for maintaining inflation under control and becoming an ESCB member. However, our endeavours for the consolidation of the institutional and real independence should be coordinated carefully by taking into consideration the specific features of our economies in transition, and not as a mere implementation of what may seem to be a successful model for the ESCB countries. In this framework, I consider today’s meeting as very important, since the Bulgarian economy and the Bulgarian National Bank have been going through substantial reforms in the context of EU accession. I believe that the challenges that we have faced and those that we will face in the future are more or less the same with those experienced by the Bulgarian authorities, including the Bulgarian National Bank. As a consequence, I think that the bilateral cooperation between our banks carries a high potential, and in the name of my institution, I avail myself of this opportunity to offer maximal guarantees with regard to the fruitful development of these relations.   1/2  
Passing into a multilateral framework, I will return once more to the idea that focuses on the institutionalisation of the inter-regional cooperation between central banks. If we look to the meetings organised with some of the regional banking authorities, the initiative on regional cooperation has been welcomed, but I also believe that time has come to carry out concrete measures towards this cooperation. Judging from my personal experience, not as governor but as a banker, I hold the opinion that it would be appropriate to establish a club of regional central banks. The regular meetings of this club would certainly enable the exchange of experiences and the further strengthening of our cooperation.    2/2  
Y V Reddy: Monetary co-operation in Asia Speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF-MAS High-Level Seminar on Asian Integration, Singapore, 3 September 2005. *      *      * Mr. Chairman and distinguished participants, It is a privilege to be associated with the deliberations on Asian Integration. Singapore very vividly signifies both the diversity and potential for prosperity of the Asian region. We deeply appreciate the hospitality and excellent arrangements made by the IMF and MAS for this High Level Seminar. The discussion paper circulated by the MAS is of high quality and is a very useful document. This session is devoted to subjects of special interest to Central Banks, namely “Enhancing Regional Surveillance and Monetary Co-operation in Asia”. I intend focusing on one of the topics flagged for discussion in this session by the organizers, namely “Is there scope for co-operation or co-ordination on exchange rate policies over the long term?” In this brief presentation, I propose to explore the following areas: First, changing dynamics of exchange rate regimes in Asia; second, importance of the Asian economies for global prosperity and stability; third, the Asian dynamics of financial integration, fourth, the scope for co-operation or  co-ordination on exchange rate policies; and finally, some thoughts specific to the Indian situation. Changing dynamics of exchange rate regimes in Asia In the period prior to the 1997 crisis, many of the Asian economies followed an exchange rate regime of fixed but adjustable pegs. During the East Asian crisis, it was realized that such pegs were quite vulnerable to speculative attacks. Several East Asian economies have adopted different types of exchange rate regimes in the post-crisis period. While some countries continued with pegged regimes, others moved over to some kind of managed floats. Thus, it appears that in most economies of Asia, the weight of experience seems to be tilted in favour of intermediate regimes, and post-crisis, the choice of the exchange rate regimes generally reveals a growing preference for relatively more flexible exchange rates than before. In this regard, given the current state of relatively benign international financial market conditions, it is possible to speculate that as the comfort level of forex reserves as self insurance is reached, and institutions and financial markets in Asian economies acquire further resilience, this shift in preference might grow stronger and wider. The recent moves by the Chinese and the Malaysian authorities would only substantiate such a notion. An intermediate managed floating regime may not sound technically a perfect system but, prima facie, it has proven to be the most pragmatic which explains its popularity. The built-in flexibility allows the domestic currency to be responsive to market forces, while it meets the concern of the authorities for ‘basic stability’ and orderly movement in forex markets. In contrast to a pure float, this mechanism can prevent excessive exchange rate volatility that can have adverse impacts on external trade and investment. In other words, rather than being distracted by a quest for the ‘perfect system’, perhaps it is wise to focus on improving the working of any given float regime. The real issue in this regard relates to how much of a float is envisaged and the nature, magnitudes as well as instruments of its management. These would depend on several factors, especially the changing contours between flexibility and volatility in each economy. The recent record of very impressive growth in Asia has been driven by trade and cross-border investment flows. The rapid strides achieved by China have provided a powerful stimulus for regional expansion. But it is the nature of trade flows as much as their impressive scale that is shaping economic relationships and prospects. While much of this trade involves production of goods, still ultimately destined for the North American and European markets, it also reflects an increased division of labour, product specialization and integration within the region. Together with this, fundamental shifts in economic relations are also taking place. Many of the intra-Asia trade flows, which correspond to the international division of labour between Asian countries, are flows of exports of components and spares but not of finished goods for their end consumers. A crucial question for some countries in the region is the level of income that would   1/4  
enable domestic demand to become the main driving force of growth. As domestic demand, notably household sector demand, becomes the driver of growth, movement to a more flexible exchange rate policy would be feasible. Similarly, as the corporates as well as financial intermediaries, especially banks equip themselves to manage movements in exchange rate, greater flexibility would be feasible, as forex markets also would tend to become less volatile. It is also necessary in this regard to recognize the ‘insurance’ in the form of foreign exchange reserves needed against potentially volatile capital flows which should be sufficient to take care of fluctuations in capital flows and ‘liquidity at risk’. It is generally felt that reserves would act as a circuit breaker for situations when unidirectional expectations become self-fulfilling. The swap arrangements among the Central Banks such as the one under Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI) add to the level of ‘insurance’ and hence to the comfort factor to the Central Banks in dealing with excess volatility in capital flows. Recently there has been considerable expansion in global liquidity but this should not dilute the vigil of policy makers in regard to volatility in capital flows. Very often, it is difficult to assess, ex ante, whether capital flows are temporary or permanent. It is prudent for policy makers to assume that they are reversible till they are proven to be enduring. Impact on real economy of significant reverse movements over a relatively short period could be destabilizing with attendant serious welfare implications. We in Asia are acutely aware of these aspects. Recent sharp upward movements in oil prices in an era of heightened uncertainties is yet another reason for policy makers in Asia to be vigilant. The hikes in oil prices tend to have adverse consequences for growth and prices in several of our economies but they also have significant impact on external sector, encompassing both current and capital accounts. On current account, the trade deficit will tend to widen. On capital account, surpluses generated in oil exporting countries may add to global liquidity and lead to large capital inflows to emerging markets that are net importers of oil. Hence, a careful assessment of the medium term sustainability would be imperative. Over the medium to longer term, the exchange rate regimes and related policies are likely to be influenced by (a) the confidence in the strength of Asian economies; (b) perceived resilience of their economic as well as financial systems; (c) growing economic and financial integration amongst Asian economies; (d) emerging significance of Asian economies in the global economy; (e) the state of international financial architecture and market conditions and (f) policy-induced measures for  co-operation and co-ordination amongst Asian economies. Importance of Asian economies and policies The fact that the Asian economies have recovered swiftly after the crises of 1997 is an important consideration in viewing the future external developments. The growth rate of developing Asia, which had plummeted to 4.2 per cent in 1998, recovered quickly to 6.2 per cent in 1999, rising further to  6.6 percent in the year 2000. In the more recent period, the recovery in the output of the Asian economies has been robust with developing Asia growing by nearly 8 per cent in 2003 and 2004. It is widely recognized that the contribution of Asia to global growth has generally been very impressive in recent years, and may continue to be so, for several years in future. The current account on the balance of payments has been in surplus for many if not all Asian economies. The private capital flows to the emerging Asia have recovered from an outflow of US $ 52 billion in 1998 to an inflow of US $151 billion in 2004. At the same time, the reserve build up in the region has been significant. In the backdrop of the resilience of the Asian economies and their ability to bounce back after a deep financial crisis, there is resurgence of confidence in their future. Strategies in the form of having mutual swap agreements under the Chiang Mai initiative, to guard against speculative attacks, could now be enlarged, and could also be supplemented by greater co-operation and co-ordination in the exchange rate regimes and policies. Indeed, from a longer-term perspective, we must note that Asia is appropriately poised in terms of abundance in factors of production – labour and capital – particularly labour, as the demography is clearly in favour of Asia to sustain a long- term growth. The emergence of surplus factors of production in Asia combined with financial strength would impact prices, wages and exchange rates. Asian economies could explore strategies to evolve a system whereby they could not only prevent and, if necessary, manage financial crises on their own to the extent possible, but also play a more active role in co-ordinating policies with other major developed economies. These arrangements could be consistent with continued and an active role of IMF in international monetary cooperation.   2/4  
It is useful to recall that the acute sense of interdependence aroused by the financial “contagion” in 1997 convinced the Asian economies of the importance of economic cooperation, one that reflected their common interests and priorities as well as strengthened their voice in the global arena. Among others, this led to two parallel movements – one in South Asia in the form of the SAARC Initiative and the other in East Asia reflecting the ASEAN+3 Initiative. The idea of having an integrated financial system so as to provide viable ‘safety net’ in times of crisis germinated. As a result, the idea of “ASEAN + 3” Initiative1 gained prominence. This, in turn, was reflected in two correlated developments. First, in 2000, ASEAN+3 countries mutually agreed to form a network of bilateral swap agreements to provide mutual protection from financial emergencies, popularly known as the Chiang Mai Initiative. More recently, there has been a resurgence in the debate on the formation of an Asian Monetary Fund and the adoption of an Asian Currency Unit. Concomitantly, reflecting the parallel developments under the ASEAN+3 Initiative, there has been wider discussion and debate on the formation of a South Asian Economic Union and a South Asian Development Bank2. Second, the Asian Bond Fund Initiative3 was launched in 2003 reflecting the effort to develop a regional bond market for catering to the medium and long term financing needs of the Asian economies. Asian dynamics of financial integration It is useful to recognize that, there are several important factors that are relevant for considering greater financial integration in Asia. First, the wide diversity in the level of economic development across the region. Second, the divergent level of financial sector development across the region. Third, the limited scope of the existing intra-region resource-pooling mechanism and the lack of institutional frameworks. Fourth, the presence of asynchronous business cycles amongst the countries in the region. Such divergences are aptly reflected in the asymmetric transmission of demand and monetary shocks in the region. There are significant developments that point to emergence of enabling factors for strengthening of economic integration in Asia. First, emerging Asia fares quite well in terms of factor mobility and wage and price flexibility. Second, the trade intensity ratios in emerging Asia, particularly the ASEAN region, are quite high and are likely to accelerate. Further, Foreign Direct Investment flows within the region are significant. Third, tariffs are being brought down rapidly. Fourth, the free trade agreements are expanding and deepening making the prospects of tariff-free and virtual trade integration in Asia sooner than later. Fifth, there is a strong commitment of political leadership in Asia to focus on economic issues. There are regular and frequent close interactions among Central Bank Governors in Asia which should strengthen the process of cooperation. Scope for co-operation and co-ordination The Chiang Mai Initiative is a good starting point to build on the various existing initiatives. Although under the present dispensation the CMI is complementary to similar IMF initiatives, it has an important symbolic value in as much as it can signal the markets a regional commitment to supporting any member country’s currency that is under speculative pressures. It also recognizes that establishing swap arrangements does not obviate the need to address structural and financial sector weaknesses. It may also be added that while CMI might have contributed to the exchange rate stability in the                                                  1 The ASEAN + 3 was formed as a gathering of the governments of ASEAN members, China, Korea and Japan that were Asian members of ASEM, had its first leaders’ meeting in December 1997.  2 The SAARC Council of Ministers meeting held in Islamabad during January 2-3, 2004, desired that the SAARCFINANCE should prepare a concept paper on the proposed South Asian Economic Union and a South Asian Development Bank. 3 The Asian Bond Fund is basically an arrangement for pooling of a portion of foreign exchange reserves of few East Asia and Pacific countries and the Fund portfolio is invested in the liquid US dollar denominated bonds of major Asian economies.   3/4  
region, it has also contributed to closer regional economic and financial integration and co-operation. It is useful to discuss ways of carrying this process forward. There are several fora already established for regional monetary cooperation. The Asian Clearing Union (ACU), which was established in 1974 at the initiative of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP) has eight member central banks. The main objective of the ACU is to provide a facility to settle current international transactions among members on multilateral net settlement basis. The ACU mechanism also provides for a currency swap type mechanism amongst members for trade transactions. ACU aims to promote monetary co-operation amongst the members and has also resulted in closer relations across the banking systems of the member countries. During the last few years trade settled through ACU mechanism has grown at a rate higher than that of total international trade of the member countries.  Yet another forum for exchange of views and experiences, including through visits and training programmes, is SAARCFINANCE. Areas covered in recent months include communication policies and practices of Central Banks and Real Time Gross Settlement systems. The recent policy shift in China from a pegged to a flexible exchange rate regime is a significant development in international finance. This step is a watershed in the financial sector reform process now underway in China. Going by the available indications, China has long-term plans for development of deep and liquid markets in financial assets, which would encompass foreign exchange, bonds, and equities, as also commodities. Some thoughts on India’s approach It may be useful to recall our experience with exchange rate management in India. In September 1975, the Government of India proposed a system of determining the exchange rate based on a basket of five currencies, with weighting, based essentially though not entirely, on trade weights. The permissible range for the exchange rate was 2.25 per cent on either side. The currencies chosen were US Dollar, Pound Sterling, Deutsche Mark, Japanese Yen and SDR. The weights were revised in 1979, 1983 and 1984, though the currency composition broadly remained the same with only one change in 1984 when French Franc replaced SDR. The band, however, was extended from 2.25 to 5.0 per cent in 1979 and from 5 to 10 per cent in 1986. Soon after the devaluation of the rupee in July 1991, there was a move in March 1992 to a regime of partial convertibility (essentially a dual exchange rate). In March 1993 the regime changed to a uniform exchange rate of the rupee which was market-determined – a system which remains in place to date. In August 1994, India moved over to current account convertibility. From the latter part of 1997, India moved to a cautious and well calibrated move towards capital account convertibility. These developments tested the exchange rate regime which proved conducive to growth while maintaining stability. India has been actively participating in the various initiatives in SAARCFINANCE and ACU arrangements. Exchange of views and co-ordination in policies through both formal and informal mechanisms have been the main characteristics of co-operation. India’s trade links with Asia are growing at an unprecedented scale. The stated policy in regard to tariffs is to bring them on par with those of East Asia as soon as feasible. Policy on Free Trade Agreements with countries in Asia, including SAPTA point to the binding forces of greater integration of India into Asia. Launching of negotiations of Free Trade Agreements between ASEAN and India is of historic significance for carrying forward Asian Integration. As part of our policy of communication and to aid researchers and analysts the Reserve Bank of India has been constructing a five-country and 36-country indices for Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER) and Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER). We have decided to review the REER and accordingly we expect a new six-country index to replace the present five-country one. The new index is likely to include the U.S.A., Eurozone, the U.K., Japan, China and Hong Kong. The new index would in that case have two new currencies, both Asian, namely, the Renminbi and the Hong Kong Dollar. The 36-country index already includes the key Asian countries, but its review is likely to result in some enhancement of their weights. This reflects an increasing recognition of the Indian economy’s rapidly growing integration with Asia.    4/4  
Antonio Fazio: Update on the change in the control structure of some Italian banking groups Report by Mr Antonio Fazio, Governor of the Bank of Italy, to the Interministerial Committee for Credit and Savings, Rome, 26 August 2005. *      *      * 1. Introduction. Supervisory procedures and action in the case of transactions involving the capital of banks The controls on the ownership structures of banks contribute, together with the other instruments of prudential supervision, to the pursuit of the objectives of sound and prudent management of intermediaries and the stability, efficiency and competitiveness of the banking and financial system (Article 5 of the Consolidated Law on Banking). Effective performance of the controls has accompanied the international opening of the ownership of Italian banks, which is also significant in comparison with other European countries. The proportion of foreign-owned capital in the four major banking groups averages 16 per cent in Italy, 7 per cent in Germany, 3 per cent in France and 2.6 per cent in Spain. In Italy competition has increased; the range of services offered to customers has broadened; unit operating costs have been reduced. This process is still under way. Under Community and Italian law, the acquisition of shareholdings in banks above given thresholds, which start at 5 per cent, must be authorized by the Bank of Italy; moreover, holdings that allow the exercise of control must always be authorized (Article 19 of the Consolidated Law on Banking). All shareholders’ agreements leading to the coordinated exercise of voting rights at a bank must be notified to the Bank of Italy within five days. Voting rights that are the subject of unreported agreements may not be exercised. The evaluations conducted by the Bank of Italy are intended to prevent major shareholders from exercising their rights to the detriment of the sound and prudent management of the bank. To this end the Bank of Italy takes into account: (a) the characteristics of the parties intending to acquire the holdings; (b) the upper limit of 15 per cent on industrial and commercial companies’ holdings of a bank’s capital and (c) in the event of the acquisition of a controlling interest, the business plan pursued.  If the acquirer is a bank, the evaluation also looks at the operation’s impact on the bank’s overall situation and organization and that of the entity created by the combination (Article 53 of the Consolidated Law on Banking). If the acquirer is an EU bank, Community law requires prior consultation with the supervisory authority of its country of origin, which is responsible for verifying its sound and prudent management. The sustainability of acquisitions is evaluated with reference to prudential regulations, which are based on common international principles; in this regard, capital adequacy with respect to the various forms of risk is of fundamental importance. In particular, the regulations state that banks’ capital, in the composition employed for supervisory purposes, must be equal to at least 8 per cent of their riskweighted assets.1Banking groups are required to report their capital ratios to the Bank of Italy twice a year, with reference to the situation on 30 June and 31 December of each year; these official reports must be sent, respectively, by 25 October and 25 April following the reference date.                                                  1 In the case of banks belonging to banking groups, the minimum capital requirement is lowered to 7 percent (at the “individual” level), while the requirement for the group as a whole remains 8 per cent (at the “consolidated” level). Furthermore, the Bank of Italy also requires the main banking groups to aim for higher capital ratios than the regulatory limits: the so-called target ratios.   1/14  
Compliance with the regulations is verified on the basis not only of statistical reports, but also of information and documents acquired by the Bank of Italy as part of its administrative activity and in the course of interviews with corporate officers. Supervisory inspections can be conducted to obtain further information regarding the management of the bank and the quality of the data transmitted. Community law and supervisory instructions do not exclude the possibility of deviations from regulatory requirements, but require that suitable measures be adopted promptly to restore compliance with the capital ratio.  In the case of business combinations, the Bank of Italy examines the amount of capital available as well as the plans for raising any additional funds that might be needed. The evaluations are made on the basis of the latest balance sheet of the acquirer, audited, in the case of listed banks, by a leading firm of independent auditors; these evaluations are supplemented with information acquired in the course of ordinary supervisory activity and with additional information, data and simulations obtained during meetings with corporate officers or from other sources. In general it is not economically advantageous, in the early stages of planning, for the bank making the acquisition to obtain more funds than are necessary for ordinary operations, not least in view of the substantial progress the capital market has made in recent years; acquiring capital in advance would primarily affect the shareholders, by reducing the return on their capital. The authorizations contain mandatory provisions to coordinate the making of investments in shareholdings with the raising of capital. In order to provide safety margins with respect to the minimum ratios prescribed by the regulations, the Bank of Italy often requires contingency plans for raising further capital to be drawn up, ready for implementation in case of need. The Bank of Italy performs a different evaluation of mergers and acquisitions, entirely separate from the examination of the prudential aspects, by virtue of the powers as antitrust authority for the banking sector entrusted to it under Law 287/1990. I will not go into this aspect in detail because it has no bearing on the facts that are the focus of attention today; in the case of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the opinion of the Antitrust Authority is pending.2The procedures followed by the Bank of Italy in the conduct of its supervisory activity comply with the provisions of Law 241/1990, as amended, which regulate administrative proceedings, making a distinction between the examination stage and the decision-making stage. In the case of business combinations, the Bank of Italy examines the amount of capital available as well as the plans for raising any additional funds that might be needed. The evaluations are made on the basis of the latest balance sheet of the acquirer, audited, in the case of listed banks, by a leading firm of independent auditors; these evaluations are supplemented with information acquired in the course of ordinary supervisory activity and with additional information, data and simulations obtained during meetings with corporate officers or from other sources. In general it is not economically advantageous, in the early stages of planning, for the bank making the acquisition to obtain more funds than are necessary for ordinary operations, not least in view of the substantial progress the capital market has made in recent years; acquiring capital in advance would primarily affect the shareholders, by reducing the return on their capital. The authorizations contain mandatory provisions to coordinate the making of                                                  2 The Antitrust Authority recently asked the parties concerned to provide information about an existing consultation agreement relating to FINSOE, the company controlling UNIPOL, entered into by Monte dei Paschi di Siena, a shareholder in FINSOE, and Holmo Spa, which controls it.   2/14  
investments in shareholdings with the raising of capital. In order to provide safety margins with respect to the minimum ratios prescribed by the regulations, the Bank of Italy often requires contingency plans for raising further capital to be drawn up, ready for implementation in case of need. The Bank of Italy performs a different evaluation of mergers and acquisitions, entirely separate from the examination of the prudential aspects, by virtue of the powers as antitrust authority for the banking sector entrusted to it under Law 287/1990. I will not go into this aspect in detail because it has no bearing on the facts that are the focus of attention today; in the case of the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the opinion of the Antitrust Authority is pending. The procedures followed by the Bank of Italy in the conduct of its supervisory activity comply with the provisions of Law 241/1990, as amended, which regulate administrative proceedings, making a distinction between the examination stage and the decision-making stage. In the interests of a desirable plurality of technical evaluations, these stages have always been characterized by a dialectical approach correlated with functional roles, professional capacities and related responsibilities. The internal regulations prescribe how these dialectical positions are synthesized and regulate the powers and duties of the people authorized to make decisions. 2. Transactions involving the capital of Banca Antoniana Popolare Veneta (Antonveneta) 2.1 Governance structure of Banca Antonveneta During 2004 relations between the members of the shareholders’ agreement governing Banca Antonveneta (ABN Amro, Lloyd Adriatico and some entrepreneurs) became increasingly strained, mainly because of the large number of participants and the diversity of their objectives; in December some of them announced their intention not to renew the agreements upon expiry. Given this situation, ABN Amro, which in June 2004 had expressed an interest in increasing its holding in Antonveneta, signified its willingness to find a solution for the bank’s governance that would safeguard its investment; on the other hand, Banca Popolare di Lodi (BPL) informed the Bank of Italy that it intended to put itself forward as reference shareholder in the search for new governance arrangements for Antonveneta. From the point of view of the Bank of Italy, the uncertainties surrounding the evolution of Banca Antonveneta’s ownership structure threatened to destabilize its management policies, thereby undermining the effectiveness of the ongoing internal reorganization and enhancement of the bank’s balance-sheet assets; this process had been initiated recently by the management in order to solve the considerable operating and organizational problems from which Antonveneta had been suffering for some time;the consolidated profit and loss account for 2003 closed with a loss of €842 million, partly as a result of substantial value adjustments to loans. In 2004 it showed a profit of €282 million. Against this background of uncertainty, ABN Amro and BPL were repeatedly urged to reach an agreement that would ensure the sound and prudent management of Banca Antonveneta. Contacts between the two parties in the early months of 2005 nonetheless failed to produce mutually acceptable solutions regarding either the governance of the bank or commercial agreements; on the contrary they led to an acceleration of plans by both parties to undertake transactions involving the capital of Banca Antonveneta.   3/14  
2.2 BPL’s application to increase its shareholding to 14.9 per cent of Banca Antonveneta’s capital On 4 February BPL gave the Bank of Italy prior notification of a plan to acquire 14.9 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. A formal application was sent on 11 February; the Bank of Italy granted authorization on 14 February, ten days after the notification. The capital needed to ensure the sustainability of the transaction was to come from an existing surplus of own funds and the forthcoming issue of a €300 million subordinated loan for which authorization had already been obtained. The plan drawn up by BPL to strengthen its capital base by issuing additional instruments was designed to maintain a high solvency ratio even after the investment. Since the issue of the capital instruments announced by BPL would take a few weeks, in the authorization measure the bank was invited to proceed gradually in acquiring the shareholdings; the document contained a further request that additional measures to strengthen capital be scheduled for the end of 2005 to take account of the effects of the application of the new International Accounting Standards. In the weeks after 14 February technical meetings were held to discuss the proposed issue of capital instruments with innovative features; the Bank of Italy requested additional documentation and after careful examination demanded changes to the transaction; consequently the preparation of the issue took longer than initially planned. 2.3 ABN Amro’s applications for authorization On 15 March 2005 ABN Amro informed the Bank of Italy, in its prior notification, that it was interested in acquiring control of Banca Antonveneta through a complete-acquisition tender offer. ABN Amro sent the official request for authorization, accompanied by the prescribed documentation, to the Bank of Italy on 30 March. In compliance with the requirements of European legislation and the supervisory Instructions, the Bank of Italy, after subjecting the documents to a preliminary examination, on 12 April applied to the Dutch supervisory authority for information regarding ABN Amro. On 12 April ABN Amro requested authorization to hold shares in excess of the thresholds of 15 and  20 per cent of capital, on the grounds that it wished to ensure the success of its bid. One complex point that arose in the course of the examination was the fact that ABN Amro was in possession of bonds convertible into Antonveneta shares; conversion of these bonds would have had major effects on the ownership structure and governance of Antonveneta. On 19 April, seven days after the formal application was made, the Bank of Italy authorized ABN Amro to increase its shareholding in Banca Antonveneta to 20 percent. At the time it was not possible to give permission to go beyond that threshold: authorization to do so would have placed the Dutch bank in a position to increase its holding to the next threshold prescribed by the regulations, 33 per cent; attainment of that threshold would have made a tender offer mandatory, whereas the application to gain control of Antonveneta by means of a voluntary tender offer was still being evaluated. On 20 April ABN Amro formally undertook not to exceed 30 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital, thereby making the potential bond conversion into the bank’s shares irrelevant for the purpose of calculating ABN Amro’s total shareholding. On 27 April the Bank of Italy authorized ABN Amro to acquire up to  30 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. On 6 May, once the necessary analyses and verifications and the consultation with the Dutch authorities had been completed, ABN Amro was authorized to take control of Banca Antonveneta. The examination, which began with ABN Amro’s prior notification on 15 March, lasted 52 days; starting from the date of the formal application for authorization, which was   4/14  
submitted on 30 March, the inquiry lasted 37 days; 17 days were taken up by the consultation with the Dutch authorities. The tender offer terminated on 22 July 2005, with the shares tendered amounting to just over 2 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. ABN Amro publicly announced its intention to return the shares acquired during the tender offer and that it was not interested in remaining a minority shareholder in Banca Antonveneta. 2.4 BPL’s additional investment On 31 March BPL announced its intention to increase its shareholding in Antonveneta to 29.9 per cent and submitted a formal application for authorization on 4 April. During the technical meetings held to assess whether BPL had sufficient capital, the Bank of Italy asked the bank’s officers to explain how the capital requirements would be met. They replied that steps would be taken to match the disbursement with actions to strengthen the capital base; proposals included the use of securities lending and the pledges of shares in order to acquire voting rights of the order of 10 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital; the sale to foreign banks of minority shareholdings in companies controlled by the group for an overall value of around €1 billion; and additions to the subordinated loans already planned. Finally, in a longer term perspective, a substantial capital increase was envisaged to support the bank’s growth plans. The estimates submitted by BPL showed the investment to be sustainable. The cost of acquiring the entire 29.9 per cent share in Banca Antonveneta’s capital was estimated at around €2 billion, while the new capital resources that were the subject of the two applications for authorization amounted to €2,275 million, later raised to €2,380 million. At the end of the transaction the bank’s capital ratio would stand at 10.3 per cent. On 7 April authorization was granted, seven days after the start of the examination of the application. Even assuming unfavourable developments regarding certain variables, acquisition of the shareholding appeared compatible with the sound and prudent management of the BPL group. After obtaining authorization for the shareholding, BPL asked the Bank of Italy to approve the issue of the instruments to strengthen its capital base described in the application and to include them in the computation of supervisory capital. The Bank of Italy called for changes in the terms and conditions of the issues, so that they would have standard technical features; the authorizations were granted in measures adopted after examinations lasting up to one month. In the meantime the Bank of Italy held several technical meetings to keep abreast of developments in the capital strengthening plan and, in particular, the sale of minority holdings of companies belonging to the group. On 29 April BPL’s shareholding reached 29.5 per cent of Antonveneta’s capital. On 30 April the shareholders’ meeting of Banca Antonveneta renewed the governing bodies and appointed members put forward by BPL. Subsequently, according to the documents produced by BPL at the beginning of May, it was found that the acquisitions had been effected with less recourse to securities lending and pledges of shares than originally proposed; moreover, it appeared that the timetable for the sale of minority shareholdings had not been respected. As a consequence, from April of this year the capital ratios were briefly out of line, although the shortfall was subsequently removed. These circumstances have no bearing on the effects of the authorization already granted by the Bank of Italy, as confirmed by the recent decision of the Lazio Administrative Court dated 13-19 July and filed on 9 August, but they are relevant for sanctions. The relative investigations, which began immediately, concluded with a formal notice issued on 29 July to the members of BPL’s board of directors and board of auditors.   5/14  
2.5 BPL’s takeover bids for Antonveneta On 22 April Banca Popolare di Lodi gave the Bank of Italy prior notification of a plan to acquire control of Banca Antonveneta by means of an exchange tender offer. The formal application was filed on 5 May. Preliminary estimates showed that BPL’s capital ratios after the acquisition would have been above the regulatory minimum regardless of the amount of shares tendered. Moreover, the planned capital increase of €1.5 billion would have further increased the capital surpluses. In April Consob, with which the Bank of Italy had begun cooperating in February with regard to the transactions involving Antonveneta’s capital, intensified its checks. Among other matters, Consob informed the Bank of Italy of the acquisition of Antonveneta shares by BPL on behalf of a number parties. Consob investigated this activity on the basis first of information requested from BPL and then of inspections and the Central Credit Register data it requested on two occasions from the Bank of Italy. The requests for Central Credit Register data were transmitted on 20 April and 4 May and satisfied by the Bank of Italy in six and two working days respectively. With a resolution dated 10 May Consob, proceeding on its own authority, found that an undeclared shareholders’ agreement existed between BPL and other Antonveneta shareholders for the concerted acquisition of Antonveneta shares and the exercise, individually or jointly, of a dominant influence over Antonveneta; the resolution also drew attention to the manner in which loans had been granted for the purchase of Antonveneta shares. The Bank of Italy promptly notified the suspension of voting rights to the persons indicated in the Consob resolution and initiated the administrative sanction procedure against them for violations of the provisions concerning the notification of shareholders’ agreements to the Bank of Italy and the authorization to acquire major shareholdings. Furthermore, judging that there had been instances of non-compliance with the rules on credit management, the Bank of Italy initiated an additional sanction procedure against BPL. The Consob resolution, which was transmitted to the Bank of Italy in a letter dated 11 May, substantially modified the information available to the Bank; the obligation to make a tender offer, with a further outlay of cash, altered the overall context of the supervisory evaluations. On 17 May BPL, conforming with the obligations resulting from Consob’s finding, applied to the Bank of Italy to authorize the mandatory cash tender offer as well and transformed the exchange tender offer for which it had applied for authorization on 5 May into a cash and exchange tender offer basically similar in content to the exchange tender offer. At the same time BPL executed a shareholders’ agreement among the persons indicated in the Consob resolution, which was notified pursuant to Article 20 of the Consolidated Law on Banking. On 2 June the shareholders’ meeting of Banca Popolare di Lodi approved a €1.5 billion capital increase; on the same occasion the name of the bank was changed to Banca Popolare Italiana (BPI). The offering terminated on 15 July with an acceptance rate of 99 per cent, which took the capital ratios well above the regulatory minimums. In view of the uncertainties regarding the transactions for the capital cover of the mandatory tender offer, on 8 June the Bank of Italy asked BPI to submit documents on the actions intended to ensure that the 8 per cent requirement would continue to be satisfied after the acquisition. In addition, the Bank formalized some especially stringent guidelines that BPI was to follow in order to ensure that the bank’s capital base could sustain the mandatory tender offer. BPI responded to the requests by providing updates and documents on the capital strengthening needed to sustain the acquisition of control of Banca Antonveneta.   6/14  
Lastly, on 20 June the Bank of Italy initiated an inspection of a general nature at BPI, inter alia with the aim of checking, in connection with the acquisitions, the bank’s capital ratios, its credit disbursement and management procedures and its statistical reports. The first checks concerned the amount of BPI’s own funds. The latter initiative came after the start on 9 June of an inspection at Antonveneta to check whether the functioning of the bank’s ordinary operations had been impaired by the temporary uncertainty stemming from the precautionary suspension of the shareholders’ resolution of 30 April renewing Banca Antonveneta’s governing bodies, ordered by the Court of Padua on 21 May. The inspection ended on 24 June without significant findings. 2.6 The examination of BPI’s proposed tender offers. The examination, conducted according to the criteria and methods referred to above, focused principally on three aspects material to the granting of authorization to acquire control of Antonveneta: a) the BPI group’s capital adequacy; b) BPI’s “quality” as a shareholder, taking account of the above-mentioned Consob resolution and the consequent steps taken by the Bank of Italy; and c) the checks carried out by the Bank of Italy regarding the conduct in connection with the temporary shortfall of BPI’s capital ratio. On the last two points the Bank of Italy continued to avail itself of the advice of authoritative jurists who had collaborated with it from the start of the Antonveneta case. Recourse was made to outside experts in view of the complexity of the factors to be evaluated, the novelty of the case and the extremely specialized nature of the matter, including its practical application. Professors Agostino Gambino, Massimo Luciani, Fabio Merusi and Paolo Ferro-Luzzi collaborated; Professors Gambino and Luciani were part of the Bank of Italy’s defence team in the trial before the Lazio Administrative Court. The examination began by estimating the overall capital ratio at 30 June on the basis of the documentation and statements produced at the time by BPI. The ratio was found to be equal to  9.2 per cent on the more restrictive assumption that the shareholding already held would be consolidated using the equity method; if it were not consolidated, taking into account the intervening suspension of the voting rights attaching to it and the absence of BPI representatives on Antonveneta’s board of directors, BPI’s capital ratio would have been higher than 11 per cent. Considering the capital strengthening measures envisaged by BPI, and particularly the capital increase of €1.5 billion then under way, it was found that the bank’s capital base could sustain the transaction in the event of the tender offers succeeding. However, the examination also revealed uncertainties as regards the situation that would emerge with the year-end application of the International Accounting Standards, due to put options issued by BPI to third parties on shares of group companies and the commitment to purchase Antonveneta shares owned by the other parties to the shareholders’ agreement. As regards the conduct deemed material for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements for the quality of the shareholders and sound and prudent management, an initial phase of the examination found questionable conduct in business dealings by shareholders of Antonveneta, in relation to the facts brought to light by the Consob resolution of 10 May and the checks carried out by the Bank of Italy.  For a fuller evaluation of the facts, the analysis of these aspects was usefully supplemented by the observations already made by the legal advisors; the results of a further consultation contributed significant elements for an appreciation of the case from the standpoint of the granting of authorization. The convergent opinions of the legal advisors, authoritative and expert in the matter, were considered to overcome the various doubts that had arisen in the first phase of the   7/14  
examination and to provide a correct interpretation of the letter and the spirit of Italian and Community legislation. On 11 July 2005 the Bank of Italy authorized BPI to acquire control of Antonveneta, giving an ample account of the grounds for its decision in the authorization measure. The integration of the two banks as envisaged in the business plan presented positive aspects from the supervisory point of view, considering the significant synergies that would arise, partly as a consequence of the new group’s strong territorial roots. On the basis of the advisors’ opinion, the authorization measure recalled the necessary autonomy of the Bank of Italy’s evaluation of matters able to impair sound and prudent management with respect to the above-mentioned Consob resolution. It was observed that the law provides for the mandatory tender offer as an ex post remedy in favour of minority shareholders; accordingly, a comparison of the different interests led to the conclusion that the consequences of denial of authorization were so serious that such a course was possible only if the applicant bank was found to be manifestly unsuitable, to an extent that rendered the threat to the target bank’s stability obvious. In addition, separate evaluations were made of the conduct of the bank’s corporate officers and the “reliability” of the bank. According to the approach adopted, the conduct was punishable with administrative sanctions. The imposition of an administrative sanction does not affect the reliability of the bank, which is the effective applicant for authorization and its ability to ensure sound and prudent management is not in question. As regards the conduct in question, the sanction procedure had already been initiated by the Bank of Italy. Similar considerations hold for the temporary shortfall of the capital ratio, since, as noted earlier, this had been made good in full and the Bank of Italy had already initiated the administrative sanction procedure for violation of the rules on capital requirements. With regard to BPI’s prospective capital adequacy, account was taken of its formal commitments to meet any need for a further strengthening of its own funds and of the feasibility of the steps it envisaged. At all events the Bank of Italy expressly required BPI to: – launch the cash/cash and exchange tender offer once the conditions for the successful outcome of the capital increase then under way had been verified; – reformulate the shareholders’ agreement between BPI and the other shareholders of Antonveneta, so as to avert a negative impact on capital adequacy with the entry into force of the International Accounting Standards for supervisory purposes; – modify the agreements concluded with Société Genérale, Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank for the transfer to them of up to 30 per cent of the Antonveneta shares acquired in the cash tender offer for subsequent resale on the market and reduce the market risk borne by BPI; – take every step that might be necessary in the future to ensure compliance with the prudential rules. The examination began on 22 April with the prior notification transmitted by BPI and lasted 80 days. From the date the first formal application was submitted (5 May), it lasted 67 days, including the period in which the time limit was suspended. Meanwhile, the Bank of Italy and Consob continued to exchange information and documentation in the context of their ordinary cooperation. The Bank of Italy described in detail the fact-finding activities it had begun and the checks and inspections under way, notifying Consob of each decision it made concerning BPI’s acquisition of control of Antonveneta.   8/14  
2. Actions under administrative law and the ruling of the Lazio Administrative Court Between April and June ABN Amro decided to apply for legal remedies, requesting, among other things, the annulment or revocation of the authorizations issued by the Bank of Italy to BPL (now BPI) whereby the latter had been progressively authorized to raise its holding in Banca Antonveneta to 29.9 per cent. These applications were examined by the Lazio Administrative Court, which on 28 April dismissed the applicant’s request for suspension of the authorizations and then issued its ruling on the merits of the case, dated 13-19 July and filed on 9 August. The Administrative Court recognized the full legitimacy of the acts of the Bank of Italy. The judges preliminarily excluded that BPL had been granted favoured treatment with the issue of its authorizations in less time than had been taken for ABN Amro, since the two applications involved different situations (BPL’s directed towards the acquisition of minority albeit qualifying holdings, ABN Ambro’s towards the acquisition of control), that merited distinct evaluations. In this regard, I recall that the examination for the granting of authorization to acquire control of Antonveneta lasted 52 days for ABN Ambro and 80 days for BPI. In stating the grounds for its ruling, the Administrative Court underscored that the go-ahead for the transaction was “formulated in such as way as to reconcile the preeminent needs of banking supervision with the characteristic dynamism of market transactions”, and affirmed that the authorization for BPI to increase its interest in Antonveneta up to 29.9 per cent came at the end of “an examination that appears to have been complete and appropriate” and that the Bank of Italy had evaluated the sustainability of the transaction from the “standpoint of sound and prudent management”. Furthermore, the Court confirmed the correctness of the conduct of the Bank of Italy, on the grounds that “the Bank of Italy is required to verify not so much the current amount of the applicant’s own funds in relation to the entire planned acquisition, as the adequacy and practical feasibility of the proposed plan for capital strengthening, thereby making a forecast, with a high degree of technical discretion, in which its institutional functions are ultimately manifested”. The Administrative Court also explicitly ruled that supervisory indications imparted at the time of granting an authorization are not conditions for the effectiveness of the authorization; they constitute accessory elements by way of guidance. Consequently, supervening developments do not impinge on the effects of the authorization measure or its legitimacy, but are relevant, on a different plane, for the Bank of Italy’s powers of control and sanction with regard to compliance with its prescriptive supervisory instructions. The Bank of Italy based its activity on these principles again in authorizing BPL to acquire control of Banca Antonveneta. 2.8 Events following the granting of authorization for BPI to acquire control Following the authorization measure of 11 July, Consob ascertained the existence of an undeclared agreement between BPI and Magiste International for the concerted purchase of Banca Antonveneta shares and the exercise, possibly on a joint basis, of a dominant influence over that bank, as well as the interposition of two foreign funds in some purchases of Antonveneta shares made prior to 30 April 2005. In this case too the Bank of Italy notified suspension of the voting rights and initiated the administrative sanction procedure under the Consolidated Law on Banking in connection with   9/14  
the relevant matters indicated in the Consob resolutions, which included the management of BPI’s finance area. On 26 July the decree issued by the Milan public prosecutor’s office for the sequestration of the Antonveneta shares owned by the parties to the shareholders’ agreements, including BPI, was notified to the Bank of Italy. According to the investigators, some financial transactions carried out in order to comply with the capital ratios, particularly the sales of minority shareholdings, had been merely artificial. On 27 July Consob ordered the precautionary suspension of both the cash tender offer and the cash and exchange tender offer made by Banca Popolare Italiana.Moreover, the supervisory inspections begun at BPI on 20 June revealed credit derivative agreements with a maturity of one year entered into with the London branch of Deutsche Bank; according to the interim reports of 29 July and 8 August by the head of the inspection team, the transaction may have been executed without following normal internal procedures. In view of the links between the credit derivatives and the minority shareholdings sold, the effect of the disposals carried out to strengthen BPI’s capital base may be substantially annulled. At the Bank of Italy’ request the company’s governing bodies are making the necessary checks.  On 30 July the Bank of Italy had already ordered the suspension for up to ninety days of BPI’s authorization to acquire control of Antonveneta, considering it necessary to make a further examination of the effects of subsequent developments on the evaluations included in the authorization measure of 11 July 2005. 2.9 The situation of BPI’s capital ratios The current situation of the BPI group, taking account of the recently executed capital increase of €1.5 billion, shows a substantial surplus of capital with respect to the minimum requirements. The surplus is estimated at €2.3 billion, with an overall capital ratio of 15.8 per cent. If on the basis of the further examinations now under way it should be necessary to sterilize the benefits to the capital ratios of the above-mentioned disposals of minority shareholdings, the surplus is estimated to be €1 billion and the overall capital ratio to be 11.3 per cent in the absence of corrective measures. If BPI were to sell the Antonveneta shares in its possession, this would lead to a substantial increase in the capital surplus, to €4.4 billion, and in the overall ratio, to 22.5 per cent; in the event that the effects of the above-mentioned disposals of shareholdings were sterilized, these figures would be €3 billion and 18 per cent respectively. A revival of the cash tender offer cannot be independent of the prompt execution of the further measures of capital strengthening already approved by the company’s governing bodies and authorized by the Bank of Italy (a capital increase of €300 million, a €400 million issue of preference shares and conversion of the €1,200 million convertible subordinated loan). The need for full compliance with the Bank of Italy’s guidance for dealing with the prospective impact of the application of the International Accounting Standards remains unaffected. The Bank of Italy is following the development of the situation and will adopt the measures falling within its sphere of competence, taking account of the decisions that will be made by the company’s governing bodies.    10/14  
3. Transactions involving the capital of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro  3.1 Governance structure of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro. In April 2004 some BNL shareholders - Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA), Assicurazioni Generali and Dorint-Della Valle - concluded a shareholders’ agreement concerning the management of the bank covering a total of 28.39 per cent of BNL’s share capital (the “pact”). In July 2004 other non-bank, non-financial shareholders of BNL entered into a rival shareholders’ agreement (the “counterpact”), which among other things regulated the way in which the voting rights attaching to their ordinary shares would be exercised; the share capital covered by the counterpact increased progressively from an initial 13.5 per cent to 27.7 per cent. Individually, the parties to the counterpact owned shareholdings that did not exceed 5 per cent. Consequently, their share purchases were not subject to prior authorization by the Bank of Italy and were in compliance with the ceiling designed to ensure separation between banking and commerce. This ceiling does not apply to shareholders’ pacts as such. The existence of two opposing pacts gave rise to a state of conflict within the body of shareholders and the board of directors of BNL, engendering uncertainty in the management and operation of the bank and impeding initiatives for its revival and growth. 3.2 Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria’s application for authorization to acquire control of BNL On 18 March 2005 BBVA gave the Bank of Italy prior notification of its intention to acquire a controlling interest in BNL by means of a voluntary exchange tender offer for all of BNL’s ordinary shares. On 13 May, after completing the required consultation procedure with the Bank of Spain and receiving clarifications from BBVA concerning the procedure for the exchange tender offer and its business plan for BNL, the Bank of Italy authorized BBVA to acquire, by means of an exchange tender offer, a holding of more than 50 per cent of BNL’s share capital. The application process lasted a total of 56 days, from the prior notification on 18 March to the authorization on 13 May. Counting from 29 March, the date on which the formal application for authorization was submitted, the process took 45 days, including a suspension of 19 days for consultation with the Spanish supervisory authority and for the acquisition of additional information from BBVA. In a note dated 30 May BBVA asked the Bank of Italy to modify the authorization issued on 13 May by eliminating the requirement to exceed the 50 per cent threshold. In a note dated 10 June the Bank of Italy responded that if as a result of the exchange tender offer BBVA were to acquire a holding of less than 50 per cent of BNL’s share capital, the Bank of Italy would evaluate the suitability of the new ownership structure to carry out the necessary reorganization. The major strategic and operational investments necessary to relaunch BNL require an ownership structure that can ensure stable management and effective policymaking, ultimately to safeguard the savings entrusted to the bank by its depositors. Similar considerations had in the meantime been set forth on 7 June in a note to the Minister for Community Policies in response to a specific request from the European Commission for clarifications concerning the 13 May authorization. Appreciation for the information provided by the Bank of Italy was expressed in a letter from the Competition Directorate-General on 13 July.   11/14  
On 14 July the Bank of Italy granted the application that BBVA had made on 16 June to acquire up to 30 per cent of BNL’s share capital through its exchange tender offer, independently of acquisition of a majority holding. In response to BBVA’s further request for recognition of its de facto control of BNL if its holding exceeded the 30 per cent threshold, the Bank of Italy reaffirmed the need to await the outcome of the exchange tender offer in order to verify the Spanish bank’s actual exercise of control. The tender offer expired on 22 July. Acceptances amounted to around 1 per cent of BNL’s share capital. BBVA announced that it would not acquire the shares if they were not enough to attain the majority of BNL’s share capital, thus implicitly acknowledging the failure of the exchange tender offer. 3.3 UNIPOL’s initiative On 11 May and 30 June UNIPOL Assicurazioni and its parent company Holmo S.p.A. requested authorization to increase their holding of BNL shares first to 9.99 per cent and then to 14.99 per cent. The stated purpose of these purchases was to acquire a large, stable holding in order, among other things, to safeguard the investment in BNL Vita, an insurance joint venture controlled by UNIPOL and BNL. In relation to each application, the Bank of Italy asked ISVAP, the supervisory authority for the insurance industry, for information on the strength of the insurance group. On 25 May and again on 13 July ISVAP pronounced a judgement of “suitability”, attesting the sustainability of UNIPOL’s planned investment in financial and capital terms. Authorizations to increase the holding were issued on 27 May and 15 July. A copy of each decision was also transmitted to Consob. On 17 July 2005 the boards of directors of UNIPOL and its parent company Holmo resolved to acquire control of BNL. The explanation adduced for this initiative was the impossibility of reaching a satisfactory agreement with BBVA on the operation of BNL Vita and establishing forms of cooperation with the parties to the counterpact. In the course of the contacts following the prior notification of this intention the Bank of Italy had emphasized the desirability of extending the project to include banking or financial partners of high standing in a position to contribute to the growth of the volume of business. The acquisition of control is to be achieved by means of a mandatory tender offer for 59 per cent of BNL’s ordinary share capital following the conclusion on 18 July of a shareholders’ agreement, notified to the market on the same day, between UNIPOL and other BNL shareholders (some cooperatives, Banca Carige, Nomura and Hopa). The agreement, which covers 30.86 per cent of BNL’s share capital, makes a tender offer mandatory under Article 109 of the Consolidated Law on Finance. The offer is to be made exclusively by UNIPOL, with the other parties to the shareholders’ agreement jointly and severally liable. Other shareholders’ and bilateral agreements, also entered into on 18 July 2005, govern the acquisition and sale of BNL shares by the parties thereto. The agreement with Crédit Suisse First Boston International also outlines joint business and financial plans. On 4 August the UNIPOL insurance group submitted its formal request to the Bank of Italy for authorization to acquire control of BNL. As UNIPOL specified, the aim of the transaction is to create a highly integrated banking and insurance conglomerate of uniquely large size in the Italian financial market. The Bank of Italy requested the opinion of ISVAP concerning the civil law implications of the transaction and the operating and financial adequacy of the insurance group and its ability to create an organizational and operational framework meeting the needs of the reorganization and relaunching of BNL. The Bank of Italy informed UNIPOL that the time limit for responding to the request for authorization was suspended pending receipt of ISVAP’s opinion. The Bank’s relations with   12/14  
ISVAP are conducted under the principle of cooperation laid down in Article 7 of the Consolidated Law on Banking. If the takeover succeeds, the provisions of Community law on the supplementary supervision of financial conglomerates, recently transposed into Italian law (Legislative Decree 142 of 30 May 2005), will apply.  On 16 August UNIPOL submitted its draft offer document to Consob for the latter’s evaluation prior to clearance for publication and issued a press release summarizing the characteristics of the tender offer. On 19 August the Bank of Italy asked UNIPOL for supplementary information on its business plan, with reference among other things to the strategic and operating and financial aspects, the distribution networks, and the information procedures and systems. 4. The merger of Unicredit with the German bank HVB  On 12 June 2005 the Boards of Directors of Unicredit and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG (HVB), with a preliminary notification to the Bank of Italy, approved the integration of the two groups. The plan envisages an exchange tender offer by Unicredit for all of HVB’s share capital. The Italian and German supervisory authorities, after a top-level meeting in Rome on 28 June, coordinated their respective procedures for authorization, which was granted on 21 July after a thorough technical investigation that in some parts included joint work by the two institutions. The exchange tender offer is expected to start at the end of August and close at the end of October. The HVB group consists of the German parent company (the country’s second largest bank in terms of assets) and a number of subsidiary banks, mostly located in Central and Eastern Europe; the most important are Bank Austria (the largest bank in Austria) and BPH (the fourth-largest bank in Poland). The combination would create one of the largest banking groups in the euro area. It would have total assets of €730 billion and yearly operating profits of around €8 billion. The new group would be highly diversified both geographically and by customer segment. Forty per cent of its credit risk would stem from exposures in Germany, 30 per cent in Italy, 15 per cent in Austria and 10 per cent in the Central and Eastern European countries. Since Unicredit already boasts a major presence in Central and Eastern Europe, the new group would have especially large market shares in Croatia (34 per cent), Bulgaria (24 per cent), Bosnia (22 per cent) and Poland (17 per cent). Thanks to the future synergies laid out in the operating and financial plan, it is expected that in 2007 the new group will have a gross operating profit of €11.8 billion and net profits of €6 billion. ROE would be 18 per cent. A specific agreement between the parties settles the principal questions regarding the management of the new group: the registered office and most of the administrative headquarters of the parent company will be in Italy; the chairman of the board of the parent company, with non-executive functions, will be the present chairman of the management board of HVB; the CEO will be the present CEO of Unicredito Italiano; and the chairman and the majority of the members of the HVB Supervisory Board will be designated by Unicredit. Under European law, the Bank of Italy will exercise consolidated supervision over the new group, in accordance with the guidelines issued recently by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors for cooperation between authorities in the supervision of international banking groups.3                                                 3 CEBS CP 09, Guidelines for co-operation between consolidating supervisors and host supervisors, July 2005.   13/14  
* * * The description of the bids for control of Banca Antonveneta and Banca Nazionale del Lavoro presented to this Committee, which is the institutionally competent forum, has highlighted in particular the timing of the exercise of powers of authorization and control. The correctness of the decisions and conduct has to be gauged by their conformity with the law. No other parameters exist. Anything beyond this does not pertain to the set of factors to be taken into consideration, especially in an institutional forum such as this. The Bank of Italy has complied scrupulously with Community and Italian law and with the relevant regulatory and supervisory provisions. The ruling of the Lazio Administrative Court, with its description of the criteria that constantly guided the Bank’s action, fully recognizes this. Without in any way infringing on the powers or organs of the State, first and foremost Parliament, to which we pay the most respectful attention, we believe that detailed knowledge of the steps taken by the Bank of Italy will help to foster agreement on the consistency of the course that the Bank has followed. The Bank of Italy performs its activity of monitoring and oversight, always ready, when the conditions require, to activate its specific powers.    14/14  
Sunil Mendis: Financial system stability and Basel II - the way forward Inaugural address by the Chief Guest Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 17th Anniversary Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 28 August 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen  It is an honour for me to be invited to give the keynote address at this forum of eminent bankers in Sri Lanka and distinguished persons from the international banking arena.   I am happy to see our friends from the Reserve Bank of India and from the Basel Committee who will no doubt make this convention very lively for discussion on a subject which concerns us all.    As Central Bankers we have a common interest in ensuring financial stability which impacts upon the macroeconomic performance.  Further, as monetary policy transmission takes place through the financial institutions for the achievement of its target of economic and price stability, the Central Bank has the responsibility for ensuring that the financial system as a whole is sound.  It should be strong enough to withstand internal and external shocks.   We must ensure that our payments and settlements system is protected from the risk of failure at any cost since it is the conduit through which our economic business and commercial activity is facilitated.  The causes and consequences of the recent Asian financial crises are still vivid in our minds and we from our part, as professional bankers, must endeavor to ensure that they are not repeated. The Central Banks can use both preventive measures and corrective action to maintain financial stability.  A constant and continuous monitoring of risks is a preventive measure.  Crisis resolution is a corrective action.  A strong regulatory regime would ensure the former and a financial safety net is an essential component of the latter.  The two supplement each other.  The cooperation of all parties concerned in both these actions is of paramount importance in maintaining financial system stability.   In Sri Lanka, as in most emerging economies, we have a bank dominated financial system.  Therefore, ensuring banking soundness will inevitably lead to financial system soundness.  The recent initiatives taken in this regard are significant – we have enhanced capital requirements to reflect the increased leverage in the industry.  Even regulatory capital is at a comfortable margin above the international norm but is still only 10% of risk assets which is the absolute minimum should these risks materialize.  Therefore, increasing the minimum capital requirements would provide a healthy platform for growth and expansion of banking business.  However, capital is the last line of defence.  The more immediate needs are good corporate governance and good risk management which will steer the banking system towards good financial health. A sound corporate governance regime would seek to promote the highest standards of professional behaviour and integrity. Policies should be implemented to prohibit any behaviour or relationship that diminishes its quality. This is very often evident in conflicts of interest, connected lending, which is not on an arms length, and preferential treatment to related parties.  The independence of directors too is crucial where directors should have the ability to exercise objective judgement, regardless of board structures or ownership structures. Well established corporate governance committees such as the Board Audit Committee which oversees the bank’s internal auditors, with objectivity and independence, should   1/2  
comprise of non-executive members of the Board who have the requisite knowledge that is commensurate with the complex nature of the banking institution. Independent, competent and qualified auditors is an essential pre-requisite of good corporate governance which would achieve a number of important objectives.  It would ensure timely identification of risks and the publication of financial statements which accurately represent the financial position and performance of the bank.  Auditors should understand their duty to the bank and its stakeholders to exercise due professional care in the conduct of audits.  In this connection, we have, in the recent past, strengthened the relationship of auditors with the regulator and the company to benefit from each others’ capabilities, expertise and knowledge.   Basel II has attempted to capture all these critical aspects into the new accord.  A bank’s own assessment of its capital needs, coupled with the regulator’s assessment of the adequacy of capital, which would encompass all other aspects of its operations, apart from credit, would ensure adequate capital to insulate the bank against its risk exposure.  After all, managing risk is fast becoming the single most important issue for the regulators as well as for the institutions that are regulated.  Therefore, Basel II is good news and we can only benefit mutually from its adoption.  A roadmap is therefore already drawn up and we hope we can all commence our journey down this road to reach our goal of a safe and sound banking system resulting in financial stability which is what we all aspire. As you are all aware, our banking community is in the process of adopting the standardized approach within Basel II by 2007.  However, the major challenge faced by the banks in the next few years, are the IT, skills development and training that are required to implement the more advanced approach which relies heavily on quantitative techniques.  It is imperative, therefore, that banks start getting ready for this eventuality sooner, than later. Basel II should not be looked at as an exercise in compliance but as an impetus to more efficient risk management across the banking sector.  Its benefits would be seen in the ability of the financial system, to promote sustainable economic growth which would be beneficial to the banks, the central bank and to the consumers of banking business. It would naturally require commitment of substantial capital and human resources from both the banks and the regulators.  We should all work together, therefore, to achieve these goals.  This should not only be the objective of the Central Bank as we are all guardians of financial stability – I trust this conference will provide an adequate forum for open discussion.  Thank you.    2/2  
Paul A Acquah: The ECOWAS Trade Liberalization Scheme Welcome remarks by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana and Chairman of the Committee of Governors of ECOWAS Central Banks, at the meeting of the Committee of Governors of ECOWAS Central Banks, Accra, 30 August 2005. *      *      * Fellow Governors, Director General of WAMA, Director General of WAMI, Director General of WAIFEM, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen. We have once again converged here in Accra in pursuit of our common objective of monetary integration. I suspect you already feel welcome here. But I would still like to assure you of our pleasure in having you and our desire to make your stay comfortable and enjoyable. Fellow Governors, the benefits of economic and monetary integration cannot be overemphasized. Even though most member countries are registering significant levels of growth in recent times, but to attain the Millennium Development Goals requires that we explore all the means at our disposal to ensure that these growth rates are accelerated and sustained. And as you will all agree trade provides strong impetus to growth. Economic and monetary integration offers a regionally based strategy for the promotion of growth and poverty reduction. Our quest to promote and sustain growth and reduce poverty in the sub-region hinges very much on our success in economic and monetary integration.  As we strive to push forward our agenda for monetary integration in the subregion therefore we should emphasize as well the centrality of ensuring full implementation of the ECOWAS Trade Liberalization Scheme and the liberalization of financial flows within the sub region. Today, we have among the items for discussion, a study on Capital and Financial Accounts Liberalization in ECOWAS. This is an item that has been on our agenda for a while and it is my hope that this study would set in motion the full process that could engage member countries towards the implementation of policies to make progress in this important area. Fellow Governors, in short an efficient trade liberalisation policy in the subregion should receive equal priority in our deliberations in order to present a consensus platform for the Ministerial committee. Fellow Governors, al so taking place concurrently with our meetings are the meetings of the West African Monetary Zone. At those meetings we will be discussing issues flowing from the Banjul declaration, and the focus will be on positioning cooperation at that level to deliver on the expanded workprogramme of the Zone and lead the Zone to its objective of a second subregional currency by 2009. I believe that this ties in with our proposals to refocus WAMA so it can also deliver most efficiently on the objectives behind its establishment. The ECOWAS sub-region has for long championed the cause of economic and monetary integration. We are now at a stage where we need to take stock of our activities to examine the record of what we have been able to achieve as a sub-region and develop strategies for the way forward, to build on stabilization, to accelerate growth and become significant participants in international trade and capital flows. Fellow Governors, I know that most of you were here in Accra during the meetings of the Association of African Central Banks. But I would still like to formally inform the Committee that Ghana, as a member of our Group assumed the chairmanship of the Association for 2005/2006. This is a challenge. Your continued support, advice and collaboration during my   1/2  
chairmanship of the Association would be essential to move the cooperation arrangements significantly forward. The issues that confront us at these meetings are all too familiar and this may suggest that we are not trying hard enough on the policy front in dealing with these issues over time. Today, some of the issues on the agenda go to the core of the integration strategy, therefore I hope we can use this opportunity for serious discussions on integration in the sub-region as we look to the task ahead. On this note Fellow Governors, let us all have fruitful deliberations. I hope you enjoy your stay in Accra. Thank you for your attention.    2/2  
Franz-Christoph Zeitler: What remains of the Stability and Growth Pact? Speech by Professor Franz-Christoph Zeitler, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Salzburg Seminar, Salzburg, 26 August 2005. *      *      * 1  A glance at the fiscal policy reality in the euro area  Almost half of the countries in the euro area have either exceeded the 3% deficit ceiling specified by the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact last year or are in danger of exceeding the threshold in 2005. Six of the ten economies which joined the EU last year have deficits of 3% or more.1  Moreover, in a number of the countries, one-off fiscal measures are disguising the true extent of the structural budget problems.  At present, procedural steps under Article 104 of the EC Treaty (excessive deficit procedure) have been instigated against six of the 12 euro-area countries. And six of the ten new ember states are involved in ongoing procedures under Art. 104. The development of the debt ratios tells a similar story.  In seven euro-area countries the debt ratio overshot the 60% reference value in 2004. In three of these countries, Germany, France and Portugal, there has actually been a sharp increase in the debt ratio since 2000.  In Germany, for example, the government deficit exceeded the Maastricht limit in every year since 2002 and even in 2005 the deficit will not be brought back under the 3%-theshold. The consolidated gross debt ratio in Germany increased by more than 5 percentage points since 2000. With approximately 65% in 2004 it is well above the 60%-limit. The high debt is effectively restricting the room for fiscal policy. For 1€ outstanding debt in 2004 nearly 5 cent had to be spent on interest expenses. With 1.4 trillion debt outstanding, in 2004 over 66 billion € had to be paid for interest.  Given the progress that was made in consolidation in the second half of the 1990s, these developments are sobering. The economic downturn which began in 2000 has undoubtedly left its mark on government deficits. However, a glance at the cyclically adjusted figures shows (even bearing in mind the uncertainty in these calculations) that the deterioration of public finances cannot be explained by unfavourable real economic data alone; especially as the interest rate convergence and the period of low interest rates following the launch of European monetary union have significantly reduced the interest burden on general government.  Overall, the cyclically adjusted deficit in the euro area rose from 1.6% in 1999 to 2.4% in 2004. During the same period, the unadjusted primary surplus went down from 2.9% to 0.6%.2This “consolidation inertia” is mirrored at the legislative level by the radical changes made to the Stability and Growth Pact. The term “pact” reflects the political consensus which underlay its creation. In the legal sense, it is not in fact a “pact”, meaning an agreement under international public law, but rather two Council regulations3, in other words, secondary European law. This is reinforced by the European Council Resolution of 17. June 1997.4 The “mother of all rules” is still the primary law under Article 104 of the EC Treaty and Protocol No 11 on the excessive deficit procedure.  The changes to the Stability and Growth Pact were agreed, after a lengthy debate, by the ECOFIN Council on 20 March 2005 and by the Heads of State or Government at its spring meeting only a few                                                       1  The information on the budgetary figures (including the cyclically adjusted values) is based on European Commission figures on government data from spring 2005. . 2  The primary balance is defined as the government deficit/surplus excluding interest expenditure. 3  Council Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 of 7 July 1997 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies and Council Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 of 7 July 1997 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure, OJ C209, 2 August 1997, p 1 and p 6. 4  OJ C236, 2 August 1997, p 1; in its judgement of 13 July 2004 (C-27/04), the ECJ also mentions the Council Resolution in connection with the methodology of the deficit procedure (71 et seq. of the grounds) as having “defined more precisely and strengthened” the Stability and Growth Pact, without deriving any further specific legal consequences from this. 
days later.5The Council adopted the relevant changes to Regulations 1466/97 and 1467/97 on 27 June 2005.6  As far as the results are concerned, I share the opinion held by most neutral observers: namely, that overall the fiscal rules have been significantly weakened. By contrast, the challenges facing a stability-oriented fiscal policy in terms of public acceptance have grown considerably. The less stringent the rules, the more convincing sound fiscal policy needs to be in daily life. This is because the changes have made the pact less transparent. They have increased the discretion of the national institutions and those in Brussels and they have opened the door to backsliding in the form of generally laxer budget policies.  Even the “old” pact was weakened by the restricted sanctions mechanism arising from primary law. This is often portrayed as a case of “sinners sitting in judgement on fellow sinners”. The individual stages of the procedure are initiated by the Commission. The ultimate decision-making power lies, however, with the ECOFIN Council.7 The reform has not changed this. It would have been better to stick to the criteria and procedures of the old pact, while at the same reversing the “burden of action” – as provided for in the first drafts of the Constitutional Treaty. The ECOFIN Council would then make a decision based on a Commission “proposal” rather than a Commission recommendation as is currently the case. This change, which at first sight appears minor, would have had the significant, material consequence of obliging the Council to reach a unanimous decision if it wished to deviate from the Commission’s proposal.8To a certain degree, problems with the political assessment of the deficit data had been anticipated from the outset. Practice has, however, brought to light an additional, unexpected problem concerning the reliability of the data themselves. Here, the Commission relied on the budget and debt figures produced by the national agencies. Great waves were caused by Greece, whose fulfilment of the conditions for accession to monetary union (from 2001) was confirmed on the basis of data which later had to be considerably revised by a different government.9 It remains to be seen whether cases such as this can be prevented by the planned tightening of the statistical reporting requirements and the possibility of audit inspections by Commission staff of the countries’ reporting agencies.10Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde, a renowned expert on constitutional law, coined the oft-quoted phrase that the modern, democratic free state, which is governed by the rule of law, lives by preconditions which it is unable to guarantee. A rule-based fiscal policy also survives on preconditions which are neither intrinsic to it nor can be guaranteed by it. First and foremost is the understanding and the willingness to accept the rules in force. And not simply out of respect for the “pacta sunt servanda” – or sanctity of pact – principle, but primarily because the underlying economic rationale is regarded as                                                       5  Report entitled “Improving the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact”, Annex II to the European Council’s conclusions of 22/23 March (7619/05). 6  Council Regulation (EC) No 1055/2005 of 27 July 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 1466/97 on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the surveillance and coordination of economic policies, OJ L 174, 7 July 2005, p 1; Council Regulation (EC) No 1056/2005 of 27 June 2005 amending Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 on speeding up and clarifying the implementation of the excessive deficit procedure, OJ L 174, 7 July 2005, p 5. 7  Even the member state in question is allowed to take part in the Council vote deciding whether an excessive deficit exists. Only in the further stages of the procedure laid down in Article 104 paragraphs 7 to 9, 11 and 12 of the EC Treaty is the representative of the member state in question not eligible to vote. Pursuant to Articles III-184 paragraph 6 page 4 of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, by contrast, the vote of the representative of the member state in question would no longer be taken into account when deciding whether an excessive deficit exists. 8  Article 250 (1) of the EC Treaty. Article III-184 (6) p 1 of the Treaty establishing a constitution for Europe provides merely that the Commission has the right to make a proposal for the decision regarding an excessive deficit. 9  According to the ECB Convergence Report, in the reference year 1999, Greece’s general government deficit was 1.6%. The deficit in 1999 has been revised upwards to 3.4%, thereby exceeding the 3%-limit. The deficit figures originally reported by the Greek government for 2001-2003 were between 1.4% and 1.7%; these figures were corrected in March 2005 to between 3.6% (2001) and 5.2 % (2003). Moreover, the figures for 2001 and 2003 have not been validated by Eurostat, so it might be assumed that the final deficit figures for these years are still higher than the current reported numbers. For more information on the revision of the Greek deficit figures and govermnet statistics, see the “Report by Eurostat on the revision of the Greek government deficit and debt figures (1997-2003)”SEC(2004) 1539 of 22 November 2004. 10  The Commission has presented a proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 3605/93 as regards the quality of statistical data in the context of the excessive deficit procedure COM(2005) 71 final). In its Opinion of 4 May 2005, OJ C 116/11 of 18 May 2005, the ECB welcomed the core objective of the proposed regulation to strengthen the legal framework for compiling relevant budget data. 
common sense for any fiscal policy aimed at fostering growth. The economic and legal sides of the pact do not conflict with each other – as is often claimed11 – but are mutually dependent. This is suggested by the very word “economy (Greek: oikonomia)”, which literally means “rules for managing a household”. Therefore, I shall now describe in brief the main reasons behind the conclusion of the Stability and Growth Pact prior to the start of European monetary union. These are also the main reasons for and objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy for the euro area. 2  Reasons for and objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy When the originally planned dual concept of political and monetary union was relinquished in the run-up to EMU, it became clear that European monetary union would have to live with an asymmetry in the management of the two key macroeconomic areas, monetary and fiscal policy. A supranational monetary policy has to coexist with fiscal policies, which essentially12 remain at national responsibility. This is by no means an absolute impediment to the successful functioning of monetary union and may even have certain operational advantages, for example, concerning competition between tax systems, social security systems and education systems. However, it also entails economic risks. Thus historical analyses have shown that the monetary unions of the 19th century failed largely as a result of mismatching fiscal policies.13Consequently, Article 104 of the Maastricht Treaty, as well as the Stability Pact adopted by the ECOFIN Council in Dublin in December 1996 largely at the urging of the then German minister of finance, Dr Waigel, attempt to combine the advantages of a fiscal policy which, in operational terms, remains a national responsibility with the necessity of a set of common rules. There are four main reasons for this. First: to avoid a conflict between fiscal and monetary policy. At times of high government debt and higher interest rates – which cannot be ruled out especially given the current historically low interest rates – there is a greater risk that attempts will be made to accommodate the nominal debt burden by pressuring the central bank into pursuing a laxer monetary policy, ie forcing it to forgo or postpone interest rate increases needed to ensure monetary stability. A credible monetary policy and the institutional independence of the ECB and the national central banks laid down in Article 108 of the EC Treaty undoubtedly provide a strong counterweight to such pressure. However, the Stability Pact was not aimed at combating an existing conflict between fiscal and monetary policy but rather – based on the wisdom of past political experience – was designed to prevent such a conflict from arising in the first place. Second: to avoid conflicts within monetary union. Before the start of monetary union, market forces were able to exercise a disciplinary effect on fiscal policy stances perceived to be unsound through corresponding exchange rate and interest rate responses. Although the market reactions often came relatively late and then overshot the mark, fiscal policy makers always had to reckon with sanctions of this kind from the market. In a monetary union, public sector borrowers can, for a time, hide some of the economic disadvantages resulting from an unsound fiscal policy under the blanket of monetary union or lessen the impact of market responses to such a policy by distributing them across the monetary union. Economists call this a fiscal externality, others talk of freeriding or moral hazard: countries with a sound fiscal policy that had to impose painful cutbacks on their citizens are forced to carry the can for less disciplined member states. In a nutshell: In a broad and liquid financial market, higher deficits of a specific country may have less impact on the interest rates : a stone causes greater waves when thrown into a garden pond than it does when thrown into a lake.                                                        11  For example, see Hans Eichel (2003) “Der Pakt ist kein Strafgesetzbuch”; Frankfuter Allgemeine Zeitung, 15 November 2003, 12. 12  The EU budget is of secondary importance in this context. 13  For example, see: Therresia Theurl (1999), Erfolgs- und Misserfolgsfaktoren von Währungsunionen: Historische Erfahrungen,  Zeitschrift für bayerische Sparkassengeschichte, 13,  129-156 . 
Those of us who regard the long-term internal cohesion of monetary union and the avoidance of centrifugal forces as a matter of primary importance must therefore vehemently urge the member states to observe the fiscal policy rules.14Third: the interrelationship between sound fiscal policy and growth.  It is often maintained that government deficits – regardless of the initial debt level concerned – are always conducive to growth. However, a glance at the facts shows that low government debt has a positive correlation to growth because of the resultant boost in confidence, lower tax burden, greater involvement and efficiency of the private sector.15Within European monetary union, this has been demonstrated in recent years by the example of countries such as Spain, Finland, Ireland and also Belgium, which has cut its high debt level (of more than 140% before the launch of monetary union) to approximately 96% (in 2004) and in recent years has recorded considerably higher growth rates than Germany, for example. Canada provides an interesting example outside the euro area. For the past seven years it has achieved budgetary surpluses and its growth rate has never fallen significantly below 2%. Leaving aside the debate about the so-called non-Keynesian effects of a fiscal policy aimed at reducing deficits – which, by the way, also proved effective in Germany in the years following 1982 despite all the gloomy predictions made at the time that the country “would save itself to death” – it is widely accepted that a high debt level impairs the stabilising role of fiscal policy even in respect of short-term growth stimuli. This is because an expansionary fiscal policy has less impact in an environment of high deficit and debt levels than in an economy with structurally sound public finances. The marginal utility of short-term fiscal policy stimuli decreases as debt increases owing to economic agents’ expectations of a later correction of the debt level and hence of the future burdens associated with all debt. Fourth: the need to tackle growing implicit government debt, in other words, the demographic burden  resulting from ageing populations in western Europe. As studies by the Bundesbank and the German Council of Economic Experts have clearly shown16, in addition to the explicit government debt on which the public debate is focused, the impact of implicit promises of future state benefits from the social security systems should not be overlooked. For many member states, Germany in particular, these constitute a real problem in terms of the sustainability of public debt.17 The Bundesbank estimates that they have raised the long-term consolidation requirement to over 3½% of GDP. Thus, a rule-based fiscal policy is also necessary out of fairness to future generations. In the language of public choice economists, the Stability Pact constitutes an insurance policy against the temptation for politicians to purchase votes today through high borrowing at the cost of future generations. 3 Criteria for a viable fiscal framework on the basis of the former Stability Pact of 1997 In order to place those fiscal and economic objectives of the Stability Pact which I mentioned earlier on a viable operational footing, the fiscal framework must fulfil the following criteria.18  Simplicity, transparency and consistency – this is particularly important if the framework is to appear                                                        14  For a debate along the lines of this argument see Harald Uhlig (2002), One money, but many fiscal policies in Europe: what are the consequences? Tilburg University. Center for Economic Research Discussion paper 2002-31.15  The fact that sound public finances have a positive effect on an economy’s long-term growth is well documented in empirical growth analyses. For example, see D Romero de Avila and R Strauch (2003), Public Finances and Long-Term Growth in Europe – Evidence from a Panel Data Analysis, ECB Working Paper 246; S Fölster and M Henrekson (1999), Growth and the Public Sector: a Critique of the Critics, European Journal of Political Economy, 15, 337-358; S Fölster and M Henrekson (2001), Growth Effects of Government Expenditure and Taxation in Rich Countries, European Economic Review, 45, 1501-1520. 16  See Deutsche Bundesbank (2004), Demographic burdens on growth and wealth, Monthly Report, December. 17  For the base year 2002, the German Council of Economic Experts estimates the present value of the implicit debt in the range of 270% of GDP compared with explicitly recorded debt levels of roughly 60%. 18  See Kopits and Symanski (1998), Fiscal Policy Rules, IMF occasional paper 162. 
credible to the general public and in terms of its efficiency when applied by the member states. Fixed incentives and sanctions system in the event that rules are breached. Rules without a fixed incentives and sanctions system will not be taken seriously. This applies equally to private life as it does to the actions of governments and states. Ensuring fulfilment of the medium and long-term objective of a balanced budget while providing short-term scope for “automatic stabilisers” (“flexibility criterion”). As you know, automatic stabilisers is a modern term for deficits resulting from cyclical tax revenue shortfalls and additional labour-market related expenditure.  Despite the undeniable political compromise which characterised even the earlier pact – especially concerning the absence of an automatic triggering, whether based on legal provisions or other mechanisms, of the system of sanctions – the former rules largely fulfilled these requirements. The key underlying principle for the medium term is clear: a budget which is balanced or in surplus. This provides scope for deficits in the short term to overcome cyclical shocks. A clear legal and optical “anchor” is provided by the 3% deficit ceiling accompanied by a fairly precise definition of exceptions for natural disasters and severe economic downturns (2% decline in GDP on an annual basis or a decline of at least 0.75% or more at the Council’s discretion pursuant to the Council Resolution of 17 June 1997). In particular the 3% ceiling has often been described as “arbitrary” or even “stupid” (Prodi). Of course, by its very nature a rule must be clearly defined and the result of an expression of political will. This applies to the duties of citizens – for example, the blood alcohol limit for drivers, the deadlines for submitting tax returns or the limits for work-related tax-deductible expenses – just as much as it does to the actions of public-sector bodies. But the 3% ceiling was never "arbitrary". Owing to the difficulties involved in effectively defining the actual objective of a cyclically-adjusted balanced budget, the nominal balance was deliberately chosen and, at the time of the pact negotiations in 1996, the 3% ceiling defined for the deficit was regarded as very generous. Furthermore, the 3% ceiling is closely linked to the 60% ceiling for government debt. For example, assuming nominal growth19 of 5%, over time a 3% deficit would tend to lead to a debt level of 60%. Given the more humble growth rates to which we have grown accustomed in recent years, a much lower deficit ceiling would be more appropriate. The problems and weaknesses of the old pact were not due to it being too rigid. On the contrary, they lay in the weakness of the political decision-making process for the incentives and sanctions system and in a preventive effect which was too modest. Consequently, as the European Commission20 also found – the governments’ medium-term stability programmes systematically overstated growth and hence budgetary developments, in other words, opportunities were overestimated and risks underestimated.  4  Changes made to the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 The changes were agreed on 23 March 2005 following a protracted political debate, coordination between the German and French governments and the active participation of the Luxembourg President of the EU Council Jean-Claude Juncker. They concern both the fundamental, “preventive” arm of the Stability Pact as defined in Council Regulation 1466/97 on the surveillance of budgetary positions, as well as the “corrective” arm laid down in Council Regulation 1467/97 on speeding up and clarifying the excessive deficit procedure.  (1) In the “preventive” arm of the pact, the medium-term budgetary objective which previously applied to all member states (balanced budget or surplus) has been modified by country-specific considerations. Under Article 2a of the new Regulation, the medium-term budgetary objectives are to be set – taking into account the debt level and potential growth rates of the member states concerned – within a range of up to -1% of GDP.21                                                      19  Based on inflation of up to 2% in line with ECB’s stability objective, 3% real growth is assumed overall. 20  European Commission (2005), Public Finances in EMU 21 Targets are set only for euro countries as well as for ERM II participating countries. 
Moreover, the member states are allowed scope to deviate from the “adjustment path” (Article 5 (1) amended), ie the path towards achieving this country-specific objective, if they are implementing structural reforms, in particular the transition to a partially funded public pension system. In the Regulation itself,22 the reason given for the change-over to country-specific budgetary targets is the “economic and budgetary heterogeneity” of the member states. This clearly conflicts with the underlying concept of European monetary union, the key component of which is a single monetary policy based on the idea of “one size fits all”.23   The proposition that structural reforms inevitably place a short-term burden on the budgetary position does not appear to be fully supported by the empirical evidence. In fact, certain essential reforms, in particular of pension systems but also of labour or goods markets, as well as some tax reforms (with no impact on tax revenue), actually have a positive effect on the budget. (2) The changes to the “corrective arm”, ie Council Regulation 1467/97, go even further. Pursuant to Article 2 (2) et seq., member states are now permitted to exceed the 3% ceiling – which is laid down in Protocol No 11 to the EC Treaty and thus enshrined in primary European law – not only in the event of a severe recession or natural disaster, but also in the case of any negative annual growth rate (potentially, even a small one) or very low GDP growth relative to its potential. Moreover, specified were “all other relevant factors” to be taken into account when deciding on excessive deficits in accordance with Article 104 (3) EC. This is a long list of potential exceptional circumstances and grounds for exemption hindering the implementation of an excessive deficit procedure. These include “prevailing economic cycles”, “policies in the context of the Lisbon agenda“, measures “to foster research and development and innovation”, “debt sustainability”, “financial contributions to foster international solidarity”, contributions to “achieving European policy goals, notably the unification of Europe” (in other words: including payments relating to German reunification) and many more. Faced with this list, it is difficult to speak of a consistent, coherent set of rules.  (3) The deadlines for the incentives and sanctions system have been extended, for example, for Council recommendations pursuant to Article 104 (7) of the EC Treaty, issuing a warning notice to member states in accordance with Article 104 (9), non-interest bearing deposits and, ultimately, fines (Article 104 (11)). (4) Furthermore, the deadline for the correction of the excessive deficit was widened to up to two years in case of “special circumstances”, which are identical to the “other relevant factors” mentioned above. (5) One change which is more significant than the extension of deadlines but has received less public attention is the possibility now provided for repeating procedural steps.  In the event of “unexpected” economic events, Council recommendations may be repeated and a warning notice reissued any number of times.24As a result, the sequential nature of the incentives and sanctions system, whereby each measure is succeeded by a more stringent one, is lost. However, the sequential nature of the old pact was also limited given that the European Court of Justice 25 had also accepted (albeit within the bounds of an action brought against the Council for failure to act) the possibility of virtual inaction on the part of the ECOFIN Council – for example, through the rejection of Commission proposals for Council recommendations. An overall assessment of the changes to the two Regulations relating to the pact must find that there is no evidence – at least not in any operationally viable form – of the initially publicly stated reason for “reforming” the pact, namely to strengthen the preventive arm. The introduction of a “benchmark” of 0.5% of GDP for annual cyclically adjusted budgetary consolidation26 corresponds to the Commission’s former practice regarding the old pact. However, it is likely to be less effective given that the objective of budgetary discipline has given way to a movable                                                       22  Paragraph 5 of the recitals. 23  See Otmar Issing (2005), Speech at the International Research Forum on monetary policy.  24  See Article 3 (5) added, Article 5 (2) added. 25 See ECJ, C-20/04 (FN4). 26  See Article 5 (1) added, Article 3 (4) added. 
target and scarcely a single policy area remains which cannot be classified under “relevant factors” or special circumstances to be considered when deciding on excessive deficits.  The economic rationale of the new version, much cited by politicians in opposition to a “legal interpretation”, does not bear up on closer examination. For example, the flexibility provided for setting the medium-term budgetary targets reduces the margin to the 3% ceiling and thus increases the danger of exceeding this ceiling during an economic downturn. There are no corresponding operational rules providing in a legally binding way for greater adjustment during an economic upturn. Nor is there any plausible explanation as to why expenditure in the context of the Lisbon agenda – which contains no less than 8 key initiatives, more than 20 integrated guidelines for growth and jobs and more than 100 individual measures27 – should have a different weighting when assessing a deficit than spending in those policy areas which are not listed, few though they are (for example, national antiterrorist measures). A general point that needs to be made in connection with applying the 3% ceiling is that both the logic and the applicability of a rule would appear to be called into question when more cases exist in which exceptions apply, rather than the rule itself. An institutional assessment of the revised pact shows that the Commission now has considerably more scope for discretion and flexibility in its interpretation than it did under the old pact. Whether the Commission will be able to withstand the temptation to offer member states a benevolent interpretation of the “relevant factors” and exempting clauses in return for a quid pro quo in other areas (for example, a willingness to compromise on the question of the subsidiarity principle or projects with a budgetary impact) is a question that can only be answered in the light of political experience. I would like to conclude by recalling that long before the start of monetary union, around the time of the “Delors Group” consultations in 1989, there was a common consensus that fiscal-policy rules and sanctions are essential for  the long term viability of a single monetary policy.28 The real “aim” behind budgetary discipline, behind the objectives of a rule-based fiscal policy, is to maintain and strengthen confidence. Firm rules are designed to make this easier – this is also the socio-economic purpose of institutions. The more the rules are relaxed the less relief they provide. As a result, the relevant actors and the central banks of the Eurosystem face greater demands and challenges.                                                       27  See for example Hans Werner Sinn’s contribution in CESifo Forum 2/2005. 28  Hans Tietmeyer, Herausforderung Euro 2004, 124ff. 
Svein Gjedrem: Petroleum and the Norwegian economy Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the Alfred Berg ABN AMRO’s Nordic Energy Conference, Oslo, 30 August 2005. The speech does not contain assessments of the economic situation or current interest rate setting. Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The references and the Charts in pdf-format  can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. *      *      * Let me start by reminding you of the importance of the petroleum sector to the Norwegian economy. In 2004, it accounted for 20 per cent of total GDP and almost half of Norway’s total exports. Due to spillover effects, investment in the petroleum sector affects the activity level both offshore and in mainland Norway.  Oil gives us an economic base that is not available to many other countries. But it also presents us with considerable challenges.  Our petroleum resources are part of our national wealth. When oil is extracted and sold, natural assets are transformed into financial wealth. Norway’s national wealth belongs not only to our generation, but also to future generations, and government policy takes this into account. When exercising fiscal discipline, the Norwegian authorities are seeking to ensure that our petroleum wealth is distributed equitably across generations.  Second, the size of the cash flow from petroleum activities varies. Considerable fluctuations in demand in the Norwegian economy, which amplify cyclical fluctuations, would be the result if petroleum revenues were to be used as they accrue.  Third, the use of petroleum revenues has an impact on competitiveness in Norwegian business and industry. A high level and substantial variations in the use of petroleum revenues would have a negative impact on internationally exposed industries.  The establishment of the Government Petroleum Fund and the guidelines for the use of petroleum revenues are intended to meet these challenges.1 The Petroleum Fund serves as a buffer between current petroleum revenues and the use of these revenues in the Norwegian economy. In this way, the economy is shielded from fluctuations in prices and extraction rates in the petroleum sector. Petroleum revenues may be gradually phased into the Norwegian economy.  The Fund is also a savings fund that allows petroleum wealth to be distributed across generations. The objectives are best achieved by investing the Petroleum Fund outside the Norwegian economy. The Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund stipulates that all central government revenues from petroleum operations shall be transferred to the Petroleum Fund and that the Fund’s capital may only be spent over the central government budget. The Act prohibits using the Fund’s capital in any other way.  Once a year, the government authorities decide in accordance with the Act how much of the Fund may reasonably be used. All use of central government funds is thus subject to the same assessment and alternative uses must be weighed against one another. The background material for the Act relating to the Petroleum Fund clearly indicates that the Fund shall not be a second central government budget and, by implication, shall not be used for investment or spending that have not received priority in the budget.  The chart shows the share of the central government’s annual net cash flow from petroleum activities that has been transferred from the Fund to the fiscal budget. Since 1996, a considerable portion of the petroleum revenues has been retained in the Fund. In 2000 and 2001, there were almost no transfers from the Fund to the fiscal budget while in the past two years the share transferred to the fiscal budget represented about one-third of the cash flow.                                                        1  See Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund, adopted on 22 June 1990 and amended by Act no. 2 of 16 January 2004. 
The Petroleum Fund has become large. At the end of the second quarter of 2005, the market value of the Petroleum Fund’s portfolio was nearly NOK 1 200 billion or approximately EUR 150 billion, or roughly 65 per cent of GDP.  The Ministry of Finance has defined a clear mandate for Norges Bank’s management of the Petroleum Fund. Norges Bank shall seek to achieve an excess return in relation to a benchmark portfolio by means of active management within a certain risk limit.  The chart shows developments in both the average annual net real return and the real return without the contribution from active management.  Returns have fluctuated considerably since the Petroleum Fund made its first investments in equity markets in 1998.  Since 1998, the first whole year the Petroleum Fund invested in equities, the annual excess return from active management has been close to half a percentage point. The corresponding krone amount is about NOK 18 billion.  Petroleum revenues generally involve substantial, but uneven currency inflows into Norway. The currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and large variations in the exchange rate.  The Petroleum Fund acts as a buffer and dampens the wide fluctuations in the krone exchange rate that petroleum revenues might otherwise have generated. An increase in petroleum revenues will result in higher capital outflows from the Petroleum Fund. Operators in the foreign exchange market may at times have a tendency to underestimate the Fund’s function as a stabilisation mechanism. The capital outflows through the Fund contribute to both curbing the appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability.  Since the summer of 2004, the krone exchange rate has appreciated by about 5 per cent, as measured by the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI).  The chart shows the krone exchange rate and oil spot prices from 1999. The chart indicates that there is no clear relationship between the nominal exchange rate and oil spot prices over time. An appreciation of the krone has accompanied higher oil prices in some periods and lower oil prices in others.  The correlation between oil prices and the nominal exchange rate has therefore varied over time. However, since the introduction of the inflation target in March 2001, the average correlation has been about zero. This is a remarkable result and may indicate that the Petroleum Fund has shielded the nominal exchange rate from movements in oil prices. Therefore, there is cause for some optimism regarding the possibilities of isolating the mainland economy from variable oil prices in the short and medium run. In the long run, however, we cannot insulate the real exchange rate from developments in the petroleum sector or the use of petroleum revenues. I will return to this later.  An increase in oil prices may nevertheless generate expectations of increased petroleum revenue spending ahead, particularly if high oil prices are assumed to persist. Such expectations may exert appreciation pressures on the krone. The chart shows that future oil prices 6-7 years ahead have increased more than spot prices since January 2004. This sharp rise may help to explain some of the appreciation over the past year. In addition, there may be expectations that developments will be more favourable in the Norwegian stock market than in foreign markets when oil prices rise. This may also have contributed to strengthening the krone.  However, when estimating the future value of the Petroleum Fund, the expected decline in the level of production on the Norwegian continental shelf should also be taken into account. In addition, there has been a tendency lately to overestimate production when looking a few years ahead.  Investment in the petroleum sector is an important source of business cycle fluctuations in Norway. Investment rose sharply in the 1970s and 1980s and reached a peak in 1998. Mainly as a result of persistently high oil prices and expectations that oil prices will remain high, investment in the Norwegian petroleum sector may again reach record levels this year. Norges Bank’s regional network currently reports a very high level of activity among suppliers to the petroleum industry.  However, investment may decline as large development projects like Ormen Lange, Kristin and Snøhvit near completion. It is uncertain how sharp the fall will be, but today’s high level of exploration activity and a long period of high oil prices imply that petroleum investment will remain high in the years ahead.  
Investment in the petroleum sector has spillover effects on the mainland economy, initially on the engineering industry and the construction sector. Looking forward, the scale of petroleum investment and its spillover effects are highly uncertain. The last time petroleum investment showed a sharp increase, in 1997/1998, growth was substantially stronger than had been assumed. An upturn occurred in the Norwegian economy as a whole at the same time. The unexpected increase in petroleum investment contributed to an economic upturn that was substantially stronger than projected. If oil prices rise further or remain at the current high level for a long period, petroleum investment may again amplify the cyclical upturn to a greater extent than projected.  Let me now return to the framework for economic policy in Norway. The Storting (Norwegian parliament) has approved a fiscal guideline for the use of petroleum revenues. It states that, in general, petroleum revenue spending shall be limited to 4 per cent, or the expected annual real return on the Petroleum Fund over time. This fiscal rule shall ensure that the use of revenues in the Norwegian economy is at a level that can be sustained over time.  The usefulness of a fiscal guideline is that it gives weight to long-term considerations when addressing day-to-day economic policy challenges. The fiscal rule stabilises enterprises’ expectations concerning competitiveness and the krone exchange rate, thus preventing abrupt and pronounced swings in the structure of the economy. If the government authorities disregard the rule, enterprises will lose an important reference. A policy rule can make matters worse if economic agents have drawn up long-term plans on a faulty basis.  The fiscal rule for the budget states that the government can use 4 per cent of the Fund over time. This year, around 6 per cent of the Fund is being used. The deviation partly reflects an unexpected shortfall in tax revenues from the non-oil economy in recent years. The government budget deficit is the difference between total revenues and total expenditure. They each account for about half of total GDP in Norway. Even small deviations from expenditure and revenue projections can have a major impact on the deficit. Exchange rate changes will also lead to fluctuations in the value of the Petroleum Fund. For these reasons alone, the use of petroleum revenues may in periods deviate from the 4 per cent rule. Spending was also increased in response to the economic downturn in 2003. We can therefore safely affirm that the fiscal rule has been normative for fiscal policy.  Nevertheless, over the last years more oil money has flowed into the Norwegian economy than earlier. Petroleum investment shows a pronounced increase this year. Moreover, government petroleum revenue spending has increased in recent years.  The fiscal rule is part of a set of economic policy guidelines. The various components of economic policy have varying effects. This is why they have different functions:  • Monetary policy steers inflation in the medium and long term and can also contribute to smoothing swings in output and employment.  • The central government budget – growth in public spending – influences the krone and the size of the internationally exposed business sector in the medium term. Government expenditure and revenues must be in balance in the long term.  • Wage formation, the structure of the economy and incentives determine how efficiently we use our labour resources and other economic resources. There is also an interaction. To give you an example:  • In its budget resolutions, the government authorities will attach importance to the effects of the budget on the Norwegian economy and will therefore take account of interest rate effects. In this way, they avoid a situation where growth in public spending and the interest rate push the economy in different directions. Norway’s history as an oil nation goes back to the end of the 1960s. At the beginning of the oil age in Norway, the relationship between the use of petroleum revenues and changes in industry structure was highlighted.  However, since then, competitiveness in the business sector in Norway has deteriorated both due to high wage growth and in later years an appreciation of the krone against our trading partners. Costs rose sharply from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s. In subsequent years, costs have varied around this higher level.  
So far this year, competitiveness in Norway’s manufacturing industry has been about 5.5 per cent weaker than the average for the period 1970-2004. Over the past 30 years, manufacturing has been scaled back in waves. A substantial decline occurred in the period 1977 to 1984 and from 1987 to 1992. The last wave occurred around the turn of the millennium. Manufacturing employment decreased by close to 55 000 persons from 1998 to 2004.  There are many studies in international literature2 that point to the pitfalls facing a country that suddenly discovers large natural resources. Certainly, the Norwegian manufacturing sector has undergone substantial changes over the past 30 years. On the other hand, this period has also been marked by substantial productivity gains in parts of the sheltered sector, for example in retail trade and the banking sector. Petroleum activities have contributed to technological developments in the shipbuilding industry and the offshore sector.  The current cost level in the Norwegian business sector is adapted to an expansion of the petroleum sector and a steady phasing-in of petroleum revenues into the mainland economy.  In the long term, the exchange rate tends to adjust so that both the domestic economy and the current account are in balance.  After a period, we will be able to cover a smaller share of our imports using current petroleum revenues and by drawing on the Petroleum Fund. Competitiveness will then have to be improved. It may have to be brought back to around the level prevailing at the end of the 1960s prior to Norway’s emergence as an oil nation. Rough estimates3 suggest that the real exchange rate that ensures balance in the external account when petroleum wealth no longer has the same significant role in the economy is more in line with the real exchange rate that we started with. This is shown in the chart, where the real exchange rate in the very long term will revert to the level prevailing before petroleum extraction began. In conclusion, the Petroleum Fund and the fiscal rule shield the economy from fluctuations in oil prices and extraction rates. With an inflation target, inflationary pressures are steered using the interest rate, while the value of the krone fluctuates. Consequently, when decisions on the use of petroleum revenues are taken, weight must not only be given to long-term considerations and the distribution of wealth across generations, but also to developments in the real exchange rate and the competitiveness of the exposed sector over the short and medium term.  Thank you for your attention.                                                       2 See e.g. J. D. Sachs and A. M. Warner (2001)”The curse of natural resources” in European Economic Review 45,  pp 827 – 838.3  See Akram, Farooq Q. (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk Økonomisk Tidsskrift 118, pp 89-112. 
Zhou Xiaochuan: Rules for developing a financial center and the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime  Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the inauguration ceremony of The People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office, Shanghai, 10 August 2005. *      *      * Honorable General Secretary Chen, Honorable Mayor Han, Colleagues and friends from the financial industry Dear guests, and Ladies and gentlemen, First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to all the concern and support you have kindly rendered to the People’s Bank of China over so many years, and I would also like to thank you for availing yourself from your busy schedule to attend the inauguration ceremony of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office. On today’s significant occasion, I wish to focus my remarks on two specific issues. The first issue explores the rules for developing a financial center, and the second issue aims to clarify questions concerning the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime. For the first issue, the answer is quite straightforward. The People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office is established for the purpose of strengthening functions of the central bank head office related to improving financial market operations and financial services. First, both international experiences and the Chinese practices in the process of reform and opening up have well demonstrated that greater marketization of the economy could lead to increased cross-region economic activities, and consequently an improved integration and scale of the economy which calls for strengthening of the functions of the central bank head office in terms of market operation and provision of financial services. Marketization and internationalization expose economic development undergo constant changes, leading to increased reliance of monetary policy conduct and transmission on the money market and foreign exchange market. The development of the financial market itself will also help to expand financial services to clients in different regions of the country and to cultivate a limited number of financial markets serving the whole nation and even the world, not segmented financial markets dotted across the country serving different regions. For the time being, Shanghai has already become the harbor for some financial markets with national influence, such as the foreign exchange market, the gold market, securities market, futures market and the inter-bank bond market etc. However in the past when the centralized economic system was prevalent or in the early periods of reform when marketization was barely developed, financial organizations favored an institutional structure featuring “parallel set-up of business departments at the subordinate and head office level” which means branch offices of a financial institution in different locations must establish corresponding business departments as contact points to interface with relevant departments at the head office. By doing so, information could be collected and centralized to the highest authority that could in turn decompose the centrally made plans level by level to different regions and localities for implementation. With the socialist market economy preliminarily established and improved in China, the outdated organizational structure of the People’s Bank of China no longer fits in with its mandate to improve market operation and financial services. Likewise, large financial institutions in China also face such an organizational problem. Second, the development of technologies and transportation facilities is producing a profound impact on the economy and the financial industry. In the past, the underdeveloped telecommunication and computer technology as well as backward transportation tended to restrict the economic activities and trade to localities with little cross-region business interactions. While now, the development of scientific technology and transportation has facilitated cross-region and even cross-country commercial activities, increased the economic scales of financial markets and financial services and fostered the modernization of financial infrastructures. This development has brought about dramatic changes to financial business mode and created great challenges to the regionalized structure of institutions and organizations. Under such circumstances, financial organizations more and more prone to set their views on the whole country rather on different regions and financial information and professionals also increasingly flow to financial centers providing services to the whole country. This in turn could help to 
facilitate the development of infrastructures of the financial centers and the cultivations of high-end technologies and financial products.  Finally, in today’s world, a country’s competitiveness depends on whether it has a dynamic financial center. A financial center has cluster effect, i.e., it attracts and fosters financial institutions, skilled labor force and various services, including intermediate institutions, such as legal, accounting, rating and appraisal services. Naturally, some activities can and will be out-sourced, but the rest is fostered based on the clustering of financial institutions and skilled labor force. In this regard, the existence of a financial center is the yardstick of whether a country is internationally competitive and whether the efficiency of domestic financial services can be elevated by large scales. General Secretary Hu Jintao called for continued efforts to make Shanghai four centers of the nation, and most importantly a financial center. In this sense, to build a national financial center is not based on the interest of a city or a particular region. Given its responsibility in conducting monetary policy, exercising macroeconomic management, fostering financial market development and maintaining financial stability, the People’s Bank of China must give considerations to the development of a national financial center and carry out central bank functions based on the platform of the financial center. In this regard, the setup of PBC Shanghai Head Office is of historical significance.      Regarding the reform of the RMB exchange rate regime, I would like to elaborate a little bit about the contents of the basket of currencies. As you all know, with authorization of the State Council, on July 21, 2005 China moved into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand with reference to a basket of currencies. The RMB will no longer be pegged to the US dollar. Instead, the RMB exchange rate will be determined based on a basket of certain major currencies with assigned weights selected in line with the real situation of China’s external sector development. At the same time, proper measures could be taken to manage and adjust the RMB exchange rate based on market supply and demand while considering the changes of the basket of currencies, so as to maintain the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. In this sense, it is quite natural that people are increasingly concerned about how the composition of the basket currencies is determined. To enhance public understanding of China’s exchange rate policy, I would like to make the following clarifications regarding the determination of the basket currencies. As a reference for the floating of the RMB exchange rate, the selection of the basket currencies and the determination of the weights assigned to these currencies must abide by a fundamental principle which is to give due considerations to the countries standing as China’s trading counterparts in current account transactions and their national currencies. As you all know, there are four items under current account, namely, trade in goods, trade in services, income (including interest income and dividend income) and current transfers (such as remittance of overseas Chinese). To put it more simply, the basket should be composed of currencies of the countries to which China has a prominent exposure in terms of foreign trade, external debt (interest repayment) and foreign direct investment (dividend). And the weights respectively assigned to these currencies should also consist with the proportional importance of these countries in China’s external sector.  -  Shares of trade in goods and services should be the fundamental considerations in the selection of the basket currencies and the weights assigned to the currencies in the basket.   Current account is a major component of China’s balance of payments, whereas trade in goods and services is the predominant item of current account. The current situation in China shows that trade in goods and services dominates current account balance. Therefore, the shares of trade are the major considerations in the determination of the currency components of the basket. China’s major trading partners are the United States, the Euro land, Japan, Korea, etc., and naturally, US dollar, euro, Japanese yen and Korean won become major currencies of the basket. In addition, China also trades significantly with Singapore, UK, Malaysia, Russia, Australia, Thailand, and Canada, currencies of these countries are also important in determining China’s RMB exchange rate. Generally speaking, annual bilateral trade volume in excess of US$10 billion is not negligible in weight assignment, whereas that exceeding US$5 billion should also be considered as a significant factor in currency weight deliberation. When you look at currencies used in trade settlement, although some countries and regions prefer US dollar as the currency for trade settlement with China, this situation is changing gradually and trade settlement in local currencies are increasingly the choice of trading partners. Moreover, we encourage this development. Since the basket represents currencies of countries covering a significant share of China’s external trade, the RMB exchange rate against a basket of currencies is therefore a better indicator of the value of RMB and the changes in China’s terms of 
trade than that against the US dollar, and consequently serves as an important reference in achieving basic trade balance in goods and services.   -  currency structure of foreign debt should be considered As China further opens to the outside world, the size of foreign debt incurred continue to grow significantly. By the end of last year, China’s foreign debt reached US$228.6 billion with the origins increasingly diversified. In most cases, foreign debt repayment would require purchasing a specific foreign currency with RMB. The resulting conspicuous demand for this specific foreign currency in the market would become a factor influencing the RMB exchange rate. As such, in determining the currency weights in the basket, we also take into consideration of the currency structure of China’s foreign debt.   -  FDI should be considered In recent years, rapid growth has been witnessed in FDI which has been gaining importance in our foreign economic relations. By now, the accumulated FDI flowed into China has reached over US$560 billion, a significant part of which was denominated in the currencies of the originating economies. The investment returns in the form of dividends will need to be exchanged into relevant foreign currency before being repatriated. Therefore the factor of FDI has to be considered in the selection of the basket currencies.   -  current transfer items under the current account should also be considered Though current transfers are not as important proportionally as other items in the current account, the currency structure of these transfers still needs to be considered in the determination of the weights assigned to the currencies in the basket.  In sum, the reform of RMB exchange rate regime to allow RMB exchange rate float with reference to a basket of currencies is in line with the needs of diversifying foreign economic and trade relations as well as the development of the international economic and financial system. Referring to a basket of currencies is not equal to pegging to such a basket. Pegging means mechanically adjusting the exchange rate of RMB against the US dollar according to the exchange rate movements of the currencies in the basket in an attempt to keep the nominal effective exchange rate unchanged. Quite differently, what we are having now is a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market demand and supply with reference to a basket of currencies. In comparison with an exchange rate regime of pegging to the US dollar solely, it can better reflect the competitiveness of RMB against major currencies, better absorb the impact generated by an unstable US dollar and moderate the fluctuations of RMB exchange rates at the multilateral level, safeguard the overall stability of China’s foreign economic and trade environment and consequently promote the basic equilibrium of balance of payments as well as the sustained, coordinated and healthy growth of the Chinese economy.  Thank you very much. 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Jackson Hole Conference - monetary policy and “credible alertness”  Intervention by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB at the Panel discussion “Monetary policy strategies: a central bank panel”, at the symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. *      *      * Dear Alan, dear ladies and gentlemen, I had the privilege of participating with Alan in all meetings of the G7 Ministers and Governors over the last 18 years. But there is one big difference between us! He participated in all these meetings as President of the Federal Reserve, whereas my responsibilities changed three times during this period. I was successively Undersecretary of the Treasury of my country, Governor of Banque de France and then President of the European Central Bank. I could therefore look at the legendary exposition of Alan in the G7 from three different angles, now not only with the benefit of a multiocular perspective but also of hindsight. And I can say that in 3-D Alan’s expositions in this intimate, restricted format are incredibly sharp, profound and visionary. I personally share fully, in particular, the judgement of Alan Blinder and Ricardo Reis on the lucidity of Alan as regards the early diagnosis of the productivity jump in the US economy.  Not only in the United States, also in Europe as in the rest of the world, Alan has a very high reputation. In some European quarters, he is even sometimes made the principal witness of monetary policy activism, but I am not sure whether he himself would agree with such a role. Still, the issue of the Fed’s movements in interest rates and those of the ECB is frequently debated. Let me elaborate on this debate somewhat further. Since 1 January 1999, when the European Central Bank (ECB) officially became the monetary authority of the euro area, the ECB has changed its policy rate 15 times. The easing cycle that started in 2001 on both sides of the Atlantic saw a cumulative reduction in the euro area’s policy rate of 275 basis points, accomplished over 7 moves. That cycle has not yet been reversed.  The fact that we have moved less frequently than the Federal Reserve, in particular over the last 2 years, has generated a very interesting discussion on central bank activism. The undisputed notion that the central bank should react to the state of the economy goes a long way to explaining why different currency areas have witnessed different degrees of central bank activism. Shocks of greater magnitude and/or longer duration, and an economic system in which exogenous disturbances run their course more strongly and speedily, can largely explain different policy responses, as measured by the frequency of policy moves and the cumulative change in the policy rate.  So, different contingencies and economic structures – quite naturally – can result in a different conduct of policy. And I could explain at length why in 2001 the highest rates in the euro area were only at the level of 4.75%, when they were at 6.5% in the United States and why the cumulative reduction in the easing cycle has been larger in the United States, only taking into account objective measures of the differences of amplitude of the economic swings that have characterised both sides of the Atlantic.1 But I would like to share with you today some thoughts on a different sort of difference in “activism”: one that is not induced by the state of the economy, but rather one that finds deeper motivation in the central bank’s strategy.  It is the degree of activism that results from the way policymakers try to reconcile a fundamental tension inherent in their profession. On the one hand, as a quite general principle of prudent monetary governance, it pays to adopt a systematic policy focused on responding to the fundamental forces at work in the economy in a predictable manner, disregarding the vagaries of expectations and markets’ fads. This policy would enhance markets’ ability to anticipate the central bank’s behaviour, favour a smooth adjustment of the economy to disturbances, and prevent instability of expectations from injecting volatility into monetary policy, and in turn into the economy. If successful, the degree of activism displayed by this policy would be mainly related to the variability of the state of the economy.                                                       1 Table 1 in the Annex displays the evolution of several macroeconomic indicators both for the euro area and the United States over the last few years.
On the other hand, a central bank does also need to recognise that misled expectations can amplify and prolong the response of inflation and economic activity to an inflationary or deflationary shock. This would in general imply that the central bank should embark on an aggressive policy action in response to expectations instability. And, this will add to the degree of activism displayed by the policy rate.  I will argue that, whilst the central bank must always be ready to take aggressive action if needed, a well-designed institutional framework, which undisputedly assigns the central bank the primary objective of price stability, and the adoption of a clear monetary policy strategy, which quantitatively defines price stability and does not pretend to fine-tune directly the business cycle, can make the latter type of policy activism unnecessary in many circumstances. The reason is that this framework reduces uncertainty about the central bank’s ultimate motives, provides a stronger anchor for inflation expectations and makes it easier for the markets to map the expected path of the policy rate to the evolution of macroeconomic conditions. This would reduce the likelihood that expectations might over-react in the first place and, should expectation instability nevertheless occur, provides the central bank with an additional viable option.  I will argue that under some conditions the central bank can regain control of private expectations without necessarily changing interest rates, but by being visibly and credibly “alert”, explaining and stressing its commitment to maintaining inflation at levels consistent with the price stability objective. The threat to act will be more effective the more credible the central bank has been over time in actually delivering price stability, as defined quantitatively. The paradox would be that this policy of a priori “reinforced alertness” would make the central bank appear ex post less “activist” in terms of changes to the policy rate. Importantly, as a side effect, this policy would better sustain economic activity and minimise macroeconomic volatility.  In practice, the central bank would normally make use of all available options – as circumstances dictate – to counteract situations that have the potential for undermining confidence and perturbing market conditions for a lasting period. We have done that in the past and we will do it in the future. As an example, under the chairmanship of my predecessor, Wim Duisenberg, whose passing away a month ago has deprived our community of central bankers of a man of remarkable wisdom and lucid judgement, we took immediate decisions after the dramatic events of 9/11, pouring very large amounts of liquidity in euro, setting up a swap agreement with the Fed and decreasing rates. This has demonstrated very clearly that the ECB was eager to act decisively and immediately when appropriate and had absolutely no enshrined bias for waiting for the “slowest ship in the convoy”. This observation that all observers and market participants made was certainly important in reinforcing the credibility of the Governing Council of the ECB when embarking on a “reinforced alertness”. In all situations, we have been aided in our task by our monetary policy strategy. Clarity about the quantitative definition of price stability and about the framework we adopt to assess risks to price stability has been particularly important for us to ensure a smooth start to Monetary Union in Europe. Such clarity afforded considerable latitude for action in the early years of the decade, despite repeated unfavourable shocks, and a remarkable leverage over market conditions. The advantages of a rule-like behaviour  At first thought, a “discretionary” response to shocks might seem exactly what one would expect of a professional central banker. After all, each economic contingency is a unique combination of circumstances that, in its own way, is unprecedented, and will probably never repeat itself again in that precise form. So, each new contingency would seem to command a different, tailor-made response on the part of monetary authorities.  There is some grain of truth to this. But decades of reflections on the role of expectations in macroeconomics have taught us that monetary policy is not a sequence of isolated policy actions. When forming their expectations, agents seek to capture the general pattern of monetary policies, and it is that pattern that matters in shaping their economic behaviour. Therefore, the relevant problem to solve for central banks is not so much about the size and timing of a given interest rate move in response to a particular contingency. It is more about the strategy for repeatedly adjusting the policy instrument in response to the state of the economy, whatever this might be.  If the central bank is able to convince economic agents and markets participants of its analysis and assessment of the outlook, and about the policy measures that it is going to take in response to it, this mechanism of anticipation will act in self-equilibrating manner. As soon as the macroeconomic news is 
released, expectations of the short-term interest rates will adjust in the equilibrating direction that markets expect to see implemented by the central bank. Such a credibility asset can turn out to be very beneficial in cases of major shocks and risks.  It is clear that a world in which central banks’ inclinations and market views are perfectly aligned is unlikely to emerge in reality. However, decades of academic reflection and central banks’ quest for stability have not past in vain. Our keen preoccupation with making ourselves understood by words and deeds has established a new climate of mutual understanding with academics, investors, market participants and public opinion at large. We have stepped up the number of gatherings in which we document our strategies and carefully explain our actions to broad audiences. On the markets’ side, our constant drive toward a continuous and all-round exchange with the public has been tangibly rewarded with high marks. The leverage of central bank pronouncements and actions over private economic behaviour has strengthened to an extent that we could not have remotely imagined only a decade ago.  There is no shortcut to fully revealing a central bank’s strategy. This disclosure – which we perform in an ongoing process of interactions with a large and complex audience – helps to clarify the policy environment and anchors expectations. But unless deeds support words, words will be unconvincing. So, there is no better way to establish a reputation for actually following a strategy of monetary policy than letting the public infer and recognise it from our repeated behaviour. Consistent behaviour is a precondition for outsiders to understand our actions and believe our pronouncements. In synthesis, it is a precondition for our credibility.  This capital of credibility is built over time and easily squandered. So, as a general principle, in weighing up the arguments for and against such and such a decision, we should never fail to appreciate that our behaviour has durable significance. It can add to the asset of credibility, or detract from it in important ways.  A corollary: beware of false signals In my view, the statement that a reputation for consistent behaviour is an asset carries an important corollary with it. We should guard against over-reacting to indicators that might give a distorted picture of economic reality and thus promote policies that might be regretted – and hastily reversed – in retrospect.  To be more specific, in carrying out our strategies, we would ideally need accurate, quantitative, contemporaneous readings of the current pertinent economic, monetary and financial data. For instance, knowledge of the level of production that would be consistent with stable prices, the so-called “natural” rate of output, would be an important tool for assessing whether the stance of policy is broadly appropriate. However, estimates of the time-varying natural rate of output, and by implication measures of economic slack, are notoriously very imprecise. Even in hindsight, different estimation methods yield quite dispersed figures. Allowing for data revisions, that is re-appraising those synthetic indicators by aggregating revised data, only makes the uncertainty surrounding those measures more pervasive.  Now, acting too strongly on such indicators, only to be forced to reverse gear soon thereafter as new estimates become available, risks the danger of an erratic policy process. Importantly, it confounds the markets, which look back on our record and try to make sense of our past behaviour using the wisdom that is only available in hindsight. If this gives indications that differ markedly from those which could be reasonably inferred in real time, outside observers might extract a distorted picture of our intentions. Even prudent policy conduct could appear ex post – and be deplored – as evidence of incorrect decisions. This could drain the central bank’s stock of credibility. All this is not new and revives memories of the 1970s. Were the spectacular policy mistakes of that unfortunate decade due to poor economic theory, poor policy or a biased representation of the economy? It was probably a blend of all of these factors, with the last one carrying substantial weight.  Advances in theory since the 1970s and more sophisticated econometrics have not immunised the policy process from these potential pitfalls. And here is a concrete example of what I mean. The first estimates of the output gap are typically available during the reference year, and are then revised over subsequent years. It is important to note that the final estimate is not available for a very long period of time: 1999 estimates, for example, were still revised by non-negligible amounts in 2004. Revisions are also large: they can often affect the sign, as well as the magnitude of the estimates. In the case at 
hand, for example, the revised output-gap measure available to us today is positive in almost all estimates for 1999, 2000 and 2001, but it was estimated to be negative in real time [as shown in Chart 1.] 2  Uncertainty is even higher for output gap projections, which are the only measures of output gap existing at the beginning of each year. For example, the real-time estimates of the output gap for 2005, published in spring by the European Commission, the IMF and the OECD, differ on average more than 25% from the output-gap projections that these institutions made at the end of 2004. And, if we add to the real-time measures of the output gap for 2005 the average size of revisions observed in the past, we can conclude that it may ex post turn out to be anything between -3.6% and +0.8%.  Clearly, output-gap measurement issues are not a fact of the past. Central banks also need to cope with this problem at present. I take this as a warning that the central bank should not rely on any simple indicator of economic slack in taking its policy decisions. To conclude this point I would say that there are, undoubtedly, great differences in terms of monetary policy strategy between us at the ECB and, to use Alan Blinder terms, the Greenspan’s Fed. We consider the public display of our arithmetic definition of price stability essential to the success of our strategy. We equally deem that the communication to the markets of our two-pillar monetary policy concept is important and has been of great help in the actual implementation of our policy. It is true that, in that sense, we belong to two different schools of thoughts on each side of the Atlantic. But there is an important point on which on the contrary we share exactly the same views. We both want to be as comprehensive as possible in our analysis. We both do not want to neglect any information, any in-depth appreciation of a particular situation. We both do not want to rely exclusively on a single particular model of the economy, as sophisticated as it may be. I have myself said several times that the Governing Council of the ECB has no intention of being the “prisoner” of a single system of equations. We both highly praise “robustness”. There is no substitute for a comprehensive analysis of the risks to price stability that pays due attention to all relevant information. It stands better chances of anchoring policy and – through that channel – expectations in a durable fashion.  Responding to risks of instability  It is to expectations and the way their dynamics should be factored into policy that I now turn.  Why should expectations be a problem within a credible policy environment? Because the economy is never at rest. Agents have to catch up with the continuous change in their environment by an ongoing process of learning. When shocks are moderate, or the underlying evolution of the economic structure proceeds at a slow pace, imperfect information and learning do not excessively complicate our interactions with the private sector. But there are times in which stormy perturbations and accelerated structural change make uncertainty more acute. These are times in which a perpetual process of learning on the part of economic agents can have implications for the overall stability of the economic system – to some extent, independently of the monetary policy regime that is in place. If agents do not possess rational expectations, but have to re-estimate continuously the coefficients of an unknown model of the economy, using rolling windows of new observations, it can well happen that a shock of sufficiently serious magnitude can unsettle expectations, even under credible monetary institutions. The reason for this is simple. It might become impossible for private forecasters quickly to form a reasoned guess about the scale of the shock, its duration and persistence, and the likelihood that it might not be easily washed away, so that it would become, in their eyes, embedded in the fundamental relations regulating the functioning of the economy for some time to come. Long-term expectations thus may over-react to the shock. They may drift endogenously reflecting the impact that the unprecedented disturbance exerts on agents’ own re-assessment of the key structural features of the economy.  These are times in which, typically, there is a disconnection between private views about the macroeconomic outlook and the central bank’s own internal forecasts. The expectation of the most likely outcome entertained by the median agent in the economy is likely to depart from the central                                                       2  Chart 1 displays estimates of the output gap constructed by the European Commission, the IMF and the OECD. To better contrast the difference between initial estimates and revised data, Chart 1 shows real-time estimates and the latest available revisions only and, making the simplifying assumption that data revised 3 years after the initial estimates are approximately correct, it displays revised data for the period up to spring 2002. 
scenario that is considered most plausible, given the conditioning assumptions, for purposes of the central bank’s own internal assessment of the macroeconomic outlook. As agents’ expectations shape the market reaction to new economic data and to the central bank’s own policy actions, they embed information that the central bank cannot neglect or grossly underrate in its own analysis.  The difficulty lies in devising a prudent way to factor such situations into policy. And here is where the fundamental tension inherent in our profession comes in. On the one hand we want to keep our eyes on the fundamentals and avoid being misled or intoxicated by what could well be noise and unfounded overreactions. On the other hand, excess endogenous volatility in private expectations could indeed provide advance warning of pending risks that the central bank should take into account. Misled market expectations can prolong the dynamic response of inflation and real activity to an inflationary or deflationary shock of sufficiently great potency. This might entail serious risks of instability. Recent work done at the Federal Reserve Board by Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams3 shows that, in these circumstances, a rise (or fall) of private inflation expectations beyond (or short of) those implied by perfect knowledge should elicit a more aggressive response than could be expected in normal conditions. The optimality of such a response is corroborated in a study by Vitor Gaspar, Frank Smets and David Vestin4[4] at the ECB. They argue that when agents perceive inflation persistence to be high, inflationary – or deflationary – shocks can easily become entrenched, because agents suspect that these forces will be perpetuated by the economic structure. An aggressive policy adjustment in reaction to detected signs of expectation instability can help head off the risks that one might see associated with the manifestation of such phenomenon. It might be an effective way to prove that the central bank is perceptive to changing circumstances – even to changing views about circumstances, present and prospective – and ready to act pre-emptively. However, any unexpected and possibly unprecedented action that the central bank takes in response to these risks might disorient the market. So, the process by which market participants price long-dated securities and assets in general might be impaired, as investors might misinterpret the central bank’s intentions. As a consequence, asset prices could be driven far away from fundamental values and confidence could be undermined.  This would suggest that action may not always be advisable. Sometimes, more optimal behaviour consists in appropriately communicating the central bank’s assessment of the fundamental state of the economy and its prospects in order to regain control of inflation expectations. In the long term, the advantages of having systematically avoided hasty reactions outweigh the benefits that might be apparent in the short term. By maintaining a steadier posture, the central bank embracing this policy views its role as that of a lighthouse or, more accurately, a lightship, in a storm. In this respect, building a reputation for a calm and firm management of the events can pay off. The viability of this approach – and its efficiency – is enhanced when the central bank operates within a clearly defined institutional framework. In policy-making regimes that feature a primary, sharply-defined objective – reinforced by a precise numerical definition of the central bank’s notion of price stability – the likely evolution of the economy vis-à-vis that objective gives clear indications as to the most likely future stance of policy. This is supposed to diminish the odds that expectations might start diverging in the first place. And, if expectation instability should develop nonetheless, being able to refer in communication unambiguously to that objective can – at times and under certain circumstances – provide an effective substitute for tangible action, provided “credible alertness” of the central bank is undisputed by market participants.  Action and vigilance  All in all, the art of central banking involves finding a fine balance between action and words in order to react to changing market expectations. The easing cycle that started in 2001 and the instability in inflation expectations that occurred in 2003 represent 2 episodes that illustrate how the ECB has in practice devised its own way to address these issues.                                                        3  Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams (2005): “Inflation Scares and Forecast-Based Monetary Policy”, CEPR Discussion Paper Series No. 4844. 4  Vitor Gaspar, Frank Smets and David Vestin (2005): “Monetary Policy under Adaptive Learning”, ECB, mimeo, available at .http://econ.ucsc.edu/~walshc/Workshop_Program_links.pdf
In early 2001 the ECB started an easing cycle. At the time, on the heels of significant adverse supply shocks and rather strong wage dynamics, inflation rates were high at levels unseen since the late phases of convergence to the new currency in the euro area. However, we equally saw an upcoming worsening of the outlook for economic activity, as indicated by the rapid decline in several confidence measures. This lowered the risks to inflation coming from wages, and inflationary pressures more generally. While we assessed that the information coming from monetary trends was consistent with price stability over the medium term, we took the view that the upward inflationary pressures were of a temporary nature and warranted looking through the shocks that had caused them to emerge. We held the view that a protracted period of weak economic activity, and the increasing odds that the recovery would not materialise soon, would eventually facilitate a downward adjustment in price and wage-setting behaviours. The easing cycle, which we readily initiated, registered a cumulative decline in the policy rate of 275 basis points over 2 years, moving the policy rate down to 2%, which was below the lowest intervention rates of the central banks over a century for an overwhelming majority of countries that are members of the euro area, including Germany.  Let me stress a point which is often underestimated. What looks perfectly appropriate with the benefit of hindsight, moving down interest rates to such low levels – exploring secular uncharted waters – was indeed bold ex ante for a new institution, which in mid 2003 was exactly 5 years old – and for a new currency – that at that time was 4½ years old. It had not been done to that extent by either the Fed or the Bank of England! In retrospect, we have been bold and equally lucid. There is no doubt that the Governing Council used appropriate judgement in granting high weight to the decrease of inflationary pressures stemming from the downside risks to economic activity. And there is also no doubt that the resolute action of the ECB, based on its own inflationary analysis, not only permitted to stabilise inflation and inflationary expectations, but also helped to forestall a much deeper slowdown in the economy.  The behaviour of inflation expectations brings me to the other episode I have mentioned. Long-term inflation expectations, which had remained well anchored at levels in line with the ECB definition of price stability from the outset of Monetary Union in January 1999, started displaying signs of upward instability in the second half of 2003 after the last decision to decrease rates. The ten-year Break-Even Inflation Rate (BEIR) suggested an incipient rise in longer-term inflation expectations [see Chart 2]. Survey-based data also revealed that the probability assigned to inflation outcomes being above our definition of price stability at long horizons was rising [see Chart 3a].  Movements in these indicators of long-term inflation expectations possibly reflected concerns that the policy stance was incompatible with the inflationary impact of the surge in oil prices, accompanied by a pick-up in economic activity and protracted conditions of ample liquidity, which could be seen as favouring spending propensities and granting firms increasing pricing power.5[5]  The rise in inflation expectations was considered very carefully by the ECB’s Governing Council. It was of utmost importance to regain control of these expectations. For all reasons that would be common to all central banks plus three which were peculiar to the ECB. First, as I have already explained, we had been bold in exploring new territory in the lower side of interest rates, and we had to dissipate any wrong sentiment in the markets that we could have neglected our main objective, namely price stability. Second, we also had to eliminate the risk that part of the market might be tempted to regard the single currency as embedding the average features of the constituent currencies, rather than inheriting the characteristics of the best performing monetary regimes that constituted its legacy: that the euro, since its inception, has been, was and will be at least as credible, as stable and as good a store of value as the most credible national currencies were, was a fundamental goal of Monetary Union, remarkably marshalled with the greatest success at the time of the transition. And, third, because our analysis was that market participants – by possibly over-assessing medium and long-term inflationary expectations – were pushing up medium and long-term market rates at a moment when it was not necessarily advisable in our own judgement.                                                       5  BEIR may have been also affected by technical market factors. When assessing developments in BEIR, caution is needed. Beyond short-term movements in financial prices that may distort the information content of long-term interest rates, an upward movement in BEIR may signal an increase in inflation expectations or in the risk premium associated to higher inflation uncertainty, although both are of obvious concern for a central bank 
Our concern about rising inflation expectations was signalled to the market from autumn 2003 in the press conference. Over time, our communication became increasingly “alert”, signalling our vigilance to the upside risks to inflation which grew at the time. We made it clear in our June 2004 policy statement, stating that such an upward trend in inflation expectations called for “particular vigilance”, and in September the expression of concern was reinforced with a statement of “strong vigilance”, making it crystal clear that the ECB was ready to take whatever action necessary to eliminate the drift in expectations and restore stability.  It is of course difficult to isolate the effect of our renewed emphasis on our objective and on the determination with which we would enforce it. But what we could observe from the second quarter of 2004 onwards was that measures of inflation expectations stabilised, then started to edge down and the probability assigned by survey respondents to inflation outcomes being higher than our price stability objective declined. We also observed a decline to unprecedented low levels in the standard deviation of individual respondents’ point forecasts, the “disagreement”, revealing increased alignment of private sector expectations around a focal point – which was coherent with our notion of price stability [see Chart 3b]. As the stabilisation of inflation expectations and their following decline coincide with the display by the ECB of its constant alertness as a key feature of the central bank’s policy, it can probably be argued that the market had become increasingly aware of the ECB’s readiness to act, and therefore that the ECB’s communication was one of the main factors driving expectations. An argument supporting this view is that the decline in Break-Even Inflation coincides with a sharp rise in oil prices. This constituted a major break from the past, when rises in oil prices regularly led to higher Break-Even Inflation rates. However, other factors also may have contributed to the fall in expected inflation, such as technical market factors, dampened dynamics in labour costs and increasing weakness in leading indicators of economic activity. Of course, while communication can play a decisive role in steering expectations, it is in the end the actual conduct of monetary policy and its success in maintaining price stability that over the longer run will determine inflation expectations. Further insights about this episode can be obtained by looking at developments in inflation expectations at different horizons [see Chart 4a]. The short-term Break-Even Inflation Rate (derived from instruments with maturity 2008) was not lastingly affected by the ECB’s communication of 2004 and remained at values slightly above the ECB’s definition of price stability all along 2004 and up to June 2005. As should be expected, its dynamics were more closely associated to movements in actual inflation and short-term indicators of inflationary pressure, such as oil price dynamics. However, the implied forward Break-Even Inflation Rate (referring to the period 2008-14) – which one would expect to reflect much more closely central bank’s credibility – exhibits a downward trend that starts in mid-2004. These patterns are even more striking if compared to the experience of other countries with a long track record, such as the United States. Over the same period, indicators of short and long-term inflation expectations in the United States display a tighter association [see Chart 4b], and, in turn, they are more closely correlated with actual inflation and developments in oil prices.6Over the last 2 years, stability in long-term inflation expectations was restored without engineering policy actions. The easing cycle that started in 2001 has not been reversed yet and the ECB has kept the policy rate constant at 2% since June 2003. During this period, the ECB has stressed that its policy assessment is conditional to macroeconomic conditions and this seems to be well understood by the markets. Changes in economic conditions and concomitantly in the ECB’s assessment of these conditions and their implications for the prospects, and the associated risks, for economic activity and inflation have allowed market participants to read signals about future changes in the policy rate. This is evident in movements in money-market forward rates, which are mainly driven by expectations of future policy rates: although the ECB has maintained constant its interest rates over this long period, forward rates have displayed substantial movements [see Chart 5]. A close look at these movements, and especially their timing, show how difficult it has been to correctly forecast the turning point during the current economic cycle in the euro area and the outlook for price stability, as evidence of a brightening in the prospects for a gradual economic recovery was shortly afterwards contradicted by the appearance of downside risks to economic growth, and as oil prices showed significant volatility.                                                       6 This decomposition of Break-Even Inflation into short and long-term expectations can be carried out for the euro area only from 2004, as the financial instruments needed to compute it are not available for previous periods. However, survey-based data are available since 1999 - the inception of the single monetary policy. Table 2 in the Annex presents mean and standard deviation of these survey-based measures of inflation expectations and compare them with corresponding measures of inflation expectations for the United States. Chart A in the Annex displays long-term implied forward Break Even Inflation rates for the euro area and the United States.
This pattern of events has repeated itself more than once over this period and uncertainty has still to fully dissipate. The Governing Council, on the basis of its comprehensive economic and monetary analyses, has constantly monitored and assessed macroeconomic conditions and the outlook for price stability, and, in its judgment, overall, they have required keeping the policy rate at 2% in each meeting over this period. In the monthly press conference following the Governing Council meeting in which we discuss monetary policy, I have very regularly made the point that we were not making any promises to the markets about future policy moves and that we stood ready to act as soon as is necessary to maintain price stability. Conclusion  If I had to draw some lessons for the future both from what has been observed on this side of the Atlantic, during Alan’s tenure, and what has been our experience in Europe, I would like to suggest three words: risks, robustness and credibility.  First, we have to stand ready at any time to weather the materialisation of new risks. The last 18 years have been particularly impressive from that standpoint. Those risks are probably the unavoidable and necessary counterpart of the immense chances that science and technology on the one hand, and the success of emerging economies and globalisation on the other, are bringing about in the world economy. Being intellectually and conceptually ready is extremely important. Incidentally, that is the reason why financial stability should continue to be of the essence and be a constant inspiration for monetary policy. Second, we have to fully accept that our economies, as well as the global economy, are experiencing a period of very rapid structural changes. I would fully subscribe to Alan’s remark that “the economic world … is best described by a structure whose parameters are continuously changing”. It is even truer in Europe. Because in addition to the impact of science and technology, in addition to the effect of globalisation, in addition to the very rapid demographic changes that characterise the industrial world, we also have to take into account the structural transformations that Europe has boldly marshalled for itself: the single market, the single currency, the historic enlargement. But the lesson is valid for all. Robustness in the present situation is key and we should not depend on a single model which would necessarily impoverish considerably the wealth of information needed for an enlightened decision.  Third, I would stress more than ever for the future the concept of credibility. It is because the Fed has, throughout the last 18 years, been very highly credible that remarkable successes have been achieved on price stability, even without what I would consider as a precondition for anchoring inflationary expectations: a quantitative definition of price stability. In all difficult episodes and crises the credibility of the Fed has been decisive in the effectiveness of its handling of the situation. In the case of the Governing Council of the ECB I have explained that our credibility has enabled us to regain full control of inflationary expectations with remarkable efficiency over the last two years. And this was because observers and market participants rightly had the intimate conviction that we intended to be absolutely ready to act at any time if needed and were not inhibited in any respect either by unconditional commitments – that we have always carefully avoided – or by any kind of well intentioned public pressures coming from many circles, including the political sphere, of which we were not particularly deprived since the setting up of our Institution. I thank you for your attention.   Chart 1 Measures of output gap for the euro area  
 Source: European Commission, IMF, OECD. Note: The European Commission’s output-gap measure displayed in the chart refers to “trend GDP gap”. Making the simplifying assumption that data revised 3 years after the initial estimates are approximately correct, the chart displays revised data for the period up to spring 2002. Chart 2 Developments in long-term inflation expectations   Note: Last observation is April 2005 for Consensus Economics forecast, and July 2005 for SDF and BEIR. 
Chart 3a Survey of Professional Forecasters: probability that 5-years ahead inflation may stand at or above 2%  Chart 3b Survey of Professional Forecasters: disagreement of 5-years ahead forecast of inflation     Note: Disagreement is measured as the standard deviation of individual forecasters’ point estimates. Chart 4a Developments in short-term and long-term inflation expectations in the euro area  (20-day centred moving averages of daily observations, March 2004-August 2005)  Chart 4b Developments in short-term and long-term inflation expectations in the United States  (20-day centred moving averages of daily observations, March 2004-August 2005)  Note: short-term inflation expectations are measured by the 2008 BEIR. Long-term inflation expectations are measured by the implied forward BEIR 2008-14.  Note: short-term inflation expectations are measured by the 2009 BEIR. Long-term inflation expectations are measured by the implied forward BEIR 2009-14. 
Chart 5 Money market rates, implied forward rates and minimum bid rate  Note: The minimum bid rate in the ECB’s Main Refinancing Operations is one of the ECB’s key policy rates. Last observation is 23 August 2005.  
ANNEX Table 1 Macroeconomic developments in the euro area and the US  (annual percentage changes, unless otherwise specified)   Sources: European Commission, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Federal Reserve Board Note: (1) HICP for the euro area, CPI for the US; (2) Total economy for euro area and Business sector for the US Table 2 Survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations for the euro area and the United States (1999-2005)  Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., ECB calculations, Reuters. Note : (a) Long-term inflation expectations from Consensus Economics refer to 6-10 years ahead. The last observation is April 2005. For the euro area, data before 2003 are taken from ECB Working Paper No. 273. (b) Long-term inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters refer to 5 years ahead for the euro area and 10 years ahead for the US. Last observation is July 2005 for the euro area and August 2005 for the US. 
Chart A Long-term implied forward Break Even Inflation rates in the euro area and the United States   Source: Reuters and ECB calculations. Euro area BEIRs are derived from Italian government inflation indexed bonds maturing in 2008 and 2014.  
Alan Greenspan: Jackson Hole Conference - closing remarks Closing remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. *      *      * The Federal Reserve will almost surely face as many uncertainties over the next eighteen years as it has over the past eighteen. Technology continues to bring rapid change and, hence, considerable uncertainty, to the global marketplace. Monetary policy, supervision and regulation activities, and payments system operation will need to be calibrated to respond to the influences of that technological change. Other forces will be at work on the economic environment as well. The inexorable aging of our population will markedly influence the policy milieu in the years ahead. Monetary policy, for example, cannot ignore the potential inflationary pressures inherent in our current fiscal outlook, especially those that could arise in meeting commitments to future retirees. However, I assume that these imbalances will be resolved before stark choices again confront us and that, if they are not, the Fed would resist any temptation to monetize future fiscal deficits. We had too much experience with the dangers of inflation in the 1970s to tolerate going through another bout of dispiriting stagflation. The consequences for both future workers and retirees could be daunting. Nearer term, the housing boom will inevitably simmer down. As part of that process, house turnover will decline from currently historic levels, while home price increases will slow and prices could even decrease. As a consequence, home equity extraction will ease and with it some of the strength in personal consumption expenditures. The estimates of how much differ widely. The surprisingly high correlation between increases in home equity extraction and the current account deficit suggests that an end to the housing boom could induce a significant rise in the personal saving rate, a decline in imports, and a corresponding improvement in the current account deficit. Whether those adjustments are wrenching will depend, as I suggested yesterday, on the degree of economic flexibility that we and our trading partners maintain, and I hope enhance, in the years ahead. On monetary policy, I envision a continuous refinement of our risk-management paradigm. I presume maximum sustainable economic growth will continue to be our goal, with price stability pursued as a necessary condition to promote that goal. To date, we have chosen not to formulate explicit inflation targets, in part, out of concern that they could inhibit the effective pursuit of our goal. I remain unpersuaded that explicit numerical inflation targets are a key characteristic that distinguishes behavior among the world's central banks. Despite the various public characterizations of the form of monetary policy regime, the Federal Reserve and most other central banks generally pursue price stability and, consistent with that goal, ease when economic conditions soften and tighten when they firm. That said, I am certain this will remain a topic of lively discussion here and at other monetary forums in years to come. Participants on all sides of that debate will be well served by keeping open minds and remaining attentive to the evidence as events unfold and practices evolve. Debates on the relative merits of asset price targeting also will continue and possibly intensify in the years ahead. The configuration of asset prices is already an integral part of our evaluation of the large array of forces that influence financial stability and economic growth. But given our current state of knowledge, I find it difficult to envision central banks successfully targeting asset prices any time soon. However, I certainly do not rule out that future work could improve our understanding of asset price behavior, and with it, the conduct of monetary policy. * * * I will miss debates on such topics with members of the Federal Open Market Committee and with the staffs of the Board and the banks. The Federal Reserve is a remarkable institution. Aside from its technical expertise in supervision and regulation and in overseeing an increasingly complex payments system, it combines for monetary policy an academic sophistication and a market-sensitive understanding that is brought to bear in formulating the tie between instruments and the goals of monetary policy. BIS Review 56/2005 1 
Surely difficult challenges lie ahead for the Fed, some undoubtedly of our own making, and others that will be thrust on us by market or other forces. Having been exposed to the inner workings of this extraordinary institution for nearly two decades, I have little doubt that my successors, and theirs, will continue to sustain the leadership of the American financial system in an ever-widening global economy. 
Shyamala Gopinath: Recent developments in forex, money and g-sec markets - account and outlook Address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 16th National Forex Assembly, Cochin, 13 August 2005. *      *      * I.  Introduction It gives me immense pleasure to address this distinguished gathering of forex professionals from all over the country. Coming to these visually beautiful surroundings, it is easy to get oblivious to the fact that this state is a large contributor of ‘invisibles’ for our balance of payments. Both tourism earnings and private remittances have had a significant impact on Kerala’s economy and the state has benefited substantially as a result of liberalisation since 1991. Putting numbers to this gain, as per a study by the Centre for Development Studies, Trivandrum1, the average yearly gain to the state since the start of reforms has been in the range of Rs. 2000 crore.  I begin this address, Ladies and Gentlemen, in the background of this interesting perspective.  Forex market in India is undergoing rapid transformation and exciting things are engaging us professionally. At the same time, it can no longer be seen in isolation – it is increasingly getting integrated within the broad ambit of financial markets. Over the last fifteen years, momentous changes have happened in the financial sector, which are well known. While the initial reforms concentrated more on the institutions like banks or non-banking financial companies, the recent years have witnessed emphasis on financial markets.  With the financial markets in India acquiring greater depth and maturity in the recent years, the issue of greater integration of various market segments among themselves, on the one hand, and with the global markets, on the other, has come to the forefront. In my address I intend to take stock of the major initiatives that have been taken to reform the financial markets in India in the past, reflect on the present scenario and articulate the future course of reforms.  As you all are aware, the development of financial markets in India has been pursued for bringing about a transformation in the structure, efficiency, and stability of markets as also facilitating integration of markets. The emphasis has been on strengthening price discovery, easing of restrictions on flows or transactions, lowering of transaction costs, and enhancing liquidity. During the post-reform period, the structure of financial market has witnessed a remarkable change in terms of the types, the number and the spectrum of maturity of financial instruments traded in various segments of money, gilts and foreign exchange markets. I now dwell on the three segments of the financial markets which fall directly under the purview of the Reserve Bank of India. As this is a gathering of Forex Professionals, it would be in the fitness of things to dwell on the reform process of the forex market first. II. Forex Market Global Scenario  The global foreign exchange markets have grown manifold in the recent years. The latest BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey on forex and derivatives markets 2004 indicate a substantial rise in activity in foreign exchange markets across the world. Average daily turnover at US $ 1.9 trillion in April 2004 showed an increase of 57 per cent and 36 per cent at current and constant exchange rates compared to April 2001, reversing the fall in global trading volumes between 1998 and 2001. Both global factors, such as search for yield and a secular deepening in Asian financial markets contributed                                                       1  “Kerala’s Gulf Connection : Emigration, Remittances and their Macroeconomic Impact 1972-2000”, Kannan K.P and Hari K.S, Centre fro Development Studies, Working Paper No. 328. BIS Review 55/2005 1 
to the strong growth. In this context, it is important to note that the share of trading between banks and financial customers rose significantly from 28 per cent in 2001 to 33 per cent in 2004. However, the currency composition of turnover has not changed significantly. The US dollar was on one side of 89 per cent of all transactions, followed by the euro (37 per cent), the yen (20 per cent) and the Pound sterling (17 per cent). In terms of currency pairs, US dollar/euro continued to be by far the most traded currency pair in April 2004, accounting for 28 per cent of global turnover, followed by US dollar/yen with 17 per cent and US dollar/Pound sterling with 14 per cent. The percentage share of the Indian rupee, though miniscule in comparison, has almost trebled to constitute 0.3 per cent of total daily turnover.  Indian Forex Market In an open economy environment, the foreign exchange market assumes critical importance for stability of the financial system since banks’ balance sheets are influenced by the foreign capital inflows and various other external transactions directly or indirectly through credit exposures. The Indian forex market has widened and deepened since the 1990s on account of implementation of various measures recommended by the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments in 1993 (Chairman: Dr. C.Rangarajan), the Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India in 1995 (Chairman: Shri O.P.Sodhani) and the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility in 1997 (Chairman: Shri S.S.Tarapore). With the transition to a market-determined exchange rate system in March 1993 and the subsequent gradual liberalisation of restrictions on various external transactions, ensuring orderly conditions in the forex market in India has become one of the key objectives. The Reserve Bank has undertaken various measures towards development of spot as well as forward segments of foreign exchange market. As a result, the average gross daily turnover increased to US $ 12.1 billion in 2004-05 (April-March) from US $ 3.7 billion in 1996-97. The top 30 banks in India account for approximately 90 per cent of the overall turnover in the market.  Approach to Reforms in Foreign Exchange Market While the operating environment is no doubt relatively more flexible in countries with current account convertibility and open capital accounts, the approach in other countries, the approach has remained cautious with a clear emphasis on the need for safeguards against potential financial instability that could arise due to excessive speculation in the foreign exchange market even when macroeconomic fundamentals are reasonably good. The Indian approach to opening the external sector and developing the foreign exchange market in a phased manner from current account convertibility to the ongoing process of capital account liberalization is now considered a prudent and desirable approach for liberalization. The recent past has witnessed significant changes in the external sector policy approach of the Reserve Bank. The focus of the measures has been to gradually dismantle controls and provide an enabling environment to all entities engaged in external transactions. The approach to liberalisation, adopted by Reserve Bank has been characterised by greater transparency, data monitoring and information dissemination and to move away from micro management of foreign exchange transactions to macro management of forex flows. The emphasis has been to ensure that procedural formalities are minimised so that individuals are able to obtain hassle free remittances facility for all current account transactions and exporters and other users of the market are able to concentrate on their core activities rather than engage in avoidable paper work. Besides, the Reserve Bank has also striven to ensure that strong Know-Your-Customer (KYC) guidelines are in place. In this enabling environment, today the Indian corporate sector is reaching out to the global production and distribution networks not only through greater orientation towards exports or imports but also through strategic takeovers, overseas acquisitions and joint ventures. Apart from attracting Fortune 500 companies to open shops in India, Indian corporates are making their own places in the list at scales which was hitherto unimaginable. Significant Policy Developments  Keeping in view the robustness of the external sector, a number of far-reaching changes have been effected in a phased manner in the recent years to liberalise the capital account, which include more flexible and liberal investments norms in order to promote Indian investment abroad and to enable Indian companies to reap the benefits of globalization and become globally competitive. The other measures relate to allowing two-way fungibility in the case of GDRs / ADRs, permission to Indian 
mutual funds to invest in overseas equity market subject to certain limits, permission to Indian companies to make acquisitions of foreign companies or make direct investment abroad in Joint Ventures/Wholly- owned Subsidiaries, permission to various participants in the foreign exchange market, including FIIs, to avail forward cover subject to genuine underlying exposure, permission to residents to open foreign currency denominated account, etc  Alongside the measures taken to encourage overseas investment by resident corporates, steps were taken to contain and calibrate debt-creating inflows. The thrust of the new ECB policy is to encourage investment in the real sector and infrastructure while at the same time restricting debt flows for purposes other than those adding to the capital stock.  RBI also encouraged the setting up of CCIL to reduce settlement risk. CCIL has functioned as an efficient enabler of settlement offering netting and operational benefits, in addition to substantial risk mitigation. CCIL settled over 900,000 deals for a gross volume of USD 900 billion in the last year alone.  Issues for the road ahead The Report of the Internal Technical Group on Forex Markets, set up by the RBI and announced last year at the same conference, has made various recommendations for further liberalization of the extant regulations. Some of the recommendations, such as, freedom to cancel and rebook forward contracts of any tenor, delegation of powers to ADs for grant of permission to corporates to hedge their exposure to commodity price risk in the international commodity exchanges/ markets and extension of the trading hours of the inter-bank foreign exchange market have already been implemented. The Reserve Bank has placed the report in the public domain for comments and the feedback received will be taken into consideration for arriving at a final decision in this regard.  Greater liberalisation requires banks to act responsibly in order to provide confidence to corporate entities going in for derivative transactions in addition to satisfying regulations. In this context, customer suitability and appropriateness issue has assumed significance. The “appropriateness standard” ensures that banks use the same principles for taking credit decisions in respect of complex derivative transactions as they do for non-derivative transactions. Banks are expected to evaluate the purpose of the derivative transaction and make an assessment as to whether it is appropriate to the customer’s needs and level of sophistication. While some banks already have an appropriateness policy in place, many banks do not. Instances of international banks encountering compensation claims due to slackness on their part in this area are well known. It is, therefore, important that all banks introduce a customer suitability and appropriateness policy.   Further, greater clarity is required in the area of derivative accounting in the books of corporates as well as banks in regard to revenue recognition and valuation of assets and liabilities. In general it may be a desirable practice to have convergence in the accounting standards for both foreign currency and INR derivatives and between on balance sheet and off balance sheet items. There is also need to eliminate incentives to drive a wedge between on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet items. Clarity is essential to differentiate between hedge and trading transactions. In respect of transactions classified as trading, and hence marked to market, an important issue that needs to be addressed is whether there is a liquid market for these products. If not, what should be a prudent approach for recognizing income or losses. RBI is in the process of compiling a master circular on all derivatives including issues related to accounting and valuation for banks in consultation with industry associations and the ICAI. We also welcome suggestions from the Forex Association in this regard.  However, there is equal need and urgency to formulate accounting standards for interest rate and certain foreign currency derivatives for all corporates. Indian accounting standards are still in formative stage as regards derivative accounting both in regard to hedge and fair value/ cash flow accounting as well as coverage of the products. ICAI is seized of the issue and it is important that the forex association also facilitates the process by providing suggestions to the Institute. In the context of good corporate governance, the issue of greater disclosure on the part of banks and corporates has become important. In the case of complex structured products, it is imperative on the part of the banks / corporates to be transparent and disclose the nature and quantum of risks contracted and the systems put in place to monitor these risks.  While accounting and disclosure issues are engaging our attention, the RBI is also examining other recommendations of the Technical Group for phased implementation. One of the recommendations relates to covered options. As things stand, the corporates are only allowed to purchase options 
supported by genuine underlying transaction/receivable. Any structured product involving cost reduction is allowed provided it does not increase underlying risk and there is no net receipt of premium. Covered options, allow the corporates to write covered calls and puts subject to adequate risk management systems being in place. This is expected to impart greater depth and liquidity to the options market and provide greater flexibility to the market participants.  Similarly, we propose to revisit the procedures in respect of crystallization of unpaid export bills which were formulated long ago. Another recommendation of the Group relates to price fix hedge. Currently, residents engaged in import/export activity can hedge the price risk of these commodities in international commodity exchanges. The suggestion is to allow price fix hedges to the extent of the average quantity of commodity bought/sold during the previous three years, or during the previous year, whichever is higher. This would be applicable both to commodities imported/ exported and procured domestically. RBI welcomes inputs from the Forex Association in regard to the recommendations under examination.  A proposal from CCIL to extend guaranteed settlement of US$/INR forward transactions from trade date is being currently examined by us. Since settlement guarantee will extend from the trade date, we expect the liquidity and depth in the forward market to increase significantly. The risks that banks today carry on their books on account of large outstanding forward positions will be significantly reduced. Let me now turn to the G-Sec market. III.  G-Sec market As a debt manager to the Government, the development of a deep and liquid market for Government securities is of critical importance to the Reserve Bank as this would result in better price discovery and reduce the cost of Government borrowing. Such markets also provide an effective transmission mechanism for monetary policy, facilitate the introduction and pricing of hedging products and serve as benchmarks for other debt instruments. Efforts towards development of the Government securities market have focused on three areas: institutional measures, innovations through instruments, and enabling measures. As a result of gradual reform measures taken over the years, the Indian G-Sec market has seen a transition for the better, as reflected in the following developments: • the market has become increasingly broad based. • consolidation of securities, albeit in a passive manner, has resulted in the development of several benchmark securities,  • a high degree of sophistication achieved in the auction process has narrowed the gap between the cut-off price and the weighted average cut-off price and has resulted in a strong correlation between the bids at the primary auction and secondary market yields, indicating improved price discovery.  • the increased volume of trading in the secondary market has resulted in a reasonably smooth yield curve;  • the yield curve has been elongated up to 30 years maturity to reduce bunching of redemptions and minimise the rollover risk;  • through a process of novation, a central counterparty, like the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) has provided excellent infrastructure and contributed to better risk management.  • to address important issues regarding pricing, choice of benchmark, and liquidity in respect of floating rate bonds (FRBs), a Sub-Group of the Technical Advisory Committee on Money, Forex and Government securities markets has been constituted.  • RBI has enhanced the efficacy of NDS by incorporating screen based anonymous order matching system under its ambit with effect from August 1, 2005. Given this backdrop, let me now turn to some of the recommendations made by the Technical Group on Government Securities which are under examination.   First, since RBI would not be able to participate in the primary auction market with effect from 2006-07, an internal Technical Group in RBI examined and recommended an appropriately restructured primary 
issuance process. The Technical Group suggested that Primary Dealers(PDs) may have to take up a greater role in underwriting and may accordingly need to underwrite 100 per cent of the notified amounts in future auctions. Second, the larger responsibility cast on the PDs may need to be compensated with appropriate incentives and one of the suggestions is to extend exclusivity in auctions, which is a typical feature in most countries with PD system. However, another view is that this may disadvantage other players in the Government securities market who have been participating directly in auctions.  Third, PDs are also required to play the role of market-makers by always offering two-way quotes, thereby imparting liquidity. However, it has been represented that the absence of short sales constrains the market-making role of PDs. The issue for consideration is whether short sales, with appropriate safeguards would be necessary for PDs to play this role of market-making.  Fourth, a numbers of challenges have emerged in monetary and debt management: To meet the emerging challenges, the Reserve Bank is taking steps to fine-tune its open market operations. This would need greater accuracy in forecasting market liquidity over the short- to medium-term. Operationally, open market purchases and sales may have to be undertaken, necessitating a review of processes and technical infrastructure consistent with market development.  Other recommendations made by the Group to further develop the efficiency and liquidity of secondary market for Government securities include (i) active consolidation of securities, (ii) introduction of a ‘When Issued’ market in a phased manner, and (iv) a securities borrowing window for PDs. As per the announcement in the Union Budget 2005-06, a Bill to amend the RBI Act,1934 for providing, among other things, legality to OTC derivatives has been introduced in the Parliament. Similarly, the Government Securities Bill seeks to broaden the market for Government securities by facilitating retail interest while also ensuring an orderly secondary market. Some of the substantive improvements expected in the management of public debt on account of this Bill are: (i) stripping and reconstitution of Government securities to facilitate improved secondary market liquidity, on the one hand and to enable better risk allocation in the appropriate investor class, on the other, (ii) provision for hypothecation, pledge and creation of lien on Government securities, etc.  Let me now turn to money market. IV.  Money Market  The money market forms an important part of the financial system by providing an avenue for equilibrating the surplus funds of lenders and the requirements of borrowers for short periods. It also provides a focal point for central bank’s intervention for influencing the liquidity in the financial system and thereby transmitting the monetary policy impulses. The primary aim of the Reserve Bank’s operations in the money market is to ensure that the liquidity and short-term interest rates are maintained at levels consistent with the monetary policy objectives. In recent years, the Reserve Bank’s approach has been to foster balanced development of different segments of the money market, introduce new instruments, reduce dependence of participants on uncollateralised exposures, facilitate price discovery in the short-end and upgrade the payment system infrastructure. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank’s strategy has focused on developing pure call/ notice money market, instituting full-fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility(LAF), developing infrastructure, promoting transparency, and various measures pertaining to instruments for non-bank participants. The following are some of the important developments pertaining to the money market: • With a view to transforming the call/ notice money market into a pure inter-bank market with participation of banks and primary dealers (PDs) only, a phased exit of non-banks from the call/notice money market was started in May 2001. With effect from August 6, 2005,  non-bank participants have been completely phased out of the call money market. • Several new financial instruments have been introduced. The traditional refinance support on fixed terms has been replaced by a full-fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) was introduced on June 5, 2000 with a view to modulating short-term liquidity under diverse market conditions. • The development of the payment system infrastructure was strengthened with the introduction of the Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) in February 2002, formation of the 
Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) in 2001, and the implementation of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in March 2004 • Measures have also been taken to make various other money market instruments (such as CDs, CPs, etc.) freely accessible to non-bank participants. These measures were intended to improve the depth of as well as the efficiency and transparency of operations in the money market. • As part of the development of new instruments, a major initiative pertains to Collateralised Borrowing and Lending Obligation (CBLO), which was operationalised as a money market instrument through CCIL on January 20, 2003. With a view to developing the market for the CBLO, the Reserve Bank allowed certain exemptions in the form of CRR relaxation. V.  Interaction between Forex, Government Securities and Money Markets The far-reaching financial sector reforms have also facilitated India’s movement to an open economy framework in which interaction between forex, Government securities and money market has become quite important. The opening of the economy has brought about gains in terms of inflows of foreign investments, which have contributed to growth and employment. However, these gains have also posed new challenges for managing the macroeconomy amidst large and volatile capital flows. This has had implications for monetary management. We have addressed this challenge with appropriate monetary-fiscal coordination. Suitable changes were made in the LAF scheme and MSS was introduced to address more enduring portion of the liquidity overhang.  In view of the growing integration of markets across borders, it is imperative that domino effects are minimised by refining and upgrading the financial infrastructure in all its vital components, such as accounting standards, including income recognition and provisioning norms, disclosure standards and insolvency laws. This upgradation is to be attained in conformity with international best practices. In this regard, the Reserve Bank has strengthened the consultative process for all major policy steps in a transparent manner by involving market participants and other experts.  VII. Concluding Observations The reforms have been successful in bringing significant improvements in various financial market segments improving their depth, liquidity and efficiency. The money market is now reasonably developed with a wide array of instruments. The character of the Government securities market has changed from being a captive market to a broad-based, deep and liquid market enabling the Reserve Bank to pursue its monetary policy through market-based instruments. Various reform measures have resulted in sharp growth of the foreign exchange market. Reforms have also been successful in creating and sustaining orderly conditions in the market. These factors have led to increased inter-linkages across financial institutions and markets. In the more recent period, the various segments of the financial market in India have, by and large, exhibited stability.  RBI will endeavour to provide an enabling environment for healthy development of financial markets. The enabling environment also encompasses harmonization of reforms in financial sector with the real sector. Large gaps exist in demand supply of infrastructure services such as transport, electricity, ports etc. It needs to be emphasized that sound macroeconomic policies and a competitive domestic sector improve the capacity of the economy to absorb higher capital inflows, reduce the cost of capital, translate external flows into higher investment levels and provide cushion against unexpected shocks in more liberalized external markets.  With progressive financial sector reforms, various segments of the financial market, including Forex, money and G-Sec markets, have made tremendous strides. While we have come a long way from the controlled regime of the yester years, we believe in following a gradualist approach to opening up. A calibrated approach towards financial sector liberalization has been the hallmark of financial sector reforms process and has paid rich dividends to the economy by insulating it from the vagaries of international capital flows and the contagion effect of various crises faced by emerging market economies in the 1990s. Let me conclude by thanking the Association for giving me this opportunity. I am sure the deliberations in this conference will be quite useful and I wish the conference all success.  Thank You. 
This BIS Review is available on the BIS website at www.bis.org. 
Susan Schmidt Bies: Basel II developments in the United States Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, before the Institute of International Bankers, Washington DC, 26 September 2005. *      *      * I would like to thank the Institute of International Bankers for the opportunity to offer some remarks today. I am honored to be on a panel with such esteemed colleagues. My remarks will touch on the latest developments with the Basel II capital revisions, including the U.S. implementation process and progress on home-host issues.  Background As some of you know, we are in our seventh year working on Basel II, and still several years away from full implementation. Some might bemoan this long formative period, but we must all remember that an international undertaking of this magnitude takes substantial time to complete. Part of the reason for the long gestation period is that we have been purposely transparent about the proposals, taken substantial time to listen to industry and other public comments, and worked diligently to make the framework better in response to those comments. In addition, this is an international agreement for which a certain "common denominator" had to be found to accommodate the variety of banking and financial systems involved. From the perspective of the Federal Reserve, we consider the work to be well worth it, given the objectives.  As you know, in the United States we have decided to implement only the advanced approaches of Basel II and make it mandatory for only the largest, internationally-active banks. We are moving along a parallel path to amend current Basel I rules for the vast majority of U.S. financial institutions. Broadly speaking, in developing Basel II we are striving to establish higher standards for internal risk management at complex banking organizations, including capital adequacy, and to improve both the supervisors' and the public's understanding of banks' risk taking and risk management. Indeed, one of the main reasons we started down the Basel II path was to better align regulatory capital with what banks are actually doing in practice to manage risks and the level of risk exposures. Over the past two decades, major banking organizations have become ever larger and more complex; most national banking systems look quite different than they did nearly two decades ago when Basel I was developed. Market changes and increased sophistication in risk-management techniques require that we now update that initial Basel framework, as it applies to the largest institutions. A fundamental premise of Basel II is that, for these major banks, neither supervisory nor market discipline can be effective unless banks' own systems can be relied upon to measure and manage risk taking and capital adequacy.  One sometimes hears that the advanced approaches of Basel II are "too complex" for anyone to understand, and the mathematical formulas in various drafts of the framework can look like a foreign language to some readers. But remember the complexity in Basel II reflects today's sophisticated risk-management practices that employ advanced quantitative methods. Most of you in this room understand that mathematics and statistics are an integral part of how you manage your businesses. Thus, it is only sensible to implement a framework at our largest institutions that is in line with what bankers themselves are doing. And since those practices change rapidly, it is necessary to have flexibility for incorporating new and better practices without having to conduct fundamental restructuring. I believe the framework provides a useful and credible basis for improving risk-management practices today and allowing for future improvements. We consider this vitally important because banking will remain a highly dynamic industry. Supervisors will have to be especially attentive to changing   1/4  
practices and ensure that Basel II does not inhibit adoption of new banking practices and financial instruments.  Basel II developments in the United States You are most likely aware that over the past several months the U.S. banking agencies have been conducting additional analysis of the results from the fourth Quantitative Impact Study--known as QIS4. As the interagency statement issued on April 29 indicated, results from QIS4 were more widely dispersed and showed a larger overall drop in regulatory capital requirements for the QIS4 population of banks than the agencies had expected. The agencies' reaction to the QIS4 results, taking additional time to understand and react to the information provided by the banks, shows how seriously we are taking Basel II implementation. This was the impetus for deciding to delay the notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) for Basel II. Analyzing the data used in QIS4 is vitally important, because ultimately the success of Basel II will depend on the quality of data and models that banks use to implement the framework.  I would like to point out that QIS4 was the most recent in a series of assessments about the framework's potential impact. In conducting QIS4, we understood that banks lacked full information about what will eventually be expected of them--one example is lack of precision about downturn estimates for LGD (loss given default). Understandably, the results were less than perfect. But we commend the bankers for their extensive efforts and thank them for their patience in producing results under less-than-perfect circumstances. In the future, we expect to have better assessments of the framework's impact on U.S. banks before it is fully implemented. And as we move forward in this process, we expect that additional information provided by U.S. supervisors--through rulemaking and guidance--would allow bankers to produce regulatory capital results that are more accurate and likely more in line with our expectations.  One of the most important findings from QIS4, obviously, relates to the overall decline in regulatory capital requirements. Capital serves as an important backstop against risk-taking and we need to ensure that an adequate level of capital is produced by the Basel II framework. To be frank, the Federal Reserve would not be comfortable qualifying any bank based on the results of QIS4, if Basel II were to be applied today. But as I noted above, QIS4 does not represent the final version of Basel II in the United States and we realize that bank data and risk-management systems required by Basel II are not yet fully developed and implemented as expected by the framework. To be sure, by the time that Basel II "goes live," bankers would have significantly more information regarding our expectations and more robust default and loss-severity data. Banks will also have to adhere to the qualification standards set by supervisors.  But given some of the uncertainty that still remains about the impact of Basel II, it is important that we continue to effectively use the safeguards designed in the Basel II process. As I just mentioned, QIS4 was one of a series of studies conducted with banks to test the methodology and identify implementation issues. The process also requires banks to successfully complete four quarters of running their Basel II systems in parallel with the capital requirements of Basel I, before they can qualify for the next stage. The current framework then requires banks to demonstrate continued reliability of their process for two years, during which floors on minimum regulatory capital exist to prevent an unintended drop in capital. The public comment process and transparency in our implementation process would provide added checks and balances.  I would also like to emphasize that market participants are also expected to play an important role as Basel II is implemented. Not just supervisors will be expected to evaluate information provided by institutions. As Basel II rolls out, bankers would be expected to disclose where their institution is in its stages of implementation, how the institution assesses and manages risk, and relevant information for third parties to ascertain the effectiveness of the bank's risk   2/4  
management. Pillar 3 market discipline, therefore, will complement supervisory efforts to maintain adequate capital.  So where do we go from here? The U.S. agencies learned some valuable information from the follow-up work pertaining to QIS4 results this summer. Right now we are still evaluating the results from this follow-up work, discussing the options to respond to those findings, and determining how the implementation process will proceed in the United States. Obviously, we understand that the industry and others are interested in details about the next steps in the United States, and we hope to provide a public communication sometime in October. Additionally, the agencies are moving forward on an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking for revisions to Basel I rules, the details of which should be publicly available very soon. We expect that the timeframe to adopt revisions to current rules will overlap with the Basel II proposals, so that the industry can review them side-by-side.  Progress on home-host issues With such a large group of international bankers in attendance, I would be remiss in not offering a few thoughts on home-host issues relating to Basel II implementation. Understandably, internationally active banks are keenly interested in cooperative arrangements among supervisors for evaluating capital adequacy under Basel II. Several years ago, the Accord Implementation Group (AIG) was formed as a subcommittee of the Basel Committee for supervisors to discuss the tactical issues associated with cross-border supervision. Most recently, and in cooperation with the representatives of the Core Principles Liaison Group (non-Group of Ten supervisors), a joint working group was established to consider enhancing guidelines for information sharing among home and host supervisors. This working group is looking to clarify the roles and responsibilities of home and host supervisors as well as supervisory expectations of banks with regard to communications between their head office and their foreign offices. The working group is also hoping to address communications between home and host supervisors about enterprise-wide risk models and their use in assessing capital adequacy in host jurisdictions, as well as mechanisms for supervisors to work together for consistency and to avoid duplication. Obviously, whatever guidance is issued would be supplemented further as implementation plans and qualification processes become more fully developed.  I do think it is also helpful to remember that a number of the home-host issues pertaining to Basel II are actually variations of long-standing challenges faced by bankers and supervisors in the context of cross-border banking. That is, many of the issues under discussion are not necessarily new, but just made more complicated by the framework. However, we do understand the concerns of bankers surrounding Basel II and how it will actually be applied in various jurisdictions. The good news is that supervisors are already building upon their existing relationships to accommodate differences in national jurisdictions and minimize the burdens placed on banks. The Federal Reserve has a long history of working constructively with other national supervisors. To date, we have met many times about Basel II implementation and how proposed rules and practices might be reconciled. While such cooperation and information sharing can go a long way to reducing the burden placed on bankers, at the end of the day we must still realize that national jurisdictions still matter. We can work to harmonize differences, but it is probably not practical to imagine that they will be eliminated entirely.  Conclusion I hope that I have offered some useful information today about Basel II implementation in the United States and the Federal Reserve's position on certain issues. Clearly, the QIS4 results have generated some concerns and an element of uncertainty still exists about the full impact of Basel II in the United States. We at the Federal Reserve clearly see some   3/4  
important issues that will require further analysis, but believe they would be best resolved by gathering better-quality data and information that can only come as banks progress in implementation of Basel II requirements. To facilitate that progress, it is important that the United States move forward with the Basel II NPR to provide greater clarity with respect to expectations.  Additionally, QIS4 estimates were not based on the finished models that banks will use to implement Basel II, and several years lie between now and when U.S. banks would operate under Basel II. Perhaps more importantly, the Federal Reserve is unequivocally committed to maintaining adequate levels of capital in our banking system and at individual institutions, in order to maintain safety and soundness.  One of the most important aspects of Basel II pertains to improved risk management, and having banks move forward in that area can only bring benefits. Obviously, in moving ahead we would adhere to the established protocols and procedures for implementing domestic rules in the United States--including additional comment periods and opportunity for the banking industry, Congress, and others to express their views. At this point, we believe, the best way for the industry and others to provide useful comments is to see the agencies' next set of proposals.     4/4  
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening economic structures and fundamentals Statement by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Joint Annual Discussion of the Boards of Governors at the 2005 World Bank-IMF Annual Meeting, Washington DC, 26 September 2005. *      *      * As we strengthen our global relationships, there needs to be greater engagement with the entire spectrum of member countries. If we are to achieve a more balanced global growth, greater stability in the global financial system and significant progress in the fight against poverty, there needs to be greater appreciation and understanding of the global issues from the perspective of the emerging and developing economies. In the current environment, the risks to global growth have increased, presenting us with an even more challenging environment to achieve these goals. Should the trend of higher oil and asset prices, and rising interest rates continue, their combined effect could diminish the near-term global growth prospects. In this environment, appropriate policies are vital to ensure that any moderation in growth does not evolve into a fundamental economic slowdown. While countries have strengthened their resilience, international cooperation becomes important in addressing these issues. At the national level, widespread reform efforts have intensified. These have been reinforced by regional initiatives. Of equal importance are reforms at the international level. It is the nature of the leadership that is exercised at the international level, and the actions initiated, that will determine the effectiveness and relevance of the role of the international financial institutions in the global economy. In Asia, significant progress has been made at the regional level in strengthening the underlying economic structures and fundamentals. The economies in Asia continue to be among the fastest growing in the world, and thus contributing to the rebalancing of global growth and stability. In addition to promoting domestic sources of growth, economies in Asia have also enhanced regional economic and financial cooperation, including measures to strengthen regional surveillance and financial support mechanisms, and to deepen the regional capital market. The greater economic and financial integration in Asia has been a mutually reinforcing force in strengthening growth in the regional economies. Intra-regional trade and investment flows in Asia have continued to increase significantly in recent years. Progress has also been made in the further deregulation and liberalisation of the economic and financial sector, thereby increasing the potential for the Asian economies to contribute to global growth and stability. Malaysia's own performance has been favourable, with continued steady growth being experienced. The Malaysian economy has continued to shift to new areas of comparative advantage, to new areas of growth, with the private sector being the main driver of growth. Resources have continued to shift towards the services sector, towards strengthening linkages in the manufacturing sector, and to the resource-based industries and the agricultural sector. This has contributed to a well-diversified economic structure and has increased the resilience of the economy to external developments. The financial sector has also seen significant transformation. The restructuring, consolidation, and internal rationalisation of the banking sector is now virtually completed. Governance and risk management practices have also been improved while structural enhancements have been made in the capital market, significantly enhancing its role in the financial system. A comprehensive and robust Islamic financial system now also operates in parallel with the domestic, conventional financial system. Against the background of strengthened economic fundamentals and financial system, Malaysia has taken the opportunity to sequentially deregulate and liberalise the financial system. This includes the introduction of a new interest rate framework that is market-driven,   1/2  
the liberalisation of foreign exchange administration rules to promote greater efficiency and enhance risk management in foreign exchange transactions, and the introduction of new foreign players into our financial system. In July this year, Malaysia adopted a managed float for the Ringgit exchange rate to better position Malaysia to respond to structural changes in the global and regional environment. Under this arrangement, the Ringgit is monitored against a basket of currencies of Malaysia's major trading partners. In this world of greater uncertainty, there has been significant focus on the issue of surveillance and risks and vulnerabilities. Experience has shown that surveillance has improved policy performance as well as the ability to take pre-emptive action to contain the impact of disruptive and destabilising developments. These efforts, however, need to be balanced by efforts to enhance the capacity of countries not only to manage the risks and vulnerabilities, but also to sustain their own capacity to support growth and development. Capacity building involves helping countries to help themselves. It requires enhancing the institutional capacity of the country. Support in putting in place the necessary institutional structures, arrangements and systems would increase the potential for the sustainability of the development process. Strengthening these foundations are vital to the deregulation and liberalisation process. They represent the pre-conditions to any reform agenda. In this regard, capital account liberalisation needs to be managed in accordance with the country's own institutional capabilities and implementation capacity. Supporting financial infrastructures, sound and strong financial institutions, developed financial markets, and a more market-driven environment are key to the success of the liberalisation process. On the support for the low-income and poorer countries, the uneven progress made in meeting the Millennium Development Goals is of deep concern. The debt relief proposal of the G-8 to assist the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) is a welcome step. Debt cancellation, however, addresses the symptoms and not the cause of poverty. Experience has shown only a few countries have graduated from the debt relief programme under the HIPC Initiative. Many still continue to be burdened with unsustainable levels of debt. It is important to recognise that the task of assisting the lower-income countries does not stop short at providing financial assistance. Development of education and health is an important part of the Millennium Development Goals. The IFIs also need to assume a greater role in encouraging the developed nations to invest and create job opportunities in the Heavily-Indebted Poor Countries and other poor nations as a long-term plan to assist low-income countries to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Finally, we share the view that the legitimacy, credibility and effectiveness of the Fund and the Bank hinges on the degree to which its representation reflects the relative significance of its respective membership. The 13 th General Review of Quotas represents an important opportunity to ensure that all members, especially the developing and emerging economies, have an adequate representation in the institutions that is consistent with their relative positions in the world economy. It is important for voices from this constituency of the emerging and developing world to not only be heard but to be listened to. We look forward to the commitment of the international community in preserving the fundamental, core principle of equality in the governance structure of the Bretton Woods Institutions. This greater engagement within the international community will contribute to increasing the prospects for a greater shared global economic prosperity.    2/2  
David Dodge: Financial system efficiency - getting the regulatory framework right Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Toronto CFA Society, Toronto, 22 September 2005. *      *      * I am happy to have the opportunity today to follow up on a speech I gave here in Toronto last December. In that speech, I talked about the need for Canada to improve its financial system efficiency. Today, I want to focus my remarks on how regulation can, and must, contribute to that important goal. When I talk about an efficient financial system, I mean a system that helps to allocate scarce economic resources to the most productive uses. By making our financial system more efficient, we can help generate sustained economic growth and prosperity.  The Bank of Canada has been contributing to the goal of an efficient financial system in a number of ways. The Bank's monetary policy aims to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. By doing so, we enhance Canadians' confidence in the value of their money, thus reducing the need for people to spend resources either anticipating or coping with inflation. We also contribute to efficiency through our role as overseer of major payments, securities, and foreign exchange clearing and settlement systems, and by providing liquidity in times of financial stress. By reducing risks to the safety and stability of the financial system, we increase certainty about the robustness of the system, thus supporting efficiency. Our semi-annual Financial System Review promotes awareness of financial system issues, looks at developments and trends in the system, and addresses issues that affect its safety, soundness, and efficiency. As well, the Bank works actively with market participants and regulators to develop and promote an efficient financial system. And we conduct research that helps inform the decisions of policy-makers in terms of promoting this goal.  Today, what I want to talk about is how policy-makers can support efficiency by getting the regulatory framework right. I will start with some brief remarks about regulation in general. I'll then discuss how our regulatory framework can support financial system efficiency, and how we can best make sure that our framework is an effective one. I'll conclude with a look at some current issues in financial system regulation and the various ways in which the Bank is involved in them. How regulation can promote financial system efficiency Let me start with a basic premise. For any market economy to operate efficiently and achieve an optimal allocation of resources, there needs to be a solid legal and regulatory framework. Basic legal concepts, such as property rights, the rule of law, and the honouring of contracts, must be in place in order for market forces to work and to generate wealth. Once this is done, policy-makers have a number of overlapping motivations for further regulation. I'll spend much of my time today talking about the promotion of efficiency. But regulators also act to improve the safety and stability of the financial system, and to protect investors and savers.  Let me set out three principles that policy-makers should apply in deciding when regulation is appropriate. First, regulation is appropriate to correct a market failure or, to put it in economic jargon, to deal with "externalities." The second principle is that regulation must be effective. Even when a market failure is recognized, regulators should act only if there is a reasonable chance that they will actually address the failure in question. The third principle is that the   1/5  
benefits of a particular regulation must be greater than the costs it imposes. In trying to solve one problem, regulators must avoid causing even greater problems. With these principles in mind, let me now describe three ways in which regulators can enhance the efficiency of the financial system. The first is to promote competition in domestic and international markets. Competition unleashes the forces that drive financial institutions and markets to become more innovative and efficient. That doesn't mean that regulators should "just get out of the way." Appropriate regulation can enhance competition. For example, an important goal of the Competition Bureau is to prevent firms from unfairly restricting competition.  Canada became a world leader in promoting competition in financial markets when it adopted many of the recommendations of the Porter Commission of the 1960s. At a time when policy-makers worldwide favoured extensive government controls on economic activity, particularly within the financial system, Porter broke new ground by coming out strongly in favour of enhancing efficiency through the promotion of competition and freer markets.  Competition is enhanced by expanding the scope of a given market. One way to do this is to have our markets and institutions compete with those in other countries and to have foreign enterprises compete in our markets. Therefore, regulation needs to take international considerations and developments into account. I'll have more to say on this point in a few minutes. For now, the point I want to stress is that competition leads to greater efficiency. A second way that good financial system regulation can promote efficiency is by working to correct "information asymmetries" that sometimes occur, and that can lead to market failures and a suboptimal allocation of funds. Most often, these failures arise when there are significant differences in the quantity or quality of relevant information available to market participants.  Regulation should be designed so that investors are able to adequately gauge the risks and potential returns of an investment. To be clear, I'm not saying that the goal of regulation should be full disclosure of all information. Rather, the aim should be to reduce information asymmetries to the point that the benefits of disclosure still outweigh the costs of compliance. In that way, regulation can lead to a more efficient financial system. The third way that financial system regulation can support efficiency is to promote overall financial stability, which essentially means limiting systemic risk. The idea that regulation can support efficiency at the same time as it promotes stability may strike some as counterintuitive. But these objectives are not mutually exclusive. If the regulation is carried out in the right way, enhancing stability can lead to increased efficiency through the saving of resources that would otherwise be dedicated to guarding against systemic risk. Let me elaborate. I noted earlier that the Bank's monetary policy supports efficiency by increasing certainty about the future value of money. This reduces the need for Canadians to spend resources on activities intended to protect them from inflation. Similarly, enhancing the safety of the financial system reduces the need for Canadians to unnecessarily spend resources to guard against the risk of a financial crisis. Policy-makers are more likely to successfully promote both stability and efficiency if they bring market players into the picture when addressing a particular issue. Canada's Large Value Transfer System (LVTS) provides a good example of how systemic risk can be mitigated in the most efficient way. The LVTS processes Canada's large-value or time-critical payments. It gives participants the certainty that once a payment has been processed, the transaction will settle on the same day, regardless of what might later happen to any of the participants. This certainty enhances efficiency on its own. But, in addition, the design of the LVTS minimizes the amount of collateral that each institution needs to pledge to the system, compared with the gross settlement systems used in other countries. This reduction in collateral frees up resources that can then be put to more efficient uses elsewhere.   2/5  
Building an effective framework That's a look at three ways in which a sound regulatory framework can improve the efficiency of the financial system—by promoting competition, by reducing information asymmetries where practical, and by reducing systemic risk. But to further our goal of improving efficiency, it is also important that our regulatory framework be effective. What makes a framework effective? I would highlight three factors. First, our regulations should provide incentives that encourage markets to reinforce and reward the right behaviour. These incentives should be sufficient to motivate market participants without the constant intervention of regulators or the imposition of detailed rules that dictate to firms not just what must be done, but how it must be done. The right incentives can help regulators achieve their goals without imposing process costs that outweigh the benefits of the regulation. Second, to achieve an effective regulatory framework, we need to take international developments into account. Countries can gain a comparative advantage by developing a superior regulatory framework. For our financial markets and institutions to be internationally competitive, our regulatory framework needs to be—and needs to be seen to be—as good as, if not better, than that of other countries. But at the same time, Canadian rules and their application should be tailored to our domestic needs and should reflect domestic realities. This tension between domestic and international considerations leads to some challenges for Canadian policy-makers. A case in point is the Sarbanes-Oxley law. Canadian policy-makers embrace the general principles behind this legislation in terms of promoting good governance and financial practices. But the extreme level of detail in the application of its rules, as well as its focus on process instead of outcomes, creates costs for many of our firms that likely exceed the benefits to the system. Large Canadian corporations that want access to U.S. capital markets have no choice—they must follow both the spirit and the letter of Sarbanes-Oxley. But Canadian regulators are right to take a made-in-Canada approach that accommodates the needs of Canadian issuers and investors. Let me be clear. The goal is not to mimic U.S. regulations, despite that market's size and proximity. The principles behind our regulations must be as good as, or better than, those of other countries. But we must apply those principles in a way that develops a comparative advantage for our firms and our markets. Finally, and very importantly, an effective regulatory framework is one where the rules are enforced and are perceived to be enforced. Even the most coherent and efficient regulatory framework won't be effective unless it is followed. Participants must be appropriately monitored. And when the rules are broken, offenders must be prosecuted, and adequate penalties must be strictly applied. A framework with strong monitoring, prosecution, and application of penalties provides the incentives for firms to follow the rules, and this adds to the framework's credibility. When everyone is playing by the rules—and everyone is confident that others have the incentives to do the same—then markets operate with greater efficiency.  I've said before that regulation should be designed to enhance confidence and support trust in markets and institutions. Let me talk about one issue as an example. Canadian-listed firms can sometimes have a lower market valuation than similar firms listed in the United States. Why? Bank of Canada research has pointed to concerns about governance as a possible cause. And one of the main concerns appears to be a perception that Canadian enforcement of insider-trading laws is not as strong as it could be. We are continuing our research to better understand the root of this perception. The key point here is that to improve the effectiveness of our regulatory framework, investors must have confidence that they will be treated fairly. To repeat: we must have, and be perceived to have, proper enforcement in Canada.    3/5  
Current issues in financial system regulation That's a look at how a sound regulatory framework can improve the efficiency of the financial system. Now let's turn to some current issues, a number of which the Bank of Canada has some involvement in. The Bank has been active in terms of research and commentary on developments aimed at improving efficiency. We have worked alongside the private sector to improve the safety and efficiency of clearing, payment, and settlement systems. For example, we've recently worked with various groups to make sure that participants are continuing to pursue more robust business-continuity plans, especially from a system-wide perspective. By increasing the degree of certainty that critical systems will be operational in times of disruption, the development of appropriate business-continuity plans can improve the overall efficiency of the financial system. With respect to fixed-income markets, the Bank is also playing a role in helping to develop regulations regarding transparency and alternative trading systems. We are promoting innovations such as electronic trading systems, because they provide opportunities to reduce transactions costs and increase transparency to appropriate levels. This will increase liquidity and lead to better-functioning markets. And through our research, our commentary, and, in some cases, our direct involvement, we contribute to the design of rules and codes of conduct that improve the functioning of both fixed-income and foreign exchange markets. Of course, one ongoing issue in the financial system is the question of consolidation among financial institutions. In my speech here in Toronto last December, I noted that Canada is facing a difficult policy challenge as we try to keep up with other countries that have enthusiastically adopted the competition-based regulatory philosophy espoused by the Porter Commission. We need to strive for a policy framework that continues to provide incentives for innovation and efficiency by encouraging competition. At the same time, we need to consider how to allow our financial institutions the scope to improve efficiency through economies of scale.  Recent research at the Bank of Canada that examined economies of scale in banking concluded that there could be untapped efficiency gains for Canadian financial institutions. The benefits from these efficiency gains could flow across the economy, through lower-cost business and retail lending. But there are other relevant public policy questions here as well, including foreign ownership and concerns about the concentration of market power among very few players. Striking a balance between these interests is not a simple task. But in terms of competition, we should keep in mind that the level of competition can be maintained or enhanced by new entrants in the marketplace or by the threat of new entrants.  Another issue that is being hotly debated relates to the ideal structure for securities regulators in Canada. What I said about this issue last year remains true today. Efficiency dictates that Canada should have uniform securities laws and regulations based on principles that apply to everyone. But the question is how to apply these rules in a tiered way to take into account the differing needs of issuers. For example, one tier could apply to large, complex firms that want access to international capital markets. Rules for these firms would be similar to those that are applied in New York or London. At the other end of the spectrum, another tier could apply to small, speculative resource firms that have historically relied on Canadian equity markets for financing. A third tier in the middle could apply to the bulk of Canadian "mid-cap" firms, which choose to access only Canadian capital markets, and which very often are smaller and less complex than U.S. "mid-cap" firms. These different tiers of firms exist in all major provincial jurisdictions. And investors in every jurisdiction have similar needs. So the key point is that, while the application of rules needs to take into account the size and complexity of firms, there is no need for different rules to be applied based on the province or territory of the issuer or investor.   4/5  
Conclusion In closing, let me say that I hope you've found my comments to be topical. Many important decisions about our regulatory framework are currently being considered, and these will profoundly affect the Canadian economy. In making those decisions, it is very important that policy-makers keep in mind the goal of efficiency. They can support this goal by promoting competition, by correcting market imperfections where practical, and by promoting financial stability through reduced systemic risk. But it is even more important to remember why the goal of efficiency must be followed. Ultimately, policy-makers must strive to provide the best possible environment for achieving optimal allocation of economic resources. This is how policy-makers and regulators of the financial system can best serve the public and contribute to sustainable economic growth and prosperity in Canada.    5/5  
Alan Greenspan: Mortgage banking Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, to the American Bankers Association Annual Convention, Palm Desert, California (via satellite), 26 September 2005.  *      *      * In the weeks and months ahead, the Federal Reserve will continue to closely follow the consequences of the recent devastating events in the Gulf Coast region in order to assess their implications for our economy. However, we are well aware that the broader economic impact is only a part of the human misery left in the wake of these events. In my remarks today, I plan, in addition, to focus on one of the key factors driving the U.S. economy in recent years: the sharp rise in housing valuations and the associated build-up in mortgage debt.  Over the past decade, the market value of the stock of owner-occupied homes1 has risen annually by approximately 9 percent on average, from $8 trillion at the end of 1995 to $18 trillion at the end of June of this year. Home mortgage debt linked to these structures has risen at a somewhat faster rate.  This enormous increase in housing values and mortgage debt has been spurred by the decline in mortgage interest rates, which remain historically low. Indeed, the thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage, currently around 5-3/4 percent, is about 1/2 percentage point below its level of late spring 2004, just before the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) embarked on the current cycle of policy tightening. This decline in mortgage rates and other long-term interest rates in the context of a concurrent rise in the federal funds rate is without precedent in recent U.S. experience.  Some of the decade-long decline can be ascribed to expectations of lower inflation, a reduced risk premium resulting from less inflation volatility, and a smaller real term premium that seems to be due to a moderation of the business cycle over the past few decades. Besides these factors, the worldwide trend reduction in long-term yields presumably reflects an excess of intended saving over intended investment.  Since the mid-1990s, worldwide saving has been boosted by a significant increase in the share of world output produced by economies with persistently above-average saving--predominantly the emerging economies of Asia. This impetus to saving has been supplemented by shifts in income toward the oil-exporting countries, which more recently have built surpluses because of steep increases in oil prices.  Softness in intended investment, however, is also part of the story. In the United States, for example, capital expenditures have been restrained for some time relative to the very substantial level of corporate cash flow. That development likely reflects the business caution that was apparent in the wake of the stock market decline and the corporate scandals early this decade. In similar fashion, Japanese investment exhibited prolonged restraint following the bursting of Japan's speculative bubble in the early 1990s, and investment in emerging Asia, excluding China, fell appreciably after the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s.  The economic forces driving the global saving-investment balance have been becoming manifest over the past decade, so the steepness of the recent decline in long-term yields suggests that something more may have been at work over the past year. According to                                                  1  Includes second homes that are not rented, vacant homes for sale, and vacant land.    1/5  
estimates prepared by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board, a significant portion of the more recent decline appears to have resulted from a fall in term premiums. Such estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty; nevertheless, they suggest that a perceived increase in economic stability in recent years has encouraged risk-takers to reach out to more-distant time horizons.  Regardless of the precise mix of factors that explains the decline in interest rates, the associated run-up in housing values has left households with a substantial pool of available home equity. According to data recently developed by Jim Kennedy of the Federal Reserve Board staff, and me, discretionary extraction of home equity accounts for about four-fifths of the rise in home mortgage debt.2  Our data splits home equity extraction net of closing costs, and hence debt increase on existing homes, into extraction from three sources: (1) that associated with home turnover--that is, mortgage originations of buyers of existing homes less the associated debt cancellation of sellers, (2) refinancing cash-outs, and (3) increases in home equity loans.  The size of equity extraction owing to turnover closely parallels and presumably finances the realized capital gains on homes, whereas cash-outs and home equity loans generally extract as-yet-unrealized capital gains.  What share of the financed capital gains are spent on consumer goods and services, thereby reducing the saving rate, is uncertain.3 Survey data suggest that approximately a fourth to a third of the value of home equity loans and cash-outs finances personal consumption expenditures directly.44 Another fourth funds repayment of nonmortgage debt that had been used, in effect, as bridge financing, predominantly of personal consumption expenditures.5 Home mortgage debt is thus the final source of funding of some consumer outlays originally financed by extensions of credit card and other consumer debt. Although there are no comparable surveys of the disposition of equity extracted by sellers of homes beyond amounts applied as a down payment on a subsequent home purchase or outright cash purchases, plausibly they would exhibit similar propensities.  If indeed this is the case, the implied increase over the past decade in consumption expenditures financed by home equity extraction, rather than by income and other assets, would account for much of the decline in the personal saving rate since 1995.                                                   2  We define discretionary extraction as the change in mortgage debt (excluding construction loans), plus scheduled, i.e., nondiscretionary, debt amortization minus mortgage debt originations to finance newly built homes. See Alan Greenspan and James Kennedy (2005), "Estimates of Home Mortgage Originations, Repayments, and Debt on One-to-Four-Family Residences, " Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2005-41 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September). 3 Because the personal saving rate is measured relative to personal disposable income, any purchases financed with the proceeds of capital gains will increase personal consumption expenditures but not income, and therefore the measured saving rate will decline. The reason for excluding capital gains from income, and hence saving, is that only book saving can finance capital investment, a key requirement of the structure of our national accounts. Capital gains do not add to gross domestic product (GDP).    4  Surveys report approximately a third of mortgage extraction is spent on "home improvements," part of which is home repair, a personal consumption expenditure.  5  The survey results cited here were reported in Glenn B. Canner, Karen Dynan, and Wayne Passmore, "Mortgage Refinancing in 2001 and Early 2002," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 88 (December 2002), pp. 469-81, Peter J. Brady, Glenn B. Canner, and Dean M. Maki, "The Effects of Recent Mortgage Refinancing," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 86 (July 2000), pp. 441-50, and Glenn B. Canner, Thomas A. Durkin, and Charles A. Luckett, "Recent Developments in Home Equity Lending," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 84 (April 1998), pp. 241-251. It is not possible to trace the part of equity extraction that initially purchases certificates of deposit, stocks, bonds, and other assets but is later liquidated to finance personal consumption expenditures. Survey data usually request the disposition of loan proceeds over a limited period of about a year. We make the assumption that the shares of the loan proceeds are fixed over the past decade.    2/5  
However, a significantly different approach to separating the proportion of consumer spending financed out of income from that financed out of wealth, though one that is similarly robust, concludes that the decline in the saving rate over the past decade can be explained by the decline in interest rates and by the increase in overall household wealth. That wealth, however, includes nonhousing wealth, most importantly stock market wealth.  Thus, we have two approaches, both of which would seem capable of explaining much or all of the decline in the personal saving rate. Of course, both cannot be true, for if they were, we would have explained a greater drop in personal saving than actually occurred. Obviously, this issue will remain an area of active research interest.  Nonetheless, it is difficult to dismiss the conclusion that a significant amount of consumption is driven by capital gains on some combination of both stocks and residences, with the latter being financed predominantly by home equity extraction.  If so, leaving aside the effect of equity prices on consumption, should mortgage interest rates rise or home affordability be further stretched, home turnover and mortgage refinancing cash-outs would decline as would equity extraction and, presumably, consumption expenditure growth. The personal saving rate, accordingly, would rise.  Carrying the hypothesis further, imports of consumer goods would surely decline as would those imported intermediate products that support them. And one would assume that the U.S. trade and current account deficits would shrink as well, all else being equal.  How significant and disruptive such adjustments turn out to be is an open question. Nonetheless, as I have pointed out in previous commentary, their economic effect will, to a large extent, depend on the flexibility inherent in our economy. In a highly flexible economy, such as the United States, shocks should be largely absorbed by changes in prices, interest rates, and exchange rates, rather than by wrenching declines in output and employment, a more likely outcome in a less flexible economy.  * * * To judge the size of a hypothetical decline in home turnover and cash-outs, we need to examine more closely the composition of sales of homes and the possible future path of home prices.  Although we do not have comprehensive data on the split between sales to owner-occupants and those to purchasers of second homes, especially investors, enough data are available to draw some conclusions, however tentative.  As I noted earlier, we can have little doubt that the exceptionally low level of home mortgage interest rates has been a major driver of the recent surge of homebuilding and home turnover and the steep climb in home prices. Indeed, home prices have been rising sharply in many countries around the world. In the United States, signs of froth have clearly emerged in some local markets where home prices seem to have risen to unsustainable levels. It is still too early to judge whether the froth will become evident on a widening geographic scale, or whether recent indications of some easing of speculative pressures signal the onset of a moderating trend.  The housing market in the United States is quite heterogeneous, and it does not facilitate the easy diffusion of local excesses. Instead, we have a collection of local markets only loosely connected by such factors as mortgage interest rates and, over the longer term, migration and construction capacity. As a consequence, the behavior of home prices varies widely across the nation.  Speculation in homes is also largely local, especially for owner-occupied residences. For homeowners to realize accumulated capital gains on a residence--a precondition of a speculative market--they must move. Another formidable barrier to speculative activity is that home sales involve significant commissions, taxes, points, and other fees, which average in   3/5  
the neighborhood of 9 percent of the sales price. Where sales by owner-occupants predominate, speculative turnover of homes is difficult.  But in recent years, the pace of turnover of existing homes has quickened. Apparently, a substantial part of the acceleration in turnover reflects the purchase of second homes--mainly for investment or vacation purposes. According to data collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), mortgage originations for second-home purchases rose from 7 percent of total purchase originations in 2000 to twice that at the end of last year. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the share may currently be even higher. Because down payments on second homes appear to be larger, on average, than they are on homes bought for owner occupancy, and because a larger share of second homes appear to be paid for wholly in cash, second homes presumably represent a larger fraction of total purchases than of loan originations, and arguably are at historically unprecedented levels.  Transactions in second homes, of course, are not restrained to the same degree as sales of primary residences--an individual can sell without having to move. This suggests that speculative activity may have had a greater role in generating the recent price increases than it customarily has had in the past.   * * * The apparent froth in housing markets may have spilled over into mortgage markets. The dramatic increase in the prevalence of interest-only loans, as well as the introduction of other, more-exotic forms of adjustable-rate mortgages, are developments that bear close scrutiny. To be sure, these financing vehicles have their appropriate uses. But to the extent that some households may be employing these instruments to purchase a home that would otherwise be unaffordable, their use is adding to the pressures in the marketplace.  Over the past few years, a great deal of attention has focused on the growing range of loan choices available to mortgage borrowers. The menu, as you know, now features a long list of novel mortgage products, not only interest-only mortgages but also mortgages with forty-year amortization schedules and option ARMs, which allow for a limited amount of negative amortization. These products could be cause for some concern both because they expose borrowers to more interest-rate and house-price risk than the standard thirty-year, fixed-rate mortgage and because they are seen as vehicles that enable marginally qualified, highly leveraged borrowers to purchase homes at inflated prices. In the event of widespread cooling in house prices, these borrowers, and the institutions that service them, could be exposed to significant losses.  Although the aggregate loan-to-value ratio (LTV) for single-family residences, condominiums and cooperatives has been about flat since early 2003, this flatness could mask increases in the number of very highly leveraged home purchasers. Using data for individual mortgage loans and other information, members of the Board staff have estimated the distribution of the remaining mortgage principal to the current home value for a very large set of U.S. households. The loans factored into this calculation include first mortgage liens and most types of second liens. The results show that, as of mid-2005, less than 5 percent of borrowers had current LTVs exceeding 90 percent. In large part, this share was small because the recent growth in house prices has rapidly pushed down the effective LTV for many homeowners. Only the most recent, and the most highly leveraged, home purchasers have high LTVs.  Highly leveraged home purchasers tend to use so-called piggyback mortgages; that is, second liens originated at the time of purchase. These loans are popular, in significant part, because they avoid the non-deductible private mortgage insurance payments required on larger, single loans. If piggyback loans are more common in states in which house price appreciation has been particularly rapid over the past five years, one might worry that homebuyers are especially exposed to reversals in house prices. However, data collected for   4/5  
2004, the first year of coverage in HMDA, show that the use of piggyback loans was not particularly correlated with strong appreciation of prices. Among mortgages tracked by HMDA, piggyback loan use was particularly high in Texas, California, Utah, Oregon, and Colorado. The presence of California on this list is probably no surprise, but home prices in the other four states have not grown particularly rapidly.  Of course, the HMDA data do not track mortgages made by all institutions or open-ended loans such as home equity lines of credit (HELOCs). Anecdotal reports suggest that some homebuyers are using HELOCs as piggyback mortgages, and so we probably do not have a full accounting of all mortgage debt.  Nonetheless, combining the newly available data on piggybacks from HMDA with other information, we can construct a reasonably comprehensive measure of the degree of leverage of mortgages used to purchase homes, by state, in 2004. These estimated LTVs are highest in states that have experienced relatively little house price appreciation, and lowest in states in which prices have appreciated the most, such as California and Massachusetts. The main reason for this negative relationship is likely that most people buying a home in California are probably also selling a home in California and using at least part of their accumulated home equity capital gains as a down payment on their new house. Apparently, many households are forgoing some consumption to lower their new mortgage balances.  In summary, it is encouraging to find that, despite the rapid growth of mortgage debt, only a small fraction of households across the country have loan-to-value ratios greater than 90 percent. Thus, the vast majority of homeowners have a sizable equity cushion with which to absorb a potential decline in house prices. In addition, the LTVs for recent homebuyers appear to be lower in those states that have experienced the most explosive run-up in house prices and that, conceivably, could be at risk for the largest price reversal. That said, the situation clearly will require our ongoing scrutiny in the period ahead, lest more adverse trends emerge.     5/5  
Mark W Olson: Business trends and management challenges for the banking industryRemarks by Mr Mark W Olson, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Annual Economic Outlook Conference, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, Tennessee, 16 September 2005. *      *      * Good morning. When I decided a few weeks ago to focus my remarks on the challenges facing the banking industry, I could not have imagined the challenges that Gulf Coast financial institutions and their customers would face in the devastating aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. So, before I turn to my planned topic of discussing banking and banking supervision more generally, I'd like to spend a few moments reviewing the efforts of the Federal Reserve, some of them in conjunction with other financial institution regulators, to maintain and restore vital financial services to the people of the Gulf Coast--including those who remain in the region and those who have been forced by the storm to relocate outside the region. First, however, I want to express our heartfelt sympathy to all of the individuals and families who have suffered greatly in the past few weeks and to acknowledge the very brave efforts of many individuals to save lives, help the sick and displaced, and restore public order. At the Federal Reserve's New Orleans Branch, essential employees stayed with the office to keep it secure despite the rising flood waters and limited contact with the outside world. In the end, the office barely escaped the flooding, and we are continuing to help our staff members whose lives have been totally disrupted. As of yesterday, all but one of the Branch's 176 employees had been accounted for. We very much hope that this individual will be located soon.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta is the parent Bank for our New Orleans Branch. I want to commend the Bank's staff for their hard work during this very trying time. The senior leadership in Atlanta took a number of important steps to work with banks, thrifts, and credit unions in an effort to ease, where possible, the burdens on these institutions and their customers. For example, in the aftermath of hurricanes or other disasters, the simple provision of cash from the Federal Reserve to banks and from banks to their customers becomes critical. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and other Federal Reserve offices quickly adjusted their operations so that the cash services normally supplied by the New Orleans office could be provided by other Fed offices surrounding the disaster area. To ensure that all banks got the cash services they needed, these offices remained open over both the Labor Day weekend and last weekend. They will be open again this coming weekend. Also, as we did following the 9/11 attacks, the Federal Reserve has assisted depository institutions with priority restoration of telephone service in cooperation with the Department of Homeland Security. Check clearing was disrupted throughout the areas affected by Katrina, yet checks were being written by individuals who were seeking shelter and other necessities--and who needed to access their funds. As relief and recovery efforts began, the restoration of check clearing became increasingly important. We quickly shifted the check processing that was normally handled by our New Orleans office to Atlanta. We also worked with the banking industry in the immediate aftermath of Katrina on many issues affecting individual institutions. To help ease the check-clearing burden, starting the week of September 5, we began giving credit for checks deposited by banks in the New Orleans Branch territory as if the checks were still being processed normally in New Orleans. We also did not return checks when we were unable to present them to severely affected institutions. Instead we held those checks and worked closely with the institutions' primary supervisors to determine how and when we could restart operational contact.   1/6  
The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta also reminded the depository institutions it serves that, as usual, the discount window was and is available to assist them in meeting their liquidity needs. We have been in contact with many depository institutions in the affected areas and are carefully monitoring the situation. At this time, we have not seen evidence of significant funding difficulties or problems in balance-sheet management. In Washington, we have worked closely with the other regulatory agencies to encourage financial institutions to consider all reasonable and prudent steps to ease burdens on customers who have been so deeply affected by Katrina. At this point, the banking industry on the whole has shown resilience and flexibility in its response to this challenging situation. While the challenges have by no means passed, banks appear to be taking the appropriate actions to provide their customers with access to much-needed cash and banking services.  Meantime, the Federal Reserve's community affairs staff is working as a clearinghouse for information on available disaster relief and consumer protections. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta also stands ready to assist community organizations and financial institutions directly affected by the hurricane, both by providing them with information and contact resources and by addressing the needs of displaced families.  So, mindful that our thoughts and attention are continually drawn back to the plight of Katrina's victims, let me now turn to my planned topic--banking in the United States.  The banking industry is an important subject for economic analysis, but one that probably gets less attention than it should. Including the banking industry in economic analysis is valuable because most major economic and financial developments become manifested in bank balance sheets and business performance. One possible reason banking does not get that attention today is that the banking system is strong, healthy, and vibrant, a condition that at least partially reflects our nation's economic well-being. When the banking industry experiences serious problems--as it has from time to time in U.S. history--the economy tends to suffer as well. This connection between economic health and the banking system, as you know, is what persuaded Congress to assign to the Federal Reserve an important role in supervising the safety and soundness of banking organizations, as well as the responsibility for the discount window. My remarks today will address the unique aspects of our banking system and its evolution, the special role played by community banks in that system, and other bank supervisory issues related to the current economic context. A unique and evolving banking system The starting point for any discussion of the importance of the U.S. banking system is to recognize that our system is unique in relation to the banking systems of other countries. The structure and regulatory framework of the U.S. system are complex, having developed over many decades. Reflecting the decentralized nature of our economy and the vast geographic expanse of this country, we have historically had a large number of banks, most of them very small. Initially, the chartering and supervision of banks both large and small was the purview of state governments. Following the Civil War, national banking charters were authorized by the National Banking Act, setting in place what we now call the dual banking system. Over the ensuing decades, the regulatory structure for banks was further shaped by financial crises, including the Great Depression; the creation of a national deposit insurance system; and other forces. More recently, technological advances, along with the increasingly rapid evolution of financial products and markets, have driven many marketplace changes resulting in a dynamic business environment that creates both opportunities and significant challenges for banks and their regulators. The most visible change in the U.S. banking industry over the past quarter-century is the dramatic consolidation among banks. There are about 7,600 commercial banks in the United States today--quite a reduction from the approximately 13,000 banks that were operating in 1980. Reflecting banks' efforts to operate more efficiently and improve their market   2/6  
penetration, mergers and acquisitions have been the main instrument banks have used to consolidate. In addition, consolidation has taken place through intra-company combinations of separate subsidiary charters within larger bank holding companies. Bank failures also played a role in bank consolidations, but failures have been relatively rare since the mid-1990s. Along with consolidation, the current generation of bankers witnessed competitive changes that blurred the once-clear boundaries around the markets for different financial services products. New features were added to traditional products, features that often allowed for more direct competition among different types of financial services providers. New products and capabilities--frequently linked to developments in capital markets--emerged to challenge some of banks' traditional roles in financial intermediation and to create risk management and diversification opportunities. As product lines and businesses became less distinct across industries, banks naturally developed a greater interest in owning securities and insurance firms, and vice versa.  Legal and regulatory change followed, in recognition of the new market realities. The Riegle-Neal Act eliminated barriers to growth across state lines. Later, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act repealed major parts of the Glass-Steagall Act, removing obstacles to expansion across financial services firms. Despite the dramatic changes in the markets for financial services products and in their regulatory framework, the banking system continues to operate well--indeed, it is thriving. Commercial banks earned $106.6 billion in 2004, the second year that profits exceeded $100 billion. The first year was 2003. With these earnings, commercial banks delivered an aggregate return on common equity of 14.22 percent and a 1.34 percent return on assets. Over the first half of 2005, industry profits have already reached nearly $57 billion, with rates of return only a little below those recorded in 2004. Demonstrating the breadth of strong earnings across the industry, only 5.7 percent of commercial banks reported net losses in 2004.  Robust growth in loans and deposits has contributed to banks' strong profits, as has strong fee income, including mortgage origination and servicing revenues. Now let me say a few words about two other factors that have supported improvement in banks' earnings: asset quality and operating efficiency.  Asset quality has been extremely strong, in large part because of favorable economic conditions. These conditions have a tangible effect on profits, allowing banks to set aside less of their earnings for future credit losses. Thus, banks' provisions for loan losses were only 0.25 percent of assets for the first half of 2005, well below the 0.70 percent for 2002. Net chargeoffs so far in 2005 amounted to less than 0.50 percent of loans, really a remarkably low figure. Returning to the present, problem assets at the end of June 2005 were also low, only 0.56 percent of loans, after having peaked at 1.23 percent in 2002. Operating efficiency has also improved and contributed to strong profits. Consolidation and bank investments in new technologies are partially responsible for this improved efficiency. I like to use a productivity measure for banks called the efficiency ratio, which measures what proportion of total revenue is eaten up by overhead costs. This ratio shows that banks have achieved significant reductions in their cost structure. The aggregate efficiency ratio for commercial banks in 2004 was 61.7 percent, meaning that banks needed to spend roughly 62 cents to generate each dollar of revenue. That full-year 2004 ratio was fully 3.5 percentage points lower than it was ten years ago in 1994.  Community banks today Although the number of banks in the United States has declined dramatically, as a general proposition we still have more commercial banks than other developed countries. The large number of banks in this country is neither an accident nor a vestige of a time before   3/6  
telephones or the internet allowed businesses to overcome geographic distances. New reasons have emerged for this large number of institutions and for the demarcation between large institutions--with well-integrated regional, national, or global operations--and the smaller locally oriented institutions that I call community banks. In this new setting, community banks differentiate themselves by focusing on the specific needs of their local markets and by providing a high level of service and attention to the customers in those markets. Community banks, that is, banks with assets of $1 billion or less, continue to be quite successful. These banks generated combined earnings of $13.4 billion in 2004, which translates into an attractive return on common equity of 11.72 percent and a return on average assets of 1.21 percent. Thus far in 2005, profitability has been a bit ahead of that pace, with returns on equity in the first half of 2005 roughly 50 basis points higher than for the same period in 2004. In the second quarter, return on equity reached 12.26 percent versus 11.80 percent in the year-earlier period, after a first-quarter 2005 return on equity of 12.33 percent compared with 11.81 in the same quarter of 2004. Seasonality is a significant factor for community banks. On first review, it would be logical to conclude from community banks' earnings and profitability figures that these banks are less profitable than large institutions and thus are competitively disadvantaged. Indeed, large banks--those with more than $10 billion in assets--generate higher rates of profitability, with returns on average equity in the 15 percent range. This difference in profitability makes economic and market sense, for a number of reasons: Community banks are subject to less earnings volatility than large banks. Competitive conditions and the sources of earnings at community banks also differ from those of large banks. For example, in aggregate, community banks have historically paid 10 to  20 basis points more than the industry as a whole on their savings and money market deposits, demonstrating their interest in attracting and retaining core deposits. Further, the underlying business paradigm at community banks is quite different than that of large institutions. Many community banks are family owned, and many more are closely held, which means there is minimal pressure on quarterly earnings performance. Comparisons of community and large banks naturally raise the broader question of how small banks can compete successfully with large banks. To answer this question, one needs to stratify these banks on the basis of profitability. This stratification reveals that, in nearly every area of bank performance, the financial results of the best-performing community banks match up well with results of the big banks--most notably in the area of efficiency. One might expect large banks to operate more efficiently because of their scale of operations. And in 2004, community banks as a whole did report an overall efficiency ratio of 65 percent, which was much less favorable than the 58 percent figure for large banks. Yet surprisingly, the top-performing community banks outperformed the large banks, delivering an efficiency ratio of 56.6 percent.  Another key strength of top-performing community banks is capital. The top one-fifth of community banks, in terms of their profitability, hold capital that is 40 to 50 percent greater than the industry average. The top quintile's leverage ratio was 11.10 percent in 2004, compared with 7.99 percent for all banks, or 38.9 percent higher than the industry average. When compared with the large-bank ratio of 7.41 percent, top-performing community bank capital ratios were some 49.8 percent higher. The effects of consolidation are as evident for community banks as for the largest banking organizations. Comparative numbers show there are about 7,300 community banks, compared with 11,000 twenty years ago. Many different factors have contributed to this consolidation, as I mentioned earlier.  Critically, the reduction in the number of community banks should not be misinterpreted as a signal that bank charters have somehow become less attractive--far from it. Let's look at the past five years. It is true that as of June 2005 there were 1,033 fewer commercial banks than at the end of 1999. That decline, however, is really not the interesting part of the story. Over   4/6  
the same period, according to the FDIC, some 718 new commercial bank charters were granted. Do a little arithmetic, and that figure suggests that for every five times that one bank acquired another bank, somewhere there were two new charters being issued. Moreover, those new charters brought more than $5.7 billion of new capital into the banking industry. Both the number of new charters and the magnitude of new capital injections are an eloquent testament to the attractiveness and vibrancy of the bank franchise.  Issues of interest to supervisors Overall, the banking industry is healthy. However, some issues warrant the attention of bankers and their supervisors. One credit risk management issue that has been in the news quite a bit lately is home mortgage lending, particularly the surge in originations of nontraditional mortgages, such as interest-only loans, payment-option loans, and various hybrid forms of adjustable-rate loans. These types of mortgages typically involve a low monthly payment for the borrower. They are sometimes called "affordability products" because the low payment can make it possible for some households to qualify for higher-priced homes that they could not afford using traditional thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages. The credit risk concern is, of course, that households stretching to qualify for loans will be severely challenged if, for example, interest rates rise, causing the adjustable rate on a hybrid loan to reset at a much higher rate. Another concern is that despite the lower monthly payment, the households will eventually have to repay or refinance the principal on these loans, whether or not the current home price is sustained. This prospect is especially troubling if the pricing and payment structure of the mortgage leads to negative amortization of the loan balance. Federal Reserve reviews indicate that banks' holdings of these unconventional mortgage loans, while still small, have risen significantly in 2005. Therefore, banks' risk management procedures must take into account the unique characteristics and credit risk profile of these novel types of loans, especially because our experience with them is quite limited.  Moving to one last credit risk management issue: Community bank loans to finance real estate construction rose 7.4 percent over the second quarter. This increase continues a remarkable trend in which commercial real estate--or CRE--lending has accounted for virtually all asset growth at community banks. In 2001 and 2002, growth in CRE loans as a whole accounted for two-thirds of overall asset growth at community banks. In 2003 and 2004, CRE lending represented essentially all of that asset growth. Over the first half of 2005, CRE loans expanded by twice as much, in dollar terms, as total assets. The continued rapid growth in CRE lending was accompanied by declines in securities holdings, home equity loans, and other consumer loans.  This pattern of sustained and one-dimensional asset growth naturally raises questions about potential concentrations of credit risk in CRE loans. These questions are most striking in markets where commercial vacancy rates are particularly high, where competition among lenders is most intense, or where potentially overheated home-price conditions have contributed to a sharp expansion in new-home construction. There is still no indication that the credit quality of these loans has begun to deteriorate, but the potential for concentrations in lending exposure remains an ongoing area of supervisory attention.  Interest-rate-risk management is always a key issue at financial institutions, particularly in the current economic and policy environment. Although many large institutions have felt earnings pressure from the flattening yield curve, net interest margins at community banks were 4.12 percent in 2004--40 basis points higher than for the industry as a whole. The gap has been even wider in 2005. A look at community banks' balance sheets and how they have been managed tells us a lot about why community banks' margins have fared better. The sharp growth in construction lending, which is predominantly variable rate, is one element that has allowed community bank loan yields to keep up with their funding costs. Community banks also reduced their holdings of securities over the past year, while shortening the maturity of   5/6  
their remaining holdings. As of June, only 15.8 percent of commercial bank assets had maturities beyond five years, compared with 16.9 percent at year-end 2004 and the peak level of 18.5 percent a year earlier. At the same time, community banks increased the proportion of their time deposits with maturities beyond one year, which allowed the banks to lock in then-current rates as they were rising.  In response to the credit- and interest-rate risk management issues I've just discussed, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have, of course, concentrated on evaluating banks' risk management capability. But the agencies are also paying significant attention to broader corporate governance issues, including internal controls and internal audit. Corporate governance is more than effective risk management. Corporate governance is the framework by which the different constituencies within an institution--owners, management, and staff--interact with each other to make sure that any actions taken are in the best interests of the corporation and its shareholders. The rules of governance established by the company determine the presence and effectiveness of internal controls, as well as the incentives for behavior within the organization.  The choices banks make when they establish their risk management and corporate governance systems have important ramifications for the institution and its well-being, and not just because of regulators. These systems affect how the institution functions and how others perceive it in the marketplace. Banks whose governance systems are weak risk episodes of fraud or other control failures that will draw adverse reactions from both their customers and the financial markets.  Conclusion A healthy and vibrant banking system is an important element of a well-functioning economy. The unique structure and regulatory framework of the U.S. banking industry has been significantly shaped by our history and market forces. As the excellent condition of U.S. commercial banks suggests, this framework continues to strike the right balance between durability and adaptability. One key element of this balance is that, despite the ever-shrinking world and the emergence of mega-financial institutions, community banks continue to experience financial success and attract real capital from the marketplace.  In this generally positive setting, issues of keen interest to supervisors remain. Banks of all sizes have benefited from recent economic conditions, experiencing historically strong asset quality, the benefits of growth in household wealth and liquidity, and a surging demand for some financial products. At the same time, these conditions present both community banks and larger institutions with important credit- and market- risk management issues, as well as broader corporate governance issues.     6/6  
Kazumasa Iwata: The role of the price stability anchor in extricating Japan from deflation Summary of a speech given by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel Discussion “Monetary Policy Strategies: A Central Bank Panel”, at the Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. *      *      * Introduction  I would like to talk about the issues relating to monetary policy strategies for the future, in the light of Japan's experience in the last decade of stagnation as well as deflation, and the subsequent struggle to overcome deflation under the zero bound on the nominal interest rate.  After a pause in growth triggered by the bursting of the mini-bubble in the digital electronics sector in spring 2004, Japan has resumed growth exceeding the potential growth rate, with the rate of change in the consumer price index, excluding institutional and special factors such as oil, telephone charges, rice and fresh food, registering virtually zero in recent months.1 Currently we have good prospects to exit from a decade-long period of deflation. In this context, I would like to draw some lessons from previous policy developments for the future conduct of monetary policy, focusing on the role of the price stability anchor. The quantitative easing policy and the price stability anchor  Japan is apparently viewed as a country that has not adopted an inflation targeting policy. Yet it is my personal view that Japan implements implicitly a price stability target within the framework of current quantitative easing policy (bank reserve target policy) which was introduced in March 2001. This is primarily because of the strict observance of the commitment on the policy duration to secure price stability.  The preceding "zero interest rate policy" in the period from February 1999 to August 2000 failed to bear fruit, in part due to the weak commitment on policy duration. In contrast, under the quantitative easing policy, the Bank of Japan clarified and strengthened the commitment on the duration of the policy by presenting in October 2003 the three conditions for ending this policy. The three conditions can be summarized by a phrase such as "stably above zero of the core consumer price index on a year-to-year basis" or "never return to deflation."  This commitment sends a signal to the market that the Bank of Japan finds it important to secure price stability to achieve positive inflation rates, although the numerical upper limit is not announced.2 It serves as an anchor of price stability to prevent a deflationary spiral under the condition of the zero bound on the nominal interest rate.                                                    1  Japan's economy resumed its recovery process after a pause in growth triggered by the IT sector-related inventory stock adjustment. The bursting of the mini-bubble in the digital electronics sector was associated with the downward cyclical phase of the liquid crystal and silicon cycle initiated in spring 2004. Subsequently, a non-IT sector-related inventory stock adjustment due to the deceleration of exports, notably for China, curtailed industrial production activity and the growth rate. Currently, the inventory stock adjustment process is almost over. In addition, domestic private final demand in the first half of 2005 was sufficiently strong to register growth above the potential growth rate (about 1 percent). 2  On the lack of an upper limit, there is some similarity to the lack of a lower limit for the numerical definition of price stability below 2 percent during the initial stage of monetary operations by the European Central Bank.   1/5  
Price level indeterminacy under the zero bound on the nominal interest rate  Under the Bank of Japan's quantitative easing policy, not only the uncollateralized overnight call rate but also the rate of longer maturity of at least one year has virtually reached zero. It is well known that monetary policy aimed at fixing the market interest rate faces difficulties in controlling the money supply and the inflation rate. The difficulties are augmented under the zero interest rates, because the association between the money supply and the price level becomes much looser than normal. Therefore, it is all the more important for the central bank to provide the price stability anchor to the market.3Moreover, the zero bound on the nominal interest rate erodes the market mechanism in the financial market as well as market discipline, thereby distorting the allocation of funds on the market. In the past several months, we encountered a difficulty in achieving the bank reserve target due to undersubscription to our offers in open market operations, and allowed a temporary deviation from the lower limit of the reserve target in early June, end-July, and early August. The intention was to maintain the bank reserve target in the face of diminishing demand for excess reserves by banks. In other words, the measure was designed to solve the trade-off between strict implementation of the commitment and flexibility. It may be noted that the additional flotation of government bonds to frontload the rollover of existing government bonds concentrated in fiscal 2008 has made it more difficult to maintain the reserve target.4Bank of England Governor Mervyn King (2004) once pointed out the importance of debt management policy, namely, the shortening maturity structure of government debt, to Japan's exit from deflation. The cash management by the government sector also seems relevant to facilitate the efficient implementation of monetary policy.  At any rate, it is best to preempt the emergence of the zero bound on the nominal interest rate, even though room remains for the central bank to affect the expected future path of short-term rates by implementing the commitment on policy duration longer than is usual. However, strict implementation of the commitment tends to limit flexibility in conducting monetary policy.  Effect of quantitative easing policy on interest rates  A number of proposals have been made to overcome Japan's deflation. One of them recommends widening the application of zero interest rates to longer maturity until the deflation disappears. In the process of raising the bank reserve target, the extent of zero interest rates has been widened to cover at least one year. This effect arises due to the commitment to maintain an ultra-expansionary policy longer than anticipated by the market participants under normal circumstances. We name this the "policy duration effect."  The increase in the bank reserve target seems to have exerted a signaling effect to solidify the commitment and thus strengthen the policy duration effect, aside from the ample liquidity                                                                                                                                                       The ECB redefined price stability by adding a lower limit of 1 percent, yet the final goal is set closer to 2 percent. 3  It may be noted that in Japan all the market interest rates are not zero, in contrast to the assumption adopted by several theoretical models. 4  The amount of government deposits and government surplus in the Bank of Japan accounts is about 35 trillion yen, in part due to the frontloading of rollover of existing government bonds and the increase in tax revenue. Inefficient cash management arising from rigid accounting rules results in a significant revenue loss. Moreover, the fluctuation of budgetary funds in Japan is quite large, compared with other major countries. This tends to limit the capability to implement an ultra-easy policy.   2/5  
provision to avoid systemic risk and a deflationary spiral. Both of the effects worked to support the recovery and prompt the restructuring process of debtor companies under the strain of balance-sheet adjustment, through the maintained low interest rates.  The price stability anchor implicit in the commitment is not specified in terms of a time frame, but is highly data-dependent, as it is defined by the achievement of positive inflation rates.  Market participants, who once appeared to be skeptical of our scenario of registering a 0.3 percent rise in the core CPI in fiscal 2006, now seem to anticipate the likely end of the current policy regime within one year, as observed in euroyen futures market interest rates. This has led to a pickup in interest rates over a wide range of maturities. In this sense the market informs us when the exit is coming.  President of the San Francisco Federal Reserve Janet Yellen once asked me why deflation has subsided despite the existence of the output gap. My answer was, "It is because of the speed limit effect." The narrowing output gap was brought about by the lengthy and sustained recovery phase in and after 2002. It may be noteworthy that the effect of the speed limit (narrowing the output gap) dominated the effect of the level of the output gap on the deceleration of deflation.5 Now we have reached the stage where it can be said that a long time is not needed to satisfy the conditions to end the quantitative easing policy.  Dynamic price stability target policy  To the extent that the combination of the provision of the price stability anchor with the monetary easing policy based on our clear commitment has succeeded in bringing Japan's economy to a virtually zero inflation rate, compared with deflation of the core CPI of about 1 percent in 2001, it seems reasonable to maintain the key elements underlying the quantitative easing policy framework at succeeding stages.  About two years ago, I described the step-by-step approach to attain ultimate price stability as a "dynamic price stability target policy" for extricating Japan from deflation, in contrast to the "timeless perspective" price level target policy. I identified the three phases of the dynamic adjustment process moving out from the deflationary equilibrium to the normal equilibrium, thereby avoiding the over- and undershooting of the inflation rate and the long-term interest rate, notably during the transition period.  Recently, former Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (2005) has presented a three-step strategy for the future of Japan's monetary policy. He identifies three phases: namely, the quantitative easing policy, the zero interest rate policy, and the interest rate policy. In between, there are two transitional phases: One is dismantling the bank reserve target to the required reserve level (about 6 trillion yen), or the shrinkage of zero interest rates to the uncollateralized overnight call rate. Another is raising short-term interest rates to the neutral level to achieve price stability over the longer term. I personally find it desirable to provide an appropriate anchor of price stability in numerical form when we embark on a new policy regime such as the return to the zero interest rate policy.  It seems necessary to retain the transparent commitment on policy duration in order to prevent abrupt changes of long-term interest rates in the transition process to reach a new                                                  5  In Japan, the output goal is not explicitly stated in the newly established Bank of Japan Law of 1997, in contrast to the case of the United States, where the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability is prescribed in the Federal Reserve Act. Yet it is absolutely necessary to pay due attention to the movement of the output gap, notably the size of narrowing of the deflationary gap. In the process of overcoming deflation, the output goal may not be in serious conflict with the goal of price stability.   3/5  
equilibrium, with the risk of entailing inflation (overshooting) or deflation (undershooting) being preempted.6Dynamic price stability target policy and the timeless perspective policy  The dynamic price stability target policy is "strategically coherent" (to borrow a phrase from Professor Bennett McCallum [2005]) to attain final price stability, but it is not a "timeless perspective policy" that puts emphasis on the time consistency of monetary policy.7 The price level target policy recommends achieving the prescribed path of price levels with a constant rate of inflation, regardless of the initial conditions. Yet it seems difficult to accept temporary overshooting of the inflation rate and long-term interest rates in the transition path returning to the desired price level path from persistent deflation, in particular under the circumstances of the large-scale accumulation of government debt and the persistent budget deficit in Japan.  However, we recognize the importance of "history dependence" in conducting monetary policy. In this context, I would like to stress that maintaining the same reserve target level at the current stage implies an increased degree of monetary easing, since the excess supply of bank reserves is intensified and the maturity of short-term monetary operation instruments is lengthened, with the result of extension of zero interest rates in the market. Moreover, according to several surveys, the expected inflation rates turn out to be positive in recent periods. This implies that the short-term real interest rate is negative despite the zero bound on the nominal interest rates. If the core message of "history dependence" implies that the monetary policy effect becomes more expansionary at the point close to the exit, the Bank of Japan's current policy is in line with the spirit inherent in the price level target policy.  The role of fiscal policy  Let me conclude my remarks by referring to the role of fiscal policy to extricate Japan from deflation. We observe that the government announced the fiscal policy target to achieve a primary budget deficit of zero in about ten years, and the automatic stabilizer effect dominated fiscal policy management after 2001 under the Koizumi administration.  The coordination between monetary and fiscal policy becomes more important, if the economy were to fall into deflationary equilibrium (or the Friedmanian equilibrium), where the size of deflation rate is equal to the natural interest rate. On fiscal policy, we can identify the two different types; namely, the Ricardian and the non-Ricardian. If the present value of government debt in the future becomes zero regardless of changes in the path of prices, it is classified as a Ricardian policy.                                                   6  This implies that we should have some safety margin on the final numerical objective (aside from the bias inherent in the price index), given the likely negative macroeconomic shock to the lower natural interest rate of Japan's economy over the future which is conducive to the zero bound on the nominal interest rate. 7  This issue may be related to issues such as the discretion versus rule-based policymaking, or the risk management approach under uncertainty versus rule-based policymaking. It seems sensible to adopt the risk management approach under the Knightian uncertainty (Greenspan [2004]). Chairman Greenspan is critical of the "too inflexible" management of rule-based monetary policy. Yet "activist" rule-based policymaking seems to possess sufficient flexibility in uncertain circumstances. For instance, the Bayesian decision process under the risk management approach involves a learning process. Learnability plays an important role in rule-oriented monetary policy to secure stability of the equilibrium. Rule-based monetary policy has flexibility to implement a systematic revision of a contingent plan and prescribes the updating process in a "timeless manner," while discretionary policy revises a contingency plan period by period. In any case, there may arise no conflict or inconsistency between the risk management approach and the provision of the price stability anchor to market participants.   4/5  
As long as the fiscal rule aiming at reducing the primary budget deficit over the medium term implies a moderate increase in the nominal government bond supply, then fiscal policy that is passive (or Ricardian) under the normal equilibrium with a positive rate of changes in prices becomes active (or non-Ricardian) under the deflationary equilibrium. Thus, there is a good reason to expect that the gradual consolidation of the fiscal balance facilitates the economy's exit from deflation, coupled with a monetary easing policy based on the price stability anchor.     5/5  
T T Mboweni: The challenge of stronger economic growth and development in South Africa Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Fedusa Third National Congress, Gold Reef City, 15 and 16 September 2005. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for your invitation to speak at the Fedusa Third National Congress. A constructive dialogue between labour and the other social partners is crucial for fostering community consensus on those issues that are important for accelerating growth and improving the quality of life of all South Africans. I welcome the opportunity to be part of this dialogue. In speaking about the challenge of stronger economic growth and development I will first briefly review where our economy currently stands, paying due attention to the statutory mandate of the South African Reserve Bank. The second part of the address will be directed at the debate on how much growth is needed for South Africa to absorb the unemployed within a reasonable timeframe, and – perhaps more importantly – what needs to be done to boost our growth and development momentum accordingly. Recent economic developments By this time we all know that South Africa's economic growth rate in the second quarter of 2005 amounted to 4,8 per cent, compared with 3,5 per cent in the first quarter. Most analysts forecast that real gross domestic product will increase by around 4 per cent in the full calendar year 2005, signifying an increase of more than 2½ per cent in real income per capita. What is particularly gratifying about the current growth environment is that our economy has enjoyed twenty-three quarters of uninterrupted economic expansion. This is the longest upswing in the recorded economic history of South Africa. The current recovery has the properties of a well-trained long-distance runner, rather than the characteristics of an unfit sprinter loaded with steroids performing admirably for just a fleeting moment. The improvement in growth in the second quarter of 2005 was mainly brought about by a sharp increase in real value added in manufacturing, which reflected rising domestic final demand and stronger export demand for certain categories of goods, alongside a somewhat more competitive level of the exchange value of the rand. Real output of the agricultural sector was bolstered by a bumper maize crop which was predominantly harvested in the second quarter, while simultaneously almost all the other main sectors of the economy displayed solid growth too. Enterprise-surveyed employment outside the agricultural sector recorded successive increases in each of the five quarters to September 2004. Private-sector job opportunities benefited most from the economic recovery, but there was also a moderate increase in public-sector employment. The pick-up in enterprise-surveyed employment was, however, not sustained in the last quarter of 2004 and the first quarter of 2005. Over the year to March 2005 enterprise-surveyed employment rose, on balance, by 111 000. The strongest increases were recorded in the community, social and personal services and trade sectors, while employment in gold mining, finance and manufacturing shrank over this  one-year period. Whereas the enterprise survey measures formal employment in the main non-agricultural sectors of the economy, results from household surveys measures all employment. Household survey data indicate that total employment in South Africa expanded by some 500 000 jobs over the year to March 2005, but roughly half of this increase was in the informal, domestic service and agricultural sectors.   1/5  
Returning to the narrower data based on the enterprise surveys, it is estimated that labour productivity rose by 2,6 per cent in the year to the first quarter of 2005. Workers engaged in more strike action in the recent past: Man-days lost to industrial action increased more than three-fold from the first half of 2004 to the first half of 2005. Nevertheless, nominal remuneration per worker rose by 8,7 per cent in the year to March 2005, noticeably slower than previously. Allowing for productivity changes, unit labour cost increased by 5,9 per cent in the year to March 2005, i.e. 1,3 percentage points lower than the average rate of increase in 2004. Wage settlements averaged 6 per cent in the first half of 2005.  These wage settlements and remuneration increases are modest compared to the high nominal increases recorded in the 1970s and 1980s. However, those distant increases were eroded by equally high inflation. After allowing for fiscal drag they did little if anything to improve the average worker's real disposable income. Currently inflation is much lower, and as a consequence there is far less money illusion and inflationary distortion which misdirect economic decisions. In July 2005 CPIX-inflation amounted to 4,2 per cent, registering its 23rd successive month within the inflation target range of 3 to 6 per cent. Although one cannot deny that it has been a difficult journey to low inflation, the benefits are apparent: More certainty regarding the future purchasing power of the money in our pockets, better planning, especially of cash-flows for those households and businesses using credit and accordingly having to make interest payments. The cash-flow improvement follows because sustained low inflation creates the scope for nominal interest rates to move to lower levels. The achievement of sustained lower inflation made it possible for the household sector to incur more debt – largely for housing and durable consumption purposes – without a significantly heavier interest burden. Since 1999 the household-debt-to-disposable-income ratio, on balance, rose from 57 per cent to more than 60 per cent, whereas the debt-service-to-disposable-income ratio decreased from around 10 per cent to about 7 per cent. Revealing as they are, these aggregate numbers do not show that numerous households that are already over-indebted and facing uncomfortable circumstances are included in the totals. Nor do they show that there is a further significant number of people who just make ends meet but who would be in dire straits if a fairly small interest rate increase were to take effect. Nevertheless, with employment and real disposable income rising and the average debt-service ratio well contained, most households are still in a comfortable position and this is likely to persist, provided they continue to live within their means and allow for some cushion to shield them against unforeseen events. The South African Reserve Bank is committed to ensuring that the hard-won gains in the fight against inflation are not forfeited. With international oil prices recently recording record-high levels, there is no shortage of factors waiting to fuel the inflation spiral. While the immediate or first-round effects of rising energy prices would have to be accepted, monetary policy will not allow this to develop into an inflationary spiral. The Bank will continue to honour its mandate as enshrined in the Constitution and the South African Reserve Bank Act and given explicit content through the adoption by the Government of a 3-to-6-per-cent target range for CPIX inflation.  Towards stronger growth and accelerated development These promising economic conditions are clouded by the high rate of unemployment in South Africa: 26 per cent of the workforce is unemployed. Recently debate intensified regarding ways to enhance the growth capacity of South Africa in order to make meaningful inroads into unemployment, poverty and underdevelopment. A sustained real growth rate of around 6 per cent per annum is often mentioned in this context. It is worthwhile to reflect on   2/5  
some of the key strands in this debate and to provide a central banker's perspective on some of these.  At a G-20 conference on economic growth which was recently held in South Africa and co-organised by the Bank, it was argued that there is more to sustained and vibrant growth and development than just "good macro". In other words, prudent and consistent monetary and fiscal policies, while necessary in order to achieve sustained strong growth and development, are not sufficient. What is needed beyond a prudent and stable macroeconomic policy arrangement is unfortunately not available in standard recipe format, but depends on the specific circumstances in each country. Allow me to discuss a handful of reforms which are likely to be crucial to enhancing the long-term health and vigour of the South African economy. The maintenance, upgrading and expansion of infrastructure deserve a prominent position among any list of reforms needed to propel growth to a higher plane. The real fixed capital stock of South Africa rose by just 2 per cent in 2004, and by between 1 and 1½ per cent per annum in the preceding four years. A continuation of such low rates of increase in the capital stock is clearly not supportive of a real GDP growth rate of 6 per cent per annum. Assuming that the capital stock would have to increase by 4½ to 5 per cent per year to support a real growth rate of 6 per cent per annum, it would require the ratio of fixed capital formation to gross domestic product to rise from the current 17 per cent to around 22 per cent in order to achieve such growth on a sustainable basis. Government – at all levels – and public corporations have committed themselves to ambitious capital programmes. However, implementation almost invariably seems to take longer than initially planned. Institutional capacity rather than money seems to be the problem in many instances. Much has been said about the inadequate road and rail infrastructure which hinders the efficient movement of workers between their residences and places of work, while also inhibiting the movement of goods between producers and markets. Similar concerns have been voiced regarding certain ports. Unfortunately sweeping statements discrediting all infrastructural installations are not at all helpful. The challenge lies in identifying specific current and future bottlenecks at the microeconomic level, followed by the often thankless processes of budgeting, planning, implementation and maintenance management. In each of these processes dedication, appropriate skills and long-term commitment are required to deliver the goods. Those overseeing these processes should stay committed to each project, infrastructure creation, with lengthy gestation periods, clearly would not benefit from high turnover at management level. Several exciting microeconomic reforms involving South Africa's infrastructure are in the pipeline. The introduction of a second fixed-line telephone operator, for example, seems set to increase competition and reduce communications costs. De-mothballing of power generating plants and the upgrading of power distribution networks, water-supply infrastructure, railway lines and rolling stock are all to be welcomed. While our main airports currently seem to cope well, projected further increases in passenger numbers and freight volumes necessitate further expansion. The cluster of industries linked to infrastructure is evidently going to experience buoyant times in the coming years. The accompanying imports of machinery and equipment might, of course, initially widen the deficit on the current account of our balance of payments. However, foreign finance usually accompanies such imports, and later on the improved infrastructure is likely to boost exports as the supply side of our economy is streamlined. A particularly sensitive area is that of land reform. Patterns of land ownership which have evolved over time are not sustainable, and need to change. However, great care needs to be taken in this process. What South Africa cannot afford is the kind of reform where agricultural land which is being used productively is purchased with taxpayers' money, transferred, and ends up being used far less productively than before, subtracting from the country's output   3/5  
and destroying job opportunities. Farming is a modern business requiring specialised skills as well as financial capital. Adequate attention has to be paid to the training of newly empowered farmers, advisory services, and financial support for a limited period.  Success in improving growth and creating jobs hinges critically on appropriate skills development. This does not require throwing money at the problem, but aligning the system of education and training to the requirements of a modern economy. Agriculture's share in total value added in the economy has dwindled from 7,7 per cent in 1975 to 3,4 per cent last year, and that of mining from 11,1 per cent to 7,1 per cent over the same period. Construction's share fell from 5,1 per cent in 1975 to 2,4 per cent in 2004 (but this should, of course, rise as infrastructure spending gets underway). At the other extreme, the share of the finance, real-estate and business services sector in the economy grew from 12,5 per cent in 1975 to 20,1 per cent last year, and that of community, social and personal services from  16,1 per cent to 21,0 per cent over the same period. Product lines and production processes within the various sub-sectors have undergone revolutionary change with the introduction of sophisticated information and communications technologies. The skills requirements of a modern services-oriented economy (the tertiary sector currently generates 65 per cent of total value added in South Africa) are dramatically different from the requirements which faced entrants to the labour market 30 years ago. In reflecting on ways to systematically improve prospects for growth, the role of the exchange rate merits some consideration. Firstly, it should be emphasised that the authorities have a target for the inflation rate and not for the exchange rate. The exchange rate is essentially determined by supply and demand in the foreign exchange market, reflecting the decisions of numerous participants – tourists, investors, importers, exporters and the like. But for various reasons the Bank cannot be blind to the exchange rate, and has a clear preference for a relatively stable and competitive level of the exchange value of the rand. The preference for a relatively stable exchange value of the rand originates from the painful adjustment costs which accompany large movements in the exchange rate. Adjustment at the margin is a natural economic phenomenon, but large movements in the exchange rate can render entire sectors uneconomical and others extremely viable within a very short period of time. The preference for a competitive level of the exchange rate reflects the need for sustainability – for exporters to move into foreign markets and to stay there. The preference for a relatively stable and competitive exchange value of the rand is seldom perfectly matched by economic outcomes. The foreign exchange market in South Africa is highly liquid (turnover nowadays exceeds US$13 billion per day) and powerful forces beyond our control, such as the international prices of commodities, have a considerable bearing on price formation in the foreign exchange market. Practical experience in the central bank with large-scale intervention in the foreign exchange market has been sobering. Zealous intervention in a liquid market with numerous financially strong participants can be a costly and largely futile exercise. In practice, the Bank prefers to leave the determination of the exchange rate to market forces. The Bank disseminates data on the balance of payments, foreign exchange reserves and related matters, thereby helping to inform market participants' decisions. On rare occasions the Bank may comment on evidence pointing to possible excesses in price formation in the foreign exchange market. The best medicine for the one-way view regarding the direction of the rand's exchange value which prevailed from the early 1980s up to 2001, however, was the recovery of the rand over the past four years, which bit deeply into the pockets of rand pessimists. The Bank may also build up or reduce its international reserves; in recent years the emphasis has been on accumulating international reserves, which naturally has had some price consequences but did not signify the adoption of a target level for the exchange rate. When abundant amounts of foreign exchange are available in the market (and the rand is comparatively strong) it presents the Bank with a good opportunity to buy more foreign   4/5  
exchange from the market, since its holdings of gold and foreign exchange are on the low side. On balance the Bank has increased its gross gold and foreign exchange reserves from US$8 billion at the end of 2003 to just below US$19 billion at present.  Conclusion Despite some progress made in recent years, high levels of unemployment necessitate more ambitious steps to strengthen South Africa's growth potential. The Reserve Bank is committed to containing inflation, thereby providing a launching pad for enhanced growth and development. But this is not a sufficient condition for economic success. Enhanced infrastructural development, the implementation of education and training programmes which deliver the skills necessary for a modern economy, and careful land reform are but a handful of the key ingredients necessary for boosting economic performance. And, as with monetary policy, all of these elements need to be nurtured carefully as it takes a while before they bear fruit. They require total dedication and sustained attention to detail if they are to be successful. Success is in our hands.    5/5  
Susan Schmidt Bies: Behind the scenes at the FOMC - how the Federal Reserve determines monetary policy  Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Academic Speaker Series, University of Tennessee, Martin, Tennessee, 7 February 2005. *      *      * Good evening. I'm certainly pleased to be back in Tennessee with a chance to visit with some old friends. I am often asked what it is like to be a Federal Reserve Governor and what I actually do. So I thought I would give you an overview of the Federal Reserve System, to assure my friends that, yes, it is a full-time job, and, yes, I did have to move to Washington to accept the appointment. Before I start, let me offer the customary caution that the views I'll express are my own and don't necessarily reflect those of other policymakers or staff members of the Federal Reserve. First, I want to spend some time offering you a broader perspective on the Federal Reserve's purposes and functions. Then I want to talk in more detail about how monetary policy is determined. At the Board, we sometimes nickname this topic "Fed 101." In fact, the Fed has a wonderful website with just that name. You can find it by going to www.federalreserveeducation.org and clicking on the "Fed101" tab at the top of the page.1 The Federal Reserve System The Federal Reserve System is generically described as the central bank of the United States. It represents our nation's third, and I trust final, attempt to establish a central bank. You may well recall learning in school that, in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the Congress chartered the First Bank of the United States and the Second Bank of the United States, but neither institution lasted more than twenty years. The Banks' very existence was controversial and went to the heart of the great national debate, which continues to this day, over which responsibilities and powers should be handled at the federal level and which should be left to the states. Suffice it to say that, after the charter of the Second Bank of the United States expired in 1836, we went without a central bank for nearly eighty years.  A series of financial panics in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, most notably the Panic of 1907, revived the idea of creating a central bank to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible, and more stable monetary and financial system. But suspicion of centralized power remained at the core of the American psyche, and so the institution that the Federal Reserve Act established in 1913 was a central bank that assigned significant responsibilities for monetary-policy-making to regional Federal Reserve Banks. The System that resulted consists of a governmental agency - the Board of Governors - in Washington and, in twelve major cities, the regional Federal Reserve Banks, which combine public and private elements. The role of the Board vis-à-vis the regional Banks was elevated in the aftermath of the stock market crash of 1929 and in the early years of the Great Depression, but the combination of centralized and regional responsibilities remains an important strength of the Federal Reserve System, as I'll explain shortly when I discuss the formulation of monetary policy. The role that the Fed's founders envisioned for the central bank was narrower, and more passive, than the role that the Fed plays today. The emphasis was on providing currency and reserves to meet seasonal demands and on assisting banks in accommodating the credit needs of commerce and business. Indeed, until the 1920s, it wasn't clearly understood that the Reserve Banks' purchases and sales of government securities influenced the supply of money and credit in the economy. Today, the Federal Reserve's duties fall into four general areas - some that would have been familiar to the central bankers in the Fed's early years and some that would have been unfamiliar:                                                       1  These remarks draw from the following sources: Laurence H. Meyer (1998), "Come with Me to the FOMC," speech delivered at Willamette University, April 2; Mark W. Olson (2004), "The Federal Open Market Committee and the Formation of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Twenty-sixth Conference of the American Council on Gift Annuities, May 5; and David J. Stockton (2002), "What Makes a Good Model for the Central Bank to Use?" speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 2.  BIS Review 8/2005 1 
• maintaining the stability of the financial system and containing systemic risk that may arise in financial markets  • supervising and regulating banking organizations to ensure the safety and soundness of the nation's banking and financial system and to protect consumers from harm in their use of credit and banking services  • playing a major role in operating and overseeing the nation's payment system, including providing certain financial services to financial institutions, the U.S. government, and foreign official institutions  • conducting monetary policy in pursuit of stable prices and maximum sustainable employment  We have an all-too-recent example of the Fed as a source of financial stability in its response to the financial aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, which occurred just before I joined the Board in December 2001. As a commercial bank executive, I was impressed with the speed at which the Fed responded when the normal settlement and information systems in check and securities markets were interrupted. The Fed worked immediately through discount window lending, open market operations, and other means to provide the financial and banking systems with sufficient liquidity. It worked with public- and private-sector participants to keep markets open or, if circumstances forced markets to close, to return them quickly to normal operations. As the operator and overseer of key payment systems, it had to ensure that its own systems, as well as those of the private sector, were operational. And on the Monday after September 11, it lowered the target federal funds rate to help cushion the economic fallout of the blow to consumers' and businesses' confidence. Because the Fed worked so effectively, bankers throughout the country could serve their consumer and business customers and thereby help to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist attacks. The Fed's role as the supervisor of banking organizations - both as the federal supervisor of the roughly 900 state-chartered banks that have joined the Federal Reserve System and as the umbrella overseer of more than 5,000 financial and bank holding companies - gives the Fed's staff and policymakers the kind of hands-on experience and knowledge that is essential for a central bank during a financial crisis. The Fed's examiners and supervisors seek to ensure not only the safety and soundness of the banking system but also the financial strength of individual banking organizations and the effectiveness of their systems for complying with anti-money-laundering, consumer-protection, and other laws. In fact, the Congress charged the Federal Reserve Board with writing the rules that implement consumer protection laws such as the Truth in Savings Act and the Truth in Lending Act, though each of the various federal banking agencies enforces the regulations for the institutions within its purview. Given all the attention paid to the Board and its Chairman, you may be surprised to learn that more than 21,000 of the Federal Reserve System's roughly 23,000 employees work not in Washington but at the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks. A substantial portion of these employees work in vital, but often unsung jobs, keeping the payment system operating smoothly. The System's employees handle the distribution of U.S. currency and coin throughout the nation and the world. They also clear and process checks and electronic payments, such as the direct deposit of paychecks, and they facilitate the electronic transfer of huge sums between large financial institutions. Monetary policy But it is monetary policy - and the Fed's principal monetary lever, the federal funds rate, which is the interest rate on overnight loans of reserves between depository institutions - that earns the Federal Reserve all that ink and airtime. Deciding on the appropriate policy from among the various options keeps nineteen policymakers and a staff of more than four hundred Ph.D. economists at the Board and the Reserve Banks quite busy. The chief monetary-policy-making body within the Federal Reserve is the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. It meets eight times a year but can confer by telephone more often if necessary, as it did in 2001 as it responded to incoming economic information as well as economic shocks from terrorism, and as it did again in 2003 as policymakers sought to understand the economic effect of the war in Iraq. The FOMC has nineteen participants - the seven Governors of the Federal Reserve Board and the twelve presidents of the Reserve Banks. Although all actively participate in discussions at the 2 BIS Review 8/2005 
meetings, only twelve have votes at any one time on the Committee. Each of the seven members of the Board wields a vote, as does the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York by virtue of that Bank's unique responsibility for implementing monetary policy decisions through the open market operations of its Domestic Trading Desk. The responsibility for casting the remaining four votes alternates among the remaining eleven Reserve Bank presidents: Two vote every other year, and the other nine vote every third year. But the important point to remember is that, in a consensus-driven body such as the FOMC, the identity of a member who casts a vote in any given year is less significant than the fact that each member of the FOMC participates fully in the deliberations. The presidents, in particular, bring to the table analyses of economic and business conditions in their districts. The boards of the Reserve Banks also contribute a wealth of anecdotal information to supplement the torrent of hard economic data the Fed analyzes. Moreover, they make recommendations to the Board on the discount rate, the rate the Fed charges on its own loans to financial institutions. The information from the Reserve Bank boards, along with other economic intelligence, is summarized in a report known as the Beige Book, which is publicly released about two weeks before each FOMC meeting. The FOMC also consults other books of other colors. But I'm getting ahead of myself. Let me describe the routine at a typical FOMC meeting. After seating ourselves around the twenty-seven-foot-long, polished mahogany-and-black-granite Board table, we begin punctually at nine o'clock. After approving the minutes of the previous meeting, our first order of business is a report from the Manager of the System Open Market Account at the New York Fed, who focuses on conditions in domestic and international financial markets. That report is followed by a presentation from the directors of the Board's Divisions of Research and Statistics and International Finance, who deliver the Board staffs' economic forecast as represented in the Greenbook, which FOMC members have usually had the weekend to study. The Greenbook contains the staffs' summary of recent economic information, a baseline economic forecast, which is the staff's best estimate, and scenarios based on possible alternative future events. Then comes the first "go-round," in which every member of the Committee offers his or her assessment of current economic conditions. We may usefully digress here to consider how the Board staff arrives at its forecast and to describe what role the forecast plays in policymakers' deliberations. An important, perhaps obvious, point to make is that it is not - I repeat, not - the FOMC's forecast. The economic staff of each Reserve Bank independently advises its president. And the economic staffs of the Reserve Banks and the individual members of the FOMC may or may not agree with elements of the Board staff's forecast. Indeed, FOMC members sometimes couch the presentation of their economic views in terms of where those views coincide with and diverge from the Greenbook's forecast. That description, in and of itself, gives you some sense of the staff's influence of the forecast. It sets the parameters of the discussion. So what kind of forecast is it? It is a forecast based on human judgment. But this judgmental forecast is informed by sophisticated econometric models. The staff's core, large-scale structural model has been dubbed FRB/US - pronounced "ferbus." But that model is not the only one the staff uses. Indeed, the staff uses its suite of smaller-scale models to probe the vulnerabilities of the core model. But as seductive as modeling is to us economists, we must remember that no model can fully capture a dynamic, ever-evolving economy such as ours. Thus, the staff's forecast, and I'm sure the individual forecasts of each FOMC member, are in the end judgmental assessments. After the Greenbook session, the director of the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs briefs the committee on the Bluebook, a document that presents policy options, usually two or three, for the Committee's consideration and that offers arguments for and against each course of action. Not a recommendation from the staff, the briefing is instead a vehicle against which FOMC members can test their own thinking. Finally, after hours of discussion and analysis, the Chairman speaks on the policy choice for the first time. Until this point, his participation in the meeting has usually been limited to questions and to comments aimed at keeping the meeting moving. After the Chairman makes his recommendation, FOMC members react in the second go-round. Then we vote, and by then it is usually about one o'clock and time for lunch. About an hour later, at around quarter after two, a statement publicly announces our decision. As currently formulated, the announcement has four parts: the first states the target for the federal funds rate; the second briefly explains the Committee's analysis of current economic conditions; the third provides the Committee's assessment of the risks to price stability and economic growth; and the last provides Committee members' votes. BIS Review 8/2005 3 
The statement is a relatively recent innovation; it is about a decade old and, over that period, it has evolved from a quite terse missive to the almost loquacious form it takes today. Before the advent of FOMC statements, market observers had to infer shifts in monetary policy by watching the New York Fed's open market operations, and trying to guess whether the Fed was easing or tightening monetary policy. As you may know, the Federal Open Market Committee decided this past December to begin releasing the minutes of its meetings on an accelerated basis. Previously, our practice had been to release the minutes on the Thursday following the next regularly scheduled meeting - that is, with a typical lag of a bit more than six weeks. Under the new schedule, that time has been cut in half: Minutes will now be released with a lag of just three weeks. This move is the latest in a long sequence of changes that the Federal Reserve has implemented over the past decade to enhance the openness and transparency of monetary policymaking. Before reaching our decision to accelerate the minutes, we discussed the pros and cons of doing so at some length at our December meeting. For a number of months, we had been experimenting internally with accelerating the preparation of the minutes, and we agreed that the trial had been a success. The minutes contain a more complete and nuanced explanation of the reasons for the Committee's policy decisions and our view of the risks to the outlook than we can possibly include in a brief post-meeting announcement. For that reason, speeding up the release of the minutes was seen as helping markets interpret our policy actions in the context of evolving economic developments and so better anticipate the course of interest rates. Another advantage is that the minutes now will provide the public a more up-to-date context for individual policymakers' public remarks. That is, when members of the FOMC give speeches, you will know how their views compare with the range of other members at the last FOMC meeting. We recognized, however, that there are risks to accelerated release: In particular, there is a possibility that, at times, the markets could misinterpret the minutes. In the end, our clear consensus was that the likely benefits outweigh the risks, and we decided to proceed with releasing the minutes on an expedited schedule. We went "live" with accelerated release beginning with the minutes of the December meeting, which were published on January 4. The document was intensively covered in the press and received considerable attention in financial markets. My impression is that most investors agree that the change is an improvement in openness and transparency of monetary policy. However, it is important to note that, when interpreting the minutes, readers should keep in mind that they are not simply a longer and more-detailed version of the statement that the FOMC issues after each meeting. The statements are intended to concisely convey the Committee's broad consensus. The minutes, however, are intended to reflect the broad range of views held by members of the Committee, including views expressed by just a few members. Thus, it is perfectly possible and appropriate that a statement in one part of the minutes does not accord with another passage in the minutes. If you want further details of how the discussion goes at FOMC meetings, transcripts are released after five years. These are verbatim transcripts, but the names of companies who provide confidential information are redacted, to encourage the sharing of forward-looking information with FOMC members, who in turn share that information with others as we have our discussions. Members of the FOMC also communicate to the public through speeches, which we all make at various times during the year. As I noted in the disclaimer I gave at the start of this speech, when we give speeches, we are speaking for ourselves, and not necessarily for the FOMC or in my case the Board of Governors. The Chairman also delivers twice-a-year reports to the Congress on monetary policy, where he speaks for the FOMC. The Chairman also testifies before Congress, giving his views on economic policy. These methods of communication are all important elements of the transparency necessary for an independent central bank to function within a democracy. As I mentioned, our goals - price stability and maximum sustainable employment - are set by law, but we are afforded the political independence to make the sometimes unpopular decisions required to achieve those goals. Appropriate transparency and accountability offer a necessary counterbalance to that independence. 4 BIS Review 8/2005 
Conclusion I hope this gives you an overview of the broad range of purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve System, as well as an insiders view of what happens behind the scenes at the FOMC. Next time you hear or read a news account of the Fed's actions to change the fed funds rate, I hope you appreciate all of the activities that go behind our decisions. BIS Review 8/2005 5 
Rakesh Mohan: Indian economy in the global setting Address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 99th Foundation Day Celebration Function of the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 8 September 2005. *      *      * I am extremely happy to be here in this at 99th Foundation Day Celebration Function of the Indian Merchants' Chamber at Mumbai on 8 September, 2005. Indian Merchants Chamber has a long heritage – and I wish them all the best for this year’s celebrations and next year’s centenary. In this age of globalization, I thought it would be apposite to share with you an account of India’s place in the global economy. Where do we stand? Have we improved our performance? These are some of the issues that I will attempt to delve in the present address. In the recent decade, India along with China has emerged as the engine of global growth. This is well reflected in India’s share in world GDP increasing significantly from 4.3 per cent in 1991 to 5.8 per cent in 2004. This period has also been one when India initiated structural reforms which encompassed, inter alia, a phased opening up of the Indian economy to the external sector. These structural reforms have strengthened India’s external sector and have also imparted a degree of dynamism to the Indian economy. The opening up of the Indian economy has not only allowed it to reap benefits of globalisation but India is also contributing to global growth. Against this backdrop, I discuss India’s recent economic growth record in order to draw lessons for it to realize its potential in a globalised world. Recent economic growth: overview and issues Economic developments in the recent years indicate a growing resilience of the Indian economy. Illustratively, even as the Indian economy was buffeted by exogenous shocks emanating from a below normal monsoon and record high international oil prices, overall GDP growth was almost 7 per cent during 2004-05. Effective macroeconomic management during the year ensured that India remained one of the fastest growing economies among emerging market economies in an environment of macroeconomic and financial stability. Looking at the post-reform period, real GDP growth has stepped up from 5.8 per cent per annum during the 1980s to 6.2 per cent per annum between 1992-93 and 2004-05. Over the same period, per capita growth has recorded a more impressive increase from 3.4 per cent to 4.3 per cent. Structural reforms have increased the competitiveness of the Indian industry and this is reflected quite vividly in the robust merchandise export growth since 2002-03 – exports have grown (in US $ terms) by more than 20 per cent per annum in each of the last three years. Concomitantly, the services sector contributes more than one-half of GDP, with growing contributions from new impulses of growth such as the information technology, telecommunication and transport sectors and a revival of foreign tourist arrivals. A noteworthy feature of macroeconomic management is the success with maintaining price and financial stability. Inflation has averaged close to five per cent per annum since the second half of the 1990s, significantly lower than that of around seven to eight per cent in the previous three and a half decades. This was possible due to effective monetary management, enabled by reforms in the fiscal-monetary interface. This has had a soothing influence on inflation expectations. Thus, despite poor monsoon conditions, record international crude oil prices and sharp increases in a host of non-oil commodity prices, inflation could be contained at around 5 per cent by the end of fiscal 2004-05, reflecting effective calibrated monetary measures supported by timely supply-side and fiscal measures. Inflation in the current year so far has eased to 3.1 per cent, although it needs to be recognised that the pass-through of international oil prices to domestic oil prices remains   1/9  
incomplete. We may also note that unlike previous oil price rise episodes of international inflation has also been contained this time. Another notable feature of the post-reform period is the improvement in the health of the financial sector. Reforms in the financial sector introduced since the early 1990s have had a major impact on the overall efficiency and stability of the banking system, reflected in improvements in capital adequacy ratios and strengthening of the balance sheets. Furthermore, Indian banks have done a remarkable job in containment of NPLs considering the overhang issues and overall difficult environment. Net NPAs have now fallen to just two per cent of net advances. The external sector continues to be robust. Despite sharp increase in oil as well as non-oil imports, India’s balance of payments has recorded large and persistent surpluses, with foreign exchange reserves at around US $ 144 billion. Increased earnings from exports of services and remittances coupled with enhanced foreign investment inflows have provided strength to the external sector. In brief, the Indian economy has exhibited a strong performance since the early 1990s in an environment of macroeconomic and financial stability – higher GDP growth, lower inflation, a resilient external sector and a strong financial sector. All these happened during the 1990s, which was otherwise a turbulent decade in terms of financial instability in many other countries. Nonetheless, it is widely agreed that the growth of the Indian economy remains well-below its potential. Real GDP growth in the first three years (2002-03 to 2004-05) of the Tenth Plan period has averaged 6.5 per cent, lower than the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-2007) target of eight per cent per annum. While the economy is doing well in many areas and these gains need to be consolidated, there are also important weaknesses, which, if not corrected could undermine even the potential performance level. In this context, it is interesting to note that the recent years (2001-02 to 2003-04) have seen India recording surpluses in the current account, i.e., we have not been able to find investment avenues to deploy our domestic savings. It is, therefore, important that impediments to investment be removed so that domestic savings can be deployed at home. Of course, to realise the growth potential of 8-9 per cent of the Indian economy, domestic savings will have also to record commensurate increases. Reforms would have to be further intensified in the agricultural sector, in factor markets to promote flexibility, in bankruptcy and exit procedures, in fiscal consolidation and in physical and social infrastructure sectors to accelerate investment. I will address some of these issues next.  Although the poverty ratio has declined since the onset of the reforms process, the number of people below the poverty line still remains high, with wide variations across states. Between 1977-78 and 1999-2000, the proportion of people living below the poverty line fell from 51.3 per cent to 26.1 per cent; over the same period, the absolute number of poor people fell from about 330 million to about 260 million, a number that is still sizable. In 2001-03, for instance, India’s per capita income was equivalent to only 9 per cent of the global average and 2 per cent of the per capita income of the high income countries.  With more than half of the people still dependent on agriculture, a key area of concern is that agricultural growth remains low and continues to be monsoon-dependent. Growth in the agricultural and allied sectors has decelerated from 3.2 per cent per annum during 1980-96 to 1.9 per cent subsequently. Per capita agricultural GDP has shown no significant upward trend after 1996-97. The slowdown is wide-spread across crops and reflects a broad based deceleration in productivity growth. The deceleration in output coincided with a downturn in world prices, and this has impacted domestic farm prices more than in earlier decades because of greater openness. The consequence has been that farm incomes became more variable and decelerated more than output in many cases. A related cause of concern, given that 57 per cent of population is still agricultural dependent, is that the role of agriculture in providing additional employment opportunities was virtually zero during the 1990s. Employment in agriculture remained virtually unchanged   2/9  
at about 190 million people during the 1990s. Concomitantly, annual employment growth for the economy, as a whole, decelerated from two per cent during the 1980s to only 1.1 per cent in the latter half of the 1990s. With employment growth trailing the additions to the labour force, unemployment rate for the economy as a whole is estimated to have increased from 8.87 per cent in 2001-02 to 9.11 per cent in 2004-05, a proportion that is far too high for a country like ours. The generation of productive employment is, therefore, a key issue that needs to be addressed on a continuous basis. The slowdown in the agricultural sector reflects subdued public investment in agriculture and inadequate crop diversification. A step-up in public investment in rural infrastructural areas such as irrigation, rural electrification and rural roads will become possible through reduction in and better targeting of subsidies that would then enable greater public investment for promoting growth. Efforts are also needed to diversify the cropping pattern to non-traditional activities in line with the changing agricultural demand pattern and making use of recent advances in bio-technology. The process of diversification calls for micro-level planning with emphasis on crop specific inputs, creating proper marketing infrastructure, cold storage, transportation facilities and supportive policies. There is a need for value addition in agricultural products through processing, packaging, and supply chain management so that farm incomes expand, employment is generated and rural poverty is alleviated. Other initiatives to increase agricultural production could cover aspects such as better availability of commodity derivatives to minimize the impact of prices uncertainty; reducing monsoon-dependency through schemes like water harvesting; and, further augmenting the flow of credit to the rural sector. Diversification of agriculture would also provide stable additional avenues of employment generation in the rural sector and enable these sectors to emerge as the main source of growth and employment in rural areas. All these measures will promote competitiveness of the agricultural sector, which is so necessary in the current global context. As regards social sector indicators, notwithstanding some progress in regard to education and health, India is still far behind its East Asian neighbours. Our social indicators are lower even in comparison with the levels achieved by these countries twenty five years ago, when they first began to grow rapidly. The social indicators also show disturbing gender gaps, large rural-urban differences and wide variation across states. Although the literacy rate has improved encouragingly from 52.2 per cent in 1991 to 64.8 per cent in 2001 and the overall number of illiterates in the country declined from 329 million in 1991 to 306 million in 2001, there are at least seven major States with more than 15 million illiterates each, accounting for nearly two-third of total illiterates in the country. Concomitantly, given India’s comparative advantage in services, it is important that the quality of secondary and higher education in the country is improved so that adequate skills are developed to realize the benefits of the knowledge economy. As regards health, the combined government (Centre plus States) expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP has stagnated at around one per cent of GDP over the last decade and a half. Total public expenditure on health in India remains even lower than many other developing countries such as Brazil (3.4 per cent), Thailand (2.1 per cent), Sri Lanka (1.8 per cent), China (1.9 per cent) and Malaysia (1.5 per cent). Low public expenditure in India is to some extent compensated by private expenditure which at 4.0 per cent of GDP is comparatively higher than all of these countries except Brazil (4.9 per cent). However, low public expenditure is a cause for concern for the vast majority of the population and primary health care remains of poor quality, unavailable and inaccessible. The infant mortality rate in India is almost double that of China (63 in India versus 37 in China) while the maternal mortality rate at 407 is manifold as compared to China’s 56. Hospital beds (per 1000 population) at 0.7 for India are less than one-half of other developing economies such as China (2.4), Thailand (2.0) and Malaysia (2.0). A significant improvement in social indicators is necessary if we want to create the pre-condition for a general improvement in welfare of our population and for genuine equality of opportunity.    3/9  
Turning to the industrial sector, reforms which encompassed removal of industrial licensing, de-reservation, substantial opening of foreign direct investment and trade liberalisation have imparted a competitive edge to Indian industry. This is reflected in a resurgence of activity in the manufacturing sector in the past two years, and the present phase appears to be sustainable, in contrast to the exuberance – which turned out to be temporary - reflected in high growth in investment and production in industry during 1993-94 to 1996-97. For industrial activity to get entrenched and gather momentum, efficiency in supply of infrastructural inputs will need a large impetus. The subdued performance of the infrastructure sector in the recent months is an issue of concern, given the sector’s strong forward and backward linkages in the economy. The increasing demand-supply gap in the availability of power is becoming the most critical issue in the future of India’s economic development. In the recent period, shortage of coal and gas has emerged as a serious constraint on power generation with the supply of both fuels falling far short of demand. In this context, given the fact that the Indian economy is among the more inefficient users of energy, highest and urgent priority needs to be given for energy-saving measures, which could include appropriate pricing policies and incentives to invest.  With growing urbanisation, issues related to urban infrastructure have come to the forefront. At present, investment in urban infrastructure is hampered by the fact that local governments are not yet creditworthy and urban infrastructure projects are, therefore, not found to be commercially viable. Strengthened planning and better coordination between various agencies entrusted with maintenance of urban infrastructure would have a positive impact on the overall productivity of economic activity in cities. Given the fact that there is a heavy concentration of economic activity in large cities, weak infrastructural facilities impede the growth of large cities and of overall economic productivity. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that the quality of urban infrastructure in the large cities is improved significantly so as to maintain and accelerate the momentum of economic growth and productivity enhancement. For urbanising economies like India to replicate the experience of developed countries in the provision of urban infrastructure, it is essential that all aspects of city management, including the fostering of a professional workforce, are strengthened.  The maintenance of vibrant growth in the manufacturing sector will depend crucially on the expansion of small and medium enterprises that then become significant players in the future. For this potential to be realized, there is a need to increase credit availability to this sector at reasonable costs. Banking institutions need to improve their credit assessment capabilities with regard to small-scale enterprises and small-scale must not be equated with high risk. Recent initiatives of the government and the Reserve Bank, such as the new legislation aimed at developing credit information bureaus will help to reduce information and transaction costs that should then lead to lower cost of credit to the SSI sector. Empirical evidence shows that wider availability of credit histories greatly expands the flow of credit as potential borrowers are no longer tied to their local lenders. The services sector has emerged as the largest contributor to growth in the country. Advances in information technology, liberalisation of the telecommunications sector and availability of skilled labour have permitted India to reap advantages through the globalisation of some services. The initial impetus provided by exports of software and services has now got additional support from the exponential growth of the IT-enabled sector (ITES). According to the National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM), India’s software and service exports recorded a strong growth of 34 per cent in 2004-05. The software sector [including ITES-Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)] now employs more than one million people, having recorded a compounded annual growth of nearly 30 per cent in employment during the period 1999-2005. The software sector also provides indirect employment to 2.5 million people. These data bring forth the growing role of the software sector, but at the same time, they suggest that for this order of growth rates to be maintained in the future, investment in social infrastructure – especially, education - needs to stepped-up. In this context, it is necessary that public expenditure on education should reverse its   4/9  
declining trend: total expenditure by the State Governments on education is budgeted to decline from 2.5 per cent of GDP in 2003-04 to 2.3 per cent in 2005-06. Moreover, given the demographic profile, the demand for education is slated to increase further. Accordingly, the improvement in State finances will enable the States to increase their expenditure on education and other social services and thereby improve the quality of overall social infrastructure so that India can realise its potential.  It is now well-recognised that monetary policy can contribute to long-run growth by maintaining low and stable inflation. International experience indicates that a prudent fiscal policy remains the single largest prerequisite for monetary stability. In India, reforms in the monetary-fiscal interface during the 1990s have been a key factor that imparted greater flexibility to monetary policy. These reforms have taken a significant step forward with the enactment of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 by the Centre. With the Centre’s GFD/GDP ratio at 4.1 per cent in 2004-05 (provisional accounts), the FRBM target of 3.0 per cent by 2008-09 appears to be within striking distance. However, with revenue deficit at 2.7 per cent in 2004-05, the elimination of the revenue deficit by 2008-09 will prove to be more difficult. Achieving this target requires continued focused action on containing expenditures, increase in tax revenues and reduction in tax exemptions. Revenue augmentation would critically depend upon improvement in tax/GDP ratio as non-tax revenue is set to decline in the coming years. With the acceleration in overall economic growth that is being observed currently, renewed efforts on tax compliance should yield beneficial results. Achievement of the FRBM target of revenue deficit at zero per cent of GDP will free up resources for public investment which will also crowd-in private investment. Overall, despite the recent improvements in the fiscal position of the Central Government the effort in achieving fiscal consolidation will have to continue. International crude oil prices are touching a record high. In previous episodes of such high oil prices, India often faced balance of payments crisis, low growth and high inflation. In the most recent period, the economy has been able to absorb the oil shock relatively comfortably so far. However, in case international oil prices continue to remain at the existing elevated levels, they could have a negative influence on growth prospects internationally. It is important to note that oil intensity – oil consumption per unit of output – in India has increased since early 1970s in contrast to the behaviour of major economies such as the Euro area, the US and Japan. Although oil intensity in India is still lower than that of advanced economies, there is scope for adopting measures to enhance efficiency of oil use in the economy. Energy conservation measures in the backdrop of high and volatile international crude oil prices could help the Indian economy to weather the adverse consequences with relatively lower output losses. In this context, there is a need for policies that permit flexibility in domestic oil prices that respond to the ups and downs in international prices, albeit with some mechanism that cushions the impact on the common man. This will also enable more efficient use of oil in the economy, especially in view of the fact that the rise in international oil prices appears to have a large permanent component. Given the volatility in the inflation rate during 2004-05, there is a need to consolidate the gains obtained in recent years from reining in inflationary expectations. While sustained efforts over time have helped to build confidence in price stability, inflationary expectations can turn adverse in a relatively short time if noticeable adverse movements in prices take place. Credible commitment of policy to fight inflation is critical to stop translation of higher oil prices into wage-price spirals. In addition, the international prices of non-oil primary commodities may continue to remain firm. On the domestic front, the manoeuvrability on oil prices is getting limited and corporates have a higher probability of gaining their pricing power with a better industrial outlook. The pricing pressure, if it were to occur from the supply side, could get complicated by continuing overhang of excess domestic liquidity. While the economy has the resilience to withstand supply shocks, the upside risks do exist. As such, the inflationary situation, both international and domestic, needs to be watched closely to   5/9  
persevere in maintaining inflation expectations and any complacency on this count could have adverse consequences for both stability and growth.  Global economic integration With the growing external openness of the Indian economy, and given its pace of expansion and size, the debate in the recent period is not only on the contours of the public policy in the context of increasing global economic integration but also to the challenges likely to be faced by the global economy on account of progressively increasing global integration of the Indian economy. The emphasis is of course on successful integration which will no doubt depend on the appropriateness of our public policies and the private sector responses. These issues are addressed next. Globalization has several dimensions arising out of enhanced connectivity among people across national borders. In particular, economic integration occurs through three channels, viz., movement of people, of goods and, of finance or capital. In managing the process of economic integration, developing countries face challenges from a world order that is particularly burdensome on them. It is necessary for public policy to manage the process with a view to maximizing the benefits to its citizens while minimizing the risks; but the path of optimal integration is highly country-specific and contextual. On balance, there appears to be a greater advantage in achieving a well-managed and appropriate integration into the global process, which would imply more effective – but not necessarily intrusive or extensive – interventions by governments. In fact, while there are some infirmities in interventions by government, markets do experience market-failures and cannot exist without some externally imposed rules and prescriptions of the public policy. As the poor, the vulnerable and the underprivileged continue to be the responsibility of the national governments, there is relevance of national public policy – particularly as it relates to global economic integration.  Against this backdrop, external sector policies designed to progressively open up the Indian economy, as observed earlier, formed an integral part of the strategy for structural reforms. In this context, the Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments (Rangarajan Committee, 1993) recommended improvement in exports, both merchandise and invisibles; modulation of import demand on the basis of the availability of current receipts to ensure a level of current account deficit consistent with normal capital flows; enhancement of non-debt creating flows to limit the debt service burden; adoption of market-determined exchange rate; building up the foreign exchange reserves to avoid liquidity crises and elimination of the dependence on short-term debt. It is evident that the external sector policies of the 1990s, based on the Report, paid rich dividends in terms of growth and resilience to a series of external and domestic shocks.  Various reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurial energies, stepped up productivity gains and improved competitiveness and access to overseas markets. India’s merchandise exports have been rising at a rate of over 20 per cent per annum, in US dollar terms, during 2002-05. As a result, the secular decline in India’s share in world exports from two per cent in 1950 to 0.5 per cent in the 1980s has been reversed. This share began rising in the 1990s and is currently at 0.8 per cent. These positive developments in the external sector provide the environment of pursuing a further rationalisation of tariffs with a view towards moving to a single, uniform rate on imports, say 10 per cent, and simplify all customs procedures strictly in line with best global practices. This should help to improve competition, exports and domestic consumers. The current external environment including the level of the foreign exchange reserves enables such a move to be made with little or no downside risks. While the recent trend in imports may continue to persist in the face of high and volatile crude prices and the large increase in domestic demand, an intrinsic link between merchandise imports and exports has emerged and become entrenched. The large expansion in imports is also spurring vigorous export growth. Given the recent experience, especially the fact that workers remittances seem to have acquired a semi-permanent, if not   6/9  
permanent, character, the current level of the trade deficit appears to be manageable at this stage and appears to be consistent with India’s growth aspirations. Given the adverse international experience with unfettered capital account liberalisation, we have been risk averse and have adopted a policy of active management of the capital account. The compositional shifts in the capital account have been consistent with the policy framework, imparting stability to the balance of payments. The sustainability of the current account is increasingly viewed as consistent with the volume of normal capital flows. The substitution of debt by non-debt flows also gives us room for manoeuvre since debt levels, particularly, external commercial borrowings, have been moderate and can be raised in the event of a sustained pick up in the demand for external resources. There is also the cushion available from the foreign exchange reserves.  India has made significant progress in financial liberalisation since the institution of financial sector reforms in 1992 and this has been recognised internationally. India has chosen to proceed cautiously and in a gradual manner, calibrating the pace of capital account liberalisation with underlying macroeconomic developments, the state of readiness of the domestic financial system and the dynamics of international financial markets. Unlike in the case of trade integration, where benefits to all countries are demonstrable, in case of financial integration, a 'threshold' in terms of preparedness and resilience of the economy is important for a country to get full benefits. A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and when a country has reached the "threshold" and the financial integration should be approached cautiously, preferably within the framework of a plausible roadmap that is drawn up by embodying the country-specific context and institutional features. The experience so far has shown that the Indian approach to financial integration has stood the test of time.  The optimism generated by the recent gains in macroeconomic performance warrants a balanced consideration of further financial liberalisation. At this stage, the optimism generated by impressive macroeconomic performance accompanied with stability has given rise to pressures for significantly accelerating the pace of external financial liberalisation. It is essential to take into account the risks associated with it while resetting an accelerated pace of a gradualist approach. The recent experience in many countries shows that periods of impressive macroeconomic performance generate pressures for speedier financial liberalisation since everyone appears to be a gainer from further liberalisation, but the costs of instability that may be generated in the process are borne by the country, the government and the poorer sections. Avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The approach to managing the external sector, the choice of instruments and the timing and sequencing of policies are matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables. As noted earlier, not only do global developments influence India, but the growing size of India has also implications for the global economy which would have also to take in to account the evolving demographic dynamics in countries such as India. Over the next half-century, the population of the world will age faster than during the past half-century as fertility rates decline and life expectancy rises. In Europe, the demographic profile is already tilted towards the higher age group and by 2050, this is projected to accelerate. Projections suggest a turning point between 2010 and 2030 when the European Union, North America and Japan will experience a substantial decline in savings rates relative to investment which may be reflected in large current account deficits. Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in the second stage of the demographic cycle. Elderly dependency is expected to double in these countries by 2025. Their working age populations will increase modestly first and then shrink. These projections suggest that East Asia could increasingly become an important supplier of global savings up to 2025; however, rapid population ageing thereafter would reinforce rather than mitigate the inexorable decline of global savings. India is entering the second stage of demographic cycle and over the next half-century, a significant increase in both savings rate and share of working age population is expected. The share of the labour force in population in India is expected to overtake the rest of Asia, including China, by 2030. Looking ahead, the rest of the world may increasingly rely on   7/9  
China and India for supplies of both labour and capital and this could significantly influence the evolution of the global economy. It is evident that China and India will have to give high priority to generating employment and both are poised for substantial increases in productivity.  The global economy will have to contend with the implications of these developments on prices, exchange rates, wages and structures of employment in industrialised countries. Over the medium term, it is felt that outsourcing will grow rapidly and may also cover high-end research and development activities. In manufacturing, China has emerged as a leader and India is catching up rapidly. Though agriculture is heavily subsidised in major industrialised countries, such subsidisation would be difficult to sustain from a fiscal point of view, since many of the countries concerned are poised to meet the mounting pension liabilities not to speak of burgeoning health care costs of maintaining the deteriorating demographics. One sector where the industrialised economies continue to show considerable strength and dominance is the financial sector, partly attributable to the confidence factor in financial markets that favours the industrialised economies and traditional international financial centres. It is essential for India to carefully monitor the developments in both real and financial sectors, and to frame the policies in tandem with the global developments so that global integration continues to be a positive sum game for all countries.  While the economic integration of India with the global economy will continue to take place, a successful integration, with due regard to the interests of a vast majority particularly, the poor in our country would be possible only through sound public policies – evolved and redesigned from time to time. Given India’s demographic advantages, the quality of labour force (in terms of relevant skills which need to be sustained, reoriented and upgraded in a globally competitive era) and the physical health of the workforce become crucial. Education and health, therefore, provide the link between supply and demand for labour through increases in productivity.  In this context, there is universal recognition of the need to improve both productivity and output in the agriculture and related activities to meet the objectives of growth and employment. There will have to be a massive shift of the workforce from agriculture to non-agricultural avocations and we should be prepared for a large-scale migration of the workforce to the tune of 10 million per year, from rural to semi-urban and urban areas. The quality of urban infrastructure even in the metropolitan cities, as noted earlier, is not conducive to globally competitive economic activity. The inevitable large scale redeployment of the migrating workforce would, therefore, need institutional arrangements, be they in public or private sector, for skill-imparting and skill up gradation. In these two matters relating to the workforce, some supply-led approaches appear to be in order, rather than waiting for the demand to be generated.  Enhanced investment activity, particularly in the infrastructure area, would necessitate higher domestic savings, especially in the public sector coupled with efficient financial intermediation. In addition, foreign savings need to be attracted and absorbed with a strong preference to Foreign Direct Investment in all sectors though in some sectors like banking, a calibrated approach may be warranted. At the same time, our enterprises should be enabled to attain a strong global presence in all sectors. In brief, our global integration has to be a two way process, encompassing movement of people with some caveats, trade in a free and equitable manner and financial integration on a specially sequenced basis.  Concluding observations The structural reforms initiated in the early 1990s coupled with a cautious and calibrated approach to external sector liberalization has led to a step-up in economic growth and India has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world. Notably, this growth has been achieved in an environment of monetary and financial stability, even as there was a series of exogenous shocks, both domestic and foreign, that hit the Indian economy in the   8/9  
period since the latter half of the 1990s. Looking ahead, the evolving demographic profile in favour of younger population suggests that the growth prospects of the Indian economy remain strong, provided their potential is effectively utilised. At the same time, a lot needs to be done to improve the quality of life. While the proportion of the poor in total population has come down, the absolute number of poor people remains high. India’s rank in terms of human development index and gender development index continues to be low compared to many developing countries. There is a need for linking growth with development and fill the gap between macroeconomic performance and social sector development. In this regard, globalisation throws both opportunities and challenges for benefit of societies. Opportunities offered by forces of globalisation offer India scope to improve the quality of life of its people, provided appropriate policies are put in place.    9/9  
Philipp Hildebrand: In the focus of the Swiss National Bank - economic outlook and monetary policy Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the WGZ-Bank, Luxemburg, 9 September 2005. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). *      *      * The world economy expands at a robust pace but the growth rates of the important economic blocs diverge considerably. In spite of the accommodative monetary policy in most industrial countries, inflation and inflation expectations remain well contained which may, among other things, be due to the process of globalisation and the credibility of central banks. Switzerland, small and extremely open, benefits from a recovering global economy. The conditions for returning to a path of modest expansion look favourable. However, there are certain risks that may affect the global and the Swiss economy negatively. Most importantly, high oil prices and the devastating effect of the hurricane „Katrina”, as well as the possibility of increasing long-term interest rates have to be mentioned. A persistently high price of oil could act as a brake to demand dynamics and growth prospects could also be threatened by soaring long-term interest rates, an effect that could be amplified through the housing channel. In the foreign exchange markets, structural and cyclical factors continue to determine the value of the US-dollar.    1/1  
David Dodge: The evolution and resolution of global imbalances Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Spruce Meadows Roundtable, Calgary, 9 September 2005. *      *      * Good morning. I am happy to be back at Spruce Meadows, and to have the opportunity to join my friends, Governors Zhou and Noyer, at this round-table discussion: "Changing Fortunes-World Monetary Policy." Our host, Ron Southern, has asked us to be at once "integrative, comprehensive, anticipatory, and apolitical." This is a tall order, but I will do my best to oblige. Today, I will talk about two types of global economic imbalances. The first relates to the way that savings and investment are being distributed across countries in an increasingly uneven way. The second is the possibility that, over the next couple of decades, the global economy might face a protracted period in which desired savings exceed planned investment, partly because of demographic trends. If economic policy-makers do not take appropriate measures quickly enough, there is even a risk-albeit a small one-that the world economy could end up with the classic dilemma-first spelled out by John Maynard Keynes-of widespread demand deficiency and a persistent deflationary gap.  But before talking about this longer-term risk, let me focus on the savings-investment imbalances that currently exist across different regions of the global economy. The United States faces a large and growing current account deficit, which reflects an excess of investment spending relative to domestic savings. This is matched by growing current account surpluses in Asia, in oil-exporting nations, and in some other economies around the world. Geographical imbalances are not necessarily a bad thing, nor are the large capital flows that they generate. Indeed, there should be a process that works through world financial markets to allow savers in one country to lend to borrowers in another. Such a process leads to higher global growth, since countries with surplus savings can invest them in countries that do not generate enough savings internally. However, when imbalances grow at an unsustainable pace, as appears to be the case at present, some form of correction must take place. If markets are allowed to operate without interference, imbalances can resolve themselves in a reasonably smooth manner. But in the absence of appropriately functioning market mechanisms, there is a greater risk that the correction will be abrupt and disorderly. Beyond disruption to financial markets, a disorderly correction might also lead governments to adopt wrong-headed protectionist measures, which would then exacerbate the damage to the global economy. But regardless of how these imbalances are resolved, it is clear that the resolution will require greater net national savings in the United States. Investment in the U.S. economy will need more financing from domestic sources-be it from the household, business, or government sectors-and less from foreign sources. This implies an increase in net U.S. exports and a decrease in net exports elsewhere in the world, as well as an increase in domestic demand in other countries. Exchange rate movements have an important role to play in this regard, because they can help redirect international trade and investment flows. In this context, efforts by some countries to slow or prevent required adjustments by pegging exchange rates are, in the end, counterproductive. I know that Governors Zhou and Noyer fully understand that, by frustrating market mechanisms, such policies raise the risk of a much larger and more disorderly correction in the future, as well as an outbreak of protectionism. But we should not look to exchange rate movements alone to resolve the existing global imbalances. Within the United States, higher interest rates can be expected to lead to increased savings. Authorities could also encourage greater national savings with a tighter fiscal policy. And they could implement structural reforms to encourage national savings through taxation, social security premiums, and other measures.  But if the United States alone were to act to resolve its imbalance by taking the steps I've just described, it would leave the global economy with much weaker aggregate demand. And so a number of other countries must focus on stimulating domestic demand. This task is made more urgent by the fact that the global economy is currently operating somewhat below capacity. The fact that inflationary pressures are absent globally is evidence of this.    1/3  
So, how can we stimulate domestic demand outside the United States? Clearly, monetary authorities bear most of the responsibility for stabilizing domestic output in the short run and moving their own economies towards full production capacity. But monetary policy may not be as effective as it could be, if there are problems with an economy's structural or fiscal policies. Thus, the appropriate policy prescription depends on each country's circumstances. Structural reforms to remove market rigidities are important for most of us. Many need to improve or develop their financial system so that savings can be more effectively channeled into investment and households can have improved access to credit. For some, the development of social safety nets would be helpful, so citizens don't feel the need to hold excessive precautionary savings. And for a few, more stimulative fiscal policy would be helpful. I'll have more to say about these policies in a few minutes, since they are also critical for the good performance of the global economy in the long run. But first, I want to discuss the second type of imbalance that I mentioned at the beginning: the challenges that will be posed by evolving economic and demographic realities. As I see it, if countries do not have the appropriate structural policies in place, there is a risk of a prolonged deficiency in global demand in the future. Let me now expand on this risk by highlighting two trends that will be important over the next decade or two. First, we can expect that Asia's share of the world economy will continue to grow. For various reasons, Asian nations have traditionally had a higher rate of savings than other economies. And so, all other things being equal, we can expect that global desired savings will rise. But all other things are not equal. The second trend that we can expect is higher desired savings in most OECD economies as the baby-boom generation prepares for retirement. Taken together, these two trends can certainly be expected to lead to a higher level of global desired savings. So it is critical for policy-makers to act now, so there can be an increase in demand and investment to compensate for the increase in desired savings.  How policy-makers handle the events of the next 10 to 20 years will be critical in preparing the global economy for the period from roughly 2020 on, when the proportion of the working-age population will start to decline in many countries. Canada will likely be in this position within 15 years. While demographic trends in the United States will likely be less challenging, in many OECD countries, the old-age dependency ratio is poised to rise sharply. According to a study by the European Commission, by 2025 the European Union will go from a ratio of roughly four working-age persons for every senior citizen to a ratio of 3 to 1. Indeed, without radical changes in fertility rates, life expectancies, or migration patterns, populations in many parts of the world will start declining, even as the world's total population continues to climb. According to the United Nations, the population of the EU could start to decline by 2025, with China expected to follow by 2050. Indeed, just this year, Japan reported a drop in its male population, and the number of deaths in that country began to exceed the number of births. But for most OECD countries, the era of declining labour forces and population is still at least a couple of decades away. Before we get there, we will first go through a period when desired savings are likely to rise. Workers in many countries can be expected to try to increase their savings for retirement. This can be accomplished for a short period through rising prices of assets, such as houses. But over the next couple of decades, this increased saving will have to come out of current income, and this means slower growth in consumer spending. At the same time, governments-faced with the need to prepare for future increases in public spending on an aging population-will also have to slow the rate of increase in current spending. To deal with this expected slower growth in domestic demand, we would typically expect monetary policy in an open economy to encourage or "crowd in" foreign demand with higher exports. But the world as a whole is one large closed economy-we can't export to another planet! If savings increase in one part of the world, offsetting increases in domestic demand will be needed elsewhere to keep global demand in line with global supply. So, since we can't export to another planet, what can policy-makers do to support the three remaining components of demand-private consumption, government spending, and investment? In terms of investment, a key point to remember is that investment requires an expectation that future profits will more than compensate for the cost of capital. Of course, changes in financial conditions play an important role in spurring investment, since real interest rates should decline to the point where desired investment matches desired savings. But, if the desire to save is too strong, and if it is spread throughout the global economy, it could happen that real interest rates would not be able to fall sufficiently to match desired savings with investment. With global inflation and interest rates already low, it could be argued that, when the expected increase in desired savings materializes, there will be   2/3  
a risk that global nominal interest rates would hit zero before real interest rates had fallen sufficiently to restore the balance between desired investment and savings. Let me stress that this is not a prediction on my part. I am only saying that, if there is no increase in global demand to offset the expected increase in desired savings, it may be difficult for monetary policy to effectively fulfill its role as the main short-run economic stabilizer in the years ahead.  So, what should policy-makers be doing now to help us avoid a Keynesian deflationary gap in the future? As it turns out, most of the policy prescriptions that I spoke about earlier in the context of the resolution of today's imbalances would also address potential problems further ahead. Let me now return to those policies and talk about them in a bit more detail. First, one might look to governments to provide an expansionary fiscal policy. In a few economies, there is clearly room for fiscal policy to become more stimulative in order to boost investment and demand. Certainly, the economies of emerging Asia have the scope to support demand with fiscal policy. But in North America, Europe, and Japan the scope for fiscal policy to spur demand appears to be very limited, given current debt levels in most of these countries and the increasing demands that aging populations will place on the government sector. The strain on the public purse to meet the needs of our aging populations will be enormous. The situation will be more serious in those countries that have not yet taken steps to ensure that their public pension systems will be able to handle the retirement of the baby-boom generation. Unless the ratios of public debt-to-GDP are reduced before this strain is felt, governments in many countries will face the difficult task of reducing services or raising taxes, or both. In any event, public debt in some countries may have already become so large that additional fiscal stimulus might actually be counterproductive. Households, anxious about future tax liabilities or the viability of public pensions, might cut back on consumption. This could offset the positive effects of the easier policy stance. But if there is any scope at all for effective fiscal action, I would argue that the emphasis should be on improving the economic infrastructure in a way that can support the production capacity of the economy while, at the same time, helping to meet rising social needs as the working population begins to decline. This might include additional money for education and training, which by adding to human capital, would help maintain the production capacity of the world economy.  But if there is one thing that all governments can do to stimulate demand, it is to have appropriate structural policies, and I stress the word "appropriate." Structural policies that promote economic flexibility are important in all circumstances. We all need to take steps to improve the flexibility of our labour markets and, in particular, to make sure that older workers who want to remain in the workforce are not discouraged from doing so. We also need to recognize that well-functioning credit markets are extremely important, so that households can borrow against future income, and businesses are able to make investments for the future. The improvement of labour and financial market policies is particularly important in Europe. In emerging Asia, improving income-security policies is essential in order to reduce the need for households to build up large amounts of precautionary savings. As well, stronger, more efficient domestic financial systems could go a long way towards raising confidence and promoting increased spending. By effectively pooling resources, stronger financial institutions and markets in Asia would help individuals become less risk-averse. Households would be more readily able to borrow against future income, and businesses would have more appropriate access to credit in order to finance investments. In closing, let me stress a few key points. I'm not saying that a disorderly correction to global imbalances is certain to happen. Nor am I saying that the global economy is inevitably headed for a deflationary shortfall in demand. What I am saying is that, as prudent policy-makers, we must not rely on good fortune to help us muddle through. We need to get going on these policy issues now, before it is too late to take remedial action. In particular, we need to make sure that our structural policies encourage maximum economic flexibility and that they do not impede investment and growth. We need to make sure that we will have the fiscal flexibility to handle the demographic challenges of the future. And we must continue to conduct monetary policy with the aim of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable, to maximize the chances that our economies will operate at full capacity. We must act now to meet the challenges of today, and of the future, for the benefit of all our citizens.    3/3  
Kishori Udeshi: Financial system stability and Basel II - way forward Address by Ms Kishori Udeshi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 17th Annual Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers, Colombo, Sri Lanka,  26 August 2005. *      *      * The initiative of the Association of Professional Bankers – Sri Lanka in organising this conference on Financial System Stability and Basel II – Way Forward is indeed commendable. Basel II is an important milestone in banking regulation and supervision and ought to be viewed as a necessary process for promoting the safety and soundness of the banking sector and thereby strengthening financial stability.  What is financial stability? In a situation of financial stability, financial institutions and markets are able to efficiently mobilise savings, provide liquidity and allocate investment.  The growing role of the financial sector in the right allocation of resources at appropriate prices could significantly enhance the efficiency with which our economies function. If financial markets work well, they will direct resources to their most productive uses. Risks will be more accurately priced and will be borne by those who have appetite for absorbing risks. Real economic activity with higher investments, in both quantity as well as quality, would result in growth with macroeconomic stability and fewer financial uncertainties.  The objectives of financial and macro-economic stability are, thus, mutually reinforcing.  As Governor Reddy has put it, ‘financial stability needs to be particularly ensured when the financial system is undergoing structural changes’. Financial stability does not mean total absence of failure of individual financial institutions, and fluctuation of prices in markets for financial assets. Such events become a cause for concern only if they lead to an impairment of the basic intermediation function or a severe misallocation of capital.  Before talking about the Indian financial system I must commend the efforts made by the Sri Lankan authorities towards strengthening the financial sector.  Its resilience is borne out by the fact that the Tsunami devastation at the end of 2004 did not affect the stability of the Sri Lankan financial sector. Indian financial system In recent years, there has been a considerable widening and deepening of the Indian financial system, coupled with the increasing globalisation of financial services. India is fast approaching an era of financial conglomerisation and ‘bundling’ in the provision of financial services. These developments are opportunities for the market participants but nevertheless pose serious challenges to regulation and supervision of the banking system.  In India, the pursuit of financial and macroeconomic stability has emerged as the central plank of financial sector reforms.  Stability of the financial system has a critical influence on price stability and sustained growth, which constitute the principal objectives of policy.  A stable financial system facilitates efficient transmission of monetary policy initiatives and the smooth operation of payment systems.  From the perspective of regulation and supervision, safeguarding depositors’ interest, and ensuring strong risk management within payment, clearing and settlement systems, is the mandate of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).  The RBI has put in place Prudential Supervisory Reporting System, covering all vital aspects and a wide range of indicators, which serves as an early warning signal as well.  Macro-Prudential Indicators (MPIs) are being compiled since March 2000, collating data from   1/7  
various reports that are received in the regulatory and supervisory wings of the Bank.  The review of MPIs covers the areas of capital adequacy, asset quality, risk management, management soundness, earnings and profitability liquidity, interest rate, maturity structure of assets and liabilities, and various indicators pertaining to major segments of financial markets such as debt, forex, capital market segments, besides macroeconomic indicators such as growth, inflation, interest rate and exchange rate.  The MPI review is accompanied by a review of developments in the global environment.  As part of the efforts to disseminate these Financial Soundness Indicators (FSIs), the Reserve Bank has started publishing the core set of indicators in its various publications. Financial sector reforms adopted in the 1990s have enhanced the strength of banks and financial institutions in India.  A striking feature of these institutions has been their improved resilience to the domestic and the external environment.  The reform process has changed the relationship between the RBI and commercial banks from one of micro regulation to that of macro management.  Aided by the robust macroeconomic environment, banks’ bottom lines have improved significantly over the last two years.  The aggregate capital ratios of scheduled commercial banks at 12.83 per cent as at end March 2005 have been well above the stipulated level of 9 per cent.  The Reserve Bank, along with the Government, has initiated several institutional measures to contain the levels of NPAs.  Notable among these include establishment of Debt Recovery Tribunals, Lok Adalats (people’s courts), Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) and Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism.  Settlement Advisory Committees have been formed at regional and head office level of commercial banks.  Enactment of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 has helped in improving the recovery climate in the country.  The Government amended the relevant provisions of the Act to address the concerns expressed by the Supreme Court regarding a fair deal to borrowers through an ordinance dated November 11, 2004. The declining trend in gross and net NPLs for scheduled commercial banks has continued despite the adoption of 90-day delinquency norm and unprecedented surge in growth of advances.  Legislation has since been enacted to facilitate the compilation and dissemination of credit information including data on defaults to the financial system by the Credit Information Bureau of India Ltd. (CIBIL). The legal provisions and practice in bankruptcy of the real sector are however still inadequate and need further reform.     The Reserve Bank is also making efforts to formulate policies to deal with risks arising on account of operations of large and complex financial institutions as these pose a systemic risk.  As a first step in this direction, an inter-agency Working Group on Financial Conglomerates (FC) comprising three supervisory bodies, viz., the Reserve Bank, the Securities and Exchange Board of India and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority, in June 2004, identified 23 FCs and a pilot process for obtaining information from these conglomerates has been initiated.     The year 2004-05 has witnessed a surge in credit off-take leading to a sizeable decline in the liquid assets of the bank. Consistent with the shift to functioning in a competitive economy and to the adoption of prudential best practices, the major challenges facing the banking sector are the deployment of funds in quality assets and the management of revenues and costs. Basel II  Unlike Basel I, which is simple, Basel II is complex. Therefore, the BCBS does not expect Basel II to be adopted widely or quickly. They believe that countries should adopt the options and approaches that are most appropriate for the state of their markets, their banking   2/7  
systems, and their supervisory structures. Supervisors can adopt the framework on an evolutionary basis and use elements of national discretion to adapt it to their needs.  Why move to Basel II Under Basel II the capital requirements are more risk sensitive as these are directly related to the credit rating of each counter-party instead of counter-party category as it is under Basel I. Further, it requires banks to hold capital not only for credit and market risk but also for operational risk (OR) and where warranted for interest rate risks, credit concentration risks, liquidity risks etc. This makes Basel II more comprehensive than Basel I. Where banks were required to hold a uniform level of 8 per cent as minimum capital under Basel I, supervisors have the discretion to require banks to hold higher levels of minimum capital under Basel II. Basel II has other advantages such as providing a range of options for counter-party capital requirements and in the process reducing the gap between required capital and regulatory capital. Basel II recognises a wider range of collaterals and provides incentives for improved risk management practices. An interesting point to note here is that Basel II recognises the element of diversification of risk in the SME sector and has assigned a lower risk weight for retail SME exposure under standardised approach. The non-retail SME exposure would also attract a lower risk weight where they have better external ratings under the standardised approach. Shifting to Basel II, therefore, could be advantageous for economies whose banks have significant SME exposure.   Indian Approach to Basel II With the commencement of the banking sector reforms in the early 1990s, the RBI has been consistently upgrading the Indian banking sector by adopting international best practices.  The approach to reforms is one of having clarity about the destination as also deciding on the sequence and pace of reforms to suit Indian conditions. This has helped us in moving ahead with the reforms without disruption.  With the successful implementation of banking sector reforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system has shown substantial improvement on various parameters.  It has become robust and displayed significant resilience to shocks.  There is ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migrate smoothly to Basel II norms. The policy approach to Basel II in India is such that external perception about India conforming to best international standards is positive and is in our favour.  Commercial banks in India will start implementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007. They will initially adopt the Standardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic Indicator Approach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed, both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks may be allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach.  Some of the regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India, relevant for Basel II are as follows: First, we have tried to ensure that the banks have suitable risk management frameworks oriented towards their requirements dictated by the size and complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expected level of capital. Second, Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks has been introduced on a pilot basis. Third, we have been encouraging banks to formalize their capital adequacy assessment process (CAAP) in alignment with their business plans and performance budgeting systems. This, together with the adoption of RBS, would enable factoring in of the Pillar II requirements under Basel II. Fourth, we have been expanding the area of disclosures (Pillar III), so as to have greater transparency in the financial position and risk profile of banks. Finally, we are trying to build capacity for ensuring the regulator’s ability for identifying and permitting eligible banks to adopt IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches.    3/7  
As per normal practice, and with a view to ensuring a smooth migration to Basel II, a consultative and participative approach has been adopted for both designing and implementing Basel II. A Steering Committee comprising senior officials from 14 banks (public, private and foreign) has been constituted with representation from the Indian Banks’ Association and the RBI. The Steering Committee had formed sub-groups to address specific issues. On the basis of recommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines to the banks on implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Framework have been issued.  Implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks in India due to the fact that operational risk is not captured under Basel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not prescribed until recently. Though the cushion available in the system, which at present has a CRAR of over 12 per cent, is comforting, banks are exploring various avenues for meeting the capital requirements under Basel II.  Even while we have decided to take the Indian banking system on to the simple approaches under Basel II, we have taken some initiatives which would clearly demonstrate that we have no intentions of either diluting the standards or picking on the less stringent options laid down in Basel II. Through these initiatives, we have prescribed stringent prudential requirements for banks in India e.g. with regard to adoption of risk weights for claims on State Governments, Public Sector Enterprises, banks and for capital market and real estate exposures.  Further even though banks can be allowed to use unsolicited ratings under the Standardised Approach, we would not allow the use of unsolicited ratings. Also, we have been expanding the area of disclosures so as to have greater transparency with regard to the financial position and risk profile of banks. Illustratively, with a view to enhancing further transparency, all cases of penalty imposed by the RBI on the banks as also directions issued on specific matters, including those arising out of inspection, are to be placed in the public domain. Such proactive disclosures by the Regulator are expected to have a salutary effect on the functioning of the banking system. In addition to the above, any penal action taken against any foreign bank branches in India are also shared with the Home country regulator with a view to enhance the quality of consolidated supervision. These initiatives will be an important supplement to the Pillar 3 disclosures prescribed under Basel II, which in our opinion will further the cause of a stable banking system. The way forward On the way forward it has to be recognised that implementation of Basel II will make considerable demands on scarce resources in terms of both economic resources and human resources.  Banks must take on the challenges and convert these into opportunities.  Here I would like to quote Ms. Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System: “Banking will remain a highly dynamic industry. Supervisors will have to be especially attentive to changing best practices and ensure that Basel II does not inhibit adoption of new banking practices and financial instruments” “Maintaining financial stability in global banking and financial markets continues to be an important objective of regulators, bankers, and other market participants, particularly because of the negative impact that financial instability has on economies as a whole. Basel II, in my view, will help improve financial stability…Even though minimum regulatory capital ratios are likely to be more volatile under Basel II, this reflects greater risk sensitivity.” Some of the issues which emerging economies in particular would need to address on the way ahead are higher capital requirements, improved IT architectures, data issues, consolidation, capacity building, external ratings, use of national discretion, validating the concept of economic capital and corporate governance.   4/7  
Higher capital requirements – The Basel document prescribes the minimum capital requirements and banks need to be encouraged to hold more capital than the minimum. As a part of their strategy, banks are expected to operate at levels above the minimum to take care of the fluctuations in capital requirements in response to the fluctuations in the quality of risk exposures. Further, it will be necessary to ensure that all elements of expected losses should be fully met by provisioning and that capital is available exclusively to support unexpected losses.  Higher capital requirements could pose difficulties if there are state owned banks. This may require consideration of options such as preference shares and other innovative tier-I instruments, hybrid tier-II capital instruments and tier-III capital instruments. Improved IT architecture/MIS – The basic requirement for implementation of Basel II is improved information systems for managing and using data for business decisions. Banks should, therefore, be encouraged to strengthen their IT architecture and also improve their information and reporting systems. This would also equip banks to cope appropriately with the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements.  Consolidation – In the normal course of operations banks would be constantly looking for opportunities of inorganic growth. Banks which operate with capital above the minimum levels have an edge over the other banks to the extent that they would be able to seize an opportunity for merger / acquisition as and when it is available without any loss of time. However, it would be necessary for such banks to improve their internal controls and risk management systems before embarking on a path of inorganic growth.  Basel II implementation would enable banks to meet the above pre-requisites and place them in a situation where they can take advantage of opportunities as and when they arise.  Data issues – Implementation of Basel II, both under Standardised Approach and IRB Approaches, would involve utilisation of data for computing capital requirements. While the dependence on data under the Standardised Approach would be largely similar to Basel I, the data requirements are considerable under the Advanced Approaches. Banks would require adequate and acceptable historical data to compute capital requirement under these Approaches. At the minimum banks need to have historical data for computing the probability of default, loss given default and operational risk losses. While building up this data base banks also need to ensure purity and integrity of such data.  Capacity Building – Above all, capacity building, both in banks and the regulatory bodies is a serious challenge, especially with regard to adoption of the advanced approaches. Banks would need to focus on equipping their staff suitably to handle the advanced risk management systems and supervisors need to equip themselves with equal skills to have effective supervision. Given the demand for skills in the sector, the level of attrition is likely to be high. Hence, banks need to focus on motivating the skilled staff and retaining them. We have initiated supervisory capacity-building measures in India to identify the gaps and to assess as well as quantify the extent of additional capital, which may be required to be maintained by such banks. The magnitude of this task, which is scheduled to be completed by December 2006, appears daunting since we have as many as 90 scheduled commercial banks in India.  External ratings – In a situation where countries do not have domestic rating agencies or where the extent of rating penetration is low the capacity of banks in these countries to relate capital requirements to the actual underlying risk will be seriously handicapped. It would be necessary to develop domestic rating agencies and look at methods for increasing the rating penetration of the rating agencies. Use of national discretion – As I have mentioned earlier, discretion is available to national supervisors under Basel II framework on many aspects. It would be necessary for the national supervisors to exercise this discretion with caution. There could be various sectors of the economy which may deserve a preferential treatment taking into account their national relevance. It would be in order to lighten the burden of Basel II on these sectors within the   5/7  
limitations of national discretion provided the resulting capital requirements reflect the underlying risks in these sectors. In case the situation prevailing in a country reflects higher risks then it would perhaps be necessary for the supervisor to factor this while formulating the national rules for Basel II implementation.  Validating the concept of economic capital – The Basel II Framework will promote adoption of stronger risk management practices by banks which will address all major risks comprehensively. Basel II, by being risk sensitive, will enable banks to bridge the gap between economic capital and regulatory capital. Through the Pillar II requirements under Basel II, banks are expected to have their own internal methodologies for assessing the risks and computing the capital requirements to support those risks even for banks adopting the standardised approach for credit risk.  This would aid the banks to move in the direction of building their own economic capital models, which can direct their business strategies. It is possible that many of the banks in emerging economies might not have developed their internal capital adequacy assessment processes (ICAAP). Implementation of Basel II would now require these banks to have in place an ICAAP which meets the Basel II specifications. The regulators would perhaps be required to take the initiative in this regard to enhance the level of understanding of ICAAP in banks, the benefits that may accrue to them by adoption of ICAAP and the likely focus of supervisory assessments in this regard.    Improving governance standards and oversight – The Basel II framework places considerable emphasis on internal processes for managing risk and for managing capital requirements. This along with the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements places tremendous demand on the Governance and oversight standards within a bank. Banks should therefore focus their energies on raising their governance and oversight standards to greater heights.  The Basel Committee recognises that primary responsibility for good corporate governance rests with boards of directors and senior management of banks. Corporate Governance can be improved by addressing a number of legal issues such as protecting and promoting shareholder rights, clarifying governance roles. Ensuring that corporations function in an environment that is free from corruption and bribery; and aligning the interests of managers, employees and shareholders through appropriate laws, regulations and other measures. All of these can help promote healthy business and legal environments that support sound corporate governance and related supervisory initiatives.  In India the governance issues have been addressed by prescribing guidelines on corporate governance in banks. These include fit and proper standards for not only the Board of Directors but also for the shareholders and the chief executives. In this regard, it might be appropriate to mention that importance of corporate governance is relevant for the state owned banks also. The focus of the standards should be, at the least, to equip the boards of banks to ask the right questions.  Conclusion Basel II is expected to foster financial stability through its risk sensitive framework which will encourage banks to adopt improved risk management practices; require supervisors to review the efficiency of banks’ risk management practices and capital allocation methodologies; and empower market participants to make informed judgements on the efficiency of banks and accordingly punish or reward banks.  While it is true that implementation of Basel II is not the be all and end all on the subject of financial stability it must be recognised that banks are “special”.  Their sound and efficient functioning is critical not only to the growth of the real sector but also for strengthening the social infrastructure.  Internationally, therefore, banks have moved centre-stage and their performance is the cynosure of all eyes. Acknowledgements for inputs are due to K. Damodaran and Dr. N.D. Jadhav, Reserve Bank of India.      6/7  
References: Y V Reddy: Banking sector reforms in India - an overview - the Institute of Bankers of Pakistan, Karachi, May 2005. Jaime Caruana: Overview of Basel II and its reflections on financial stability - the International Conference on Financial Stability and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, May 2005 Jaime Caruana: Consequences of Basel II for SMEs – the European Parliament Workshop, Brussels, July 2003  Susan Schmidt Bies: Financial stability benefits and implementation challenges of Basel II – the International Conference on Financial Stability and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, May 2005.    7/7  
Paul A Acquah: Workshop on the general data dissemination systems (GDDS) Opening address by Dr Paul A Acquah, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the Workshop on the general data dissemination systems (GDDS), Accra, 17 August 2005. *      *      * Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Stakeholders, Ladies and Gentlemen, I deem it an honour and at the same time necessary to be part of this important workshop and I appreciate the opportunity to give the opening address. You would agree with me that the appetite for statistics and other information on the economy has increased considerably in this country and that users have become more resourceful in the analysis and use of data. This growing interest has been motivated by a desire to make assessments of how far we are from our national objectives, be they on growth, inflation, income distribution and incidence of extreme poverty or how distant or close we are to the Millennium Development Goals. All this requires a robust and responsive statistical system to monitor developments and to allow policy changes to meet changing demands. Mr. Chairman, statistics do not only serve national purposes but they have global implications and it is a significant development that Ghana has become part of the GDDS platform. The GDDS requires a good set of principles for routine data dissemination. Adherence to its guidelines should enhance the usefulness of the data and provide users with valuable information to plan their work and programs. It also serves as a yardstick by which Ghana can judge its performance in the field of statistics. One important outcome of the GDDS platform is the collaboration with other statistical providers, and the fostering of a network among institutions. Ghana’s adherence to the GDDS should ultimately lead us to a strengthened statistical system. I am very sure we all agree on the usefulness of data and there would be no need to run you through that. However, we should acknowledge that good statistics as collected according to agreed international best practices, using appropriate methods for data collection, processing and dissemination are crucial as a tool for national development. Accurate and timely data would allow us to formulate sound policies, effectively compare our progress over time and space and also set benchmarks for measuring progress in the future. Ladies and Gentlemen, it is however of paramount importance that the data generation process is thoroughly understood so that the appropriate interpretations could be made. Economic statistics are often only an approximation of the underlying reality they are attempting to measure. Even where the data can be perfectly measured there is often discrepancy between the economic concept that we would want to measure and the real phenomenon that the statistics attempts to measure. For example Gross Domestic Product seeks to measure the total economic activity, the value added that takes place in the economy over time. It is almost impossible to measure this directly. Instead much of the data is estimated from surveys. This gives rise to measurement issues relating to coverage, sampling and non-response, but not such as to undermine their integrity. It is therefore normal to have revisions as new information that improves the accuracy of the data is received. GDP growth and inflation (as measured by changes in CPI) are two of the most important indicators that are closely watched. They do have both economic and political significance, as they have become the standard tools for assessing performance.   1/2  
In fact, ease of access to official statistics has become a hallmark of open and democratic societies, making it imperative for ensuring its accuracy and timeliness. The only way we can measure our short-to-medium term macroeconomic performance would be to effectively and accurately measure trends in monetary aggregates, balance of payments, debt sustainability and fiscal performance in addition to GDP and inflation. Sound statistics are necessary to monitor these trends closely and accurately because of the economic costs that can accrue from imbalances and deviations of these indicators from sustainable levels. Mr. Chairman, a conscious effort on our part to improve upon data collection in terms of timelines and accuracy has an international dimension of interest. Data are essential for investors, international organisations, financial institutions, banks and fund managers who rely on data of various countries to evaluate their investments. We all agree that data can be unreliable and prone to different interpretations or too dated to be useful. Improving upon the reliability and timeliness of data enhances the chances of attracting foreign direct investment and allowing better assessment of various risks associated with investment decisions. Absence of data closes the door to any access to financing from the international capital markets in a globally interdependent world. There is a need for proper funding and adequately resourcing our official institutions in charge of generating data, not only to ensure that disseminated data are accurate and reliable but also to ensure that they are current and not dated. Mr. Chairman, notwithstanding the significance of accuracy and timeliness of data in our national building efforts, our official institutions that have responsibility for collecting, collating and analyzing data have not received the prime support in terms of resources. It is caught up in a vicious spiral of under-funding and under-performance and in most cases their best efforts given the limited resources are under-appreciated. There is no doubt that we need to support increased investment in our main statistical agency and also improve upon its capacity. Ladies and Gentlemen, acknowledging this is a first step in solving this endemic problem. Information is invaluable not only for policy making but for the benefit of the financial markets. Adhering to the GDDS should provide an impetus to transform our institutions charged with the statutory responsibility to generate statistics so that they can meet international best practices. The GDDS framework is built around four pillars; data characteristics, quality, access and integrity. Its main objectives are to encourage countries to improve upon data quality, provide a framework for evaluating needs for data improvement and setting priorities and providing a guide for countries in the dissemination to the public of comprehensive timely, accessible and reliable economic, financial and socio-demographic statistics. Today’s event is one evidence that our statistical agencies go beyond their limited resources to ensure that data disseminated are reliable. Ghana’s participation in the GDDS ensures a common platform and allows international data comparison due to its standard international best practices methods of collecting these data. Mr Chairman, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I am very sure that this workshop will be very useful and productive with discussions guided by the pillars and principles on which the GDDS is built. The workshop would enable us, even as we showcase and demonstrate the potential benefits to be gained as a country in joining the GDDS, resolve to mobilize national support in terms of resources and cooperation with official agencies responsible for collecting and analyzing data in this country. Thank you.    2/2  
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Continuity in a time of change Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the 12th Anniversary of the BSP, Manila, 4 July 2005. *      *      * Introduction MB Member Valdepeñas, MBM Boncan, MBM Amatong, MBM Villafuerte, Outgoing MBMs Mr. Alindogan and Mr. Salazar, our esteemed former Central Bank Governors, our friends from the banking community and the business sector, distinguished guests, my family, our friends from media, my co-workers in the BSP, M.O., SPC and our regional offices and branches, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.   Today we celebrate the twelfth year of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and I wish everyone a Happy Anniversary!   This celebration is particularly significant for us. Governor Buenaventura, MBMs Quintos, Salazar and Alindogan are closing six years of outstanding work in central banking today.  We salute them for their very important contributions to the relentless pursuit of the goals and objectives of this institution.  I have been fortunate to participate in and personally witness the major changes made to advance monetary policy making and banking supervision during their watch.  They, together with the MBMs who are staying behind, are one of a kind, a bold bunch of policymakers who were alien to the fear factor in introducing innovations to make the financial system and the BSP as an institution attuned to the new standards and requirements of a fast changing world.   Governor Buenaventura cannot join us in today’s celebration, but the BSP is so close to his heart that he sent his taped message, so that even in spirit we shall all be complete. As he finishes his term, he leaves a legacy that, while towering, is at the same time edifying and inspiring for us to continue the tradition of excellence and hard work in the BSP.   As we bid farewell to our outgoing MBMs, we also extend a warm welcome to our incoming Board members:  Mrs. Amatong and Mrs. Villafuerte who are not new to the Monetary Board.  We all look forward to working with them in the period ahead.   This afternoon, I would like to share with you my thoughts about the two main pillars of central banking:  monetary policy and banking supervision. I will also identify the challenges faced by a modern central bank and what they mean to the BSP in terms of our organization.   Sustaining the shift in monetary policy regime The first pillar of price stability represents our contract with the Filipino people.  When consumer prices are stable, we serve the cause of economic growth.  Today, the issue of inflation strikes even closer to the hearts, or perhaps the guts of the public.  Surveys by independent research organizations have, for example, consistently ranked high prices as the foremost concern of the lower income classes.  A low and stable inflation preserves the purchasing power of the people’s incomes. There is more food on the table and more services to buy.   In my earlier interviews with the media, I have stressed one important point that will be the hallmark of my stewardship.  We will not try to reinvent the wheel.  Instead, we shall strive to continually improve it and keep it running more efficiently.  Our vision is to see that it brings us to where we want to go.    We shall therefore continue to adhere to inflation targeting as our monetary framework. Inflation targeting emerged at that point where monetary targeting started to fade.  Since the implementation of inflation targeting in January 2002, we have seen how rigorous economic   1/4  
analysis, discipline in the conduct of monetary policy and greater transparency in the thinking of the monetary authorities have contributed to reduced gyrations in consumer prices. The dynamics of inflation expectations has been largely anchored in the market’s appreciation of the BSP’s explanation of the factors driving inflation and what the BSP intends to do to address them. This is the face of continuity.   But you will agree with me that perhaps there is scope for change.  We shall soup up the inflation targeting framework.  We will not only reassess the various components of our forecasting models and the integrity of our databases, but we will also intensify our capacity to anticipate possible shocks in the system.  The first is to make sure we have the right tools to deal with shocks; the second will give us the comfort that we will not be ossified by surprises.  We have completed our early warning systems for various areas like currency, business cycles and the banking system, and we shall increasingly make use of them in our monthly review of the monetary policy stance.  The results of our periodic environmental scanning exercises will be used in an attempt to more effectively incorporate political factors in assessing the risks to the inflation outlook.  We are also reviewing our monetary tools that include the reserve requirement, open market operations and credit policy.  If we may add, finally, the market can expect greater transparency in the conduct of monetary policy and this should reduce the gray areas in anchoring public expectation about inflation and enhance the functioning of the markets.  Strengthening the financial system In the financial sector, the main challenges emerged from the overhang of the Asian financial crisis and the greater integration of the Philippines into the global financial system.  In response, we have addressed these challenges precisely by strengthening the financial sector.  Focus has been given to maintaining a sound and viable banking system and the development of the domestic capital market.   Efforts in this area have begun to show positive results.  Banks’ balance sheets are gradually recovering from the large burden of bad loans while the local bond market has received the initial shot from the reforms that include the now operational fixed income exchange.  We shall sustain the Bangko Sentral’s reform strategy on cleaning up banks’ balance sheets, addressing remaining weaknesses in managing risks, and ensuring that our prudential regulatory standards are elevated to international benchmarks.  We shall also continue to coordinate with other government agencies and the private sector in installing the remaining infrastructural requirements of a well-functioning capital market that would diversify our sources of funds and reduce our vulnerability to various shocks.   But we need to enhance a few things even as we have started to launch them.  We are moving into consolidated supervision and risk-based approach to bank examination that are aligned with international best practices.  Such innovations are necessary to allow regulators to effectively manage challenges posed by conglomerate structures and cross-border issues.   We are improving corporate governance and market discipline.  A crucial element for effective oversight of the banking system is for the regulator to have stronger supervisory and regulatory authority and this can only be done with the support of Congress in amending the BSP Charter.  Finally, we realize that the BSP can enhance its effectiveness by establishing teamwork with the other financial regulators.  Thus was born the Financial Sector Forum (FSF) that has elevated the cooperation among the regulators to pioneering levels.  The FSF will help harmonize supervisory and regulatory efforts, improve the exchange of information among regulators and promote better consumer protection.   In the area of promoting the domestic capital market, the changes we would like to see are the fruits of the steps that have already been started in close collaboration with the private sector.  We shall be pleased to see more robust trading of government and subsequently, private, debt securities at the Fixed Income Exchange, improved market confidence from the use of independent custodians, migration by the banks from the common trust fund to unit   2/4  
investment trust fund, and lower borrowing cost with the installation of a credit information bureau, currently being discussed by Congress.  We are excited to see the day when we are able to reduce our reliance on foreign borrowing because the domestic capital market is efficient enough to provide the critical mass to fund sustained economic growth.   Promotion of microfinance and literacy program-the social dimension of BSP policy We shall also intensify the social dimensions of BSP policy.  Foremost in this is our advocacy for microfinance.  This program is the most effective tool for democratizing the access of the public to a portion of the nation’s wealth, for empowering the poor and the economically- challenged group of small entrepreneurs and for scoring a dent on poverty alleviation.  We shall also pursue economic and financial literacy program to reach out to our consumers, investors, overseas Filipino workers and their beneficiaries to help expand their options of where to put their money and ensure their economic future.   BSP organization    My fellow workers at the BSP, central banks have often been described as the most powerful institution in the economic sphere:  the monetary policy decisions made by the monetary authorities “can lift markets overnight, bring people out of unemployment, keep growth on track and hold inflation in check.”1Yet what central banks can do is ostensibly limited by a host of factors notably increasing globalization.  Globalization has integrated international capital markets and with this, deregulation and technological progress have rendered traditional control-based approaches virtually ineffective.  As market forces drive globalization, it has also increased the propagation of shocks in the world economy.  What then is the challenge for us?   It is important for us at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas to be able to row with the current and if necessary at some point, to row against it.  What is imperative is that the BSP is appropriately structured and equipped.  Our commitment to building a more effective central banking organization is captured by our new vision and mission statements and they should serve as our guide for the next steps.  We owe a great deal to the work in the past to instituting best practices, enhancing the bank’s corporate image, and strengthening corporate governance within the BSP itself.   I know that we can always count on you my fellow BSPers, for our committed and professional men and women have been the strength of our organization through the years. Moving forward, let us continue to give our best to this institution, which has always looked after our welfare.  We see this in the better facilities, comprehensive adjustment in pay scale and expanded opportunities through improved training programs and scholarships.  These are elements that we should review from time to time to ensure they remain adequate and appropriate.  As a great inventor once said: “…if we did all the things we are capable of doing, we would literally astonish ourselves.”2                                                 1 Meyer, Laurence H. (2002) “A Term at the Fed, An Insider’s View,” Harper Business. 2  Thomas Alba Edison.   3/4  
The way forward The BSP story of the last six years is ending today with a considerable amount of success.  We are moving into the story of the next six years, complete with the template of new ideas and bold reforms.  If we are to chart the roadmap in a “T” account, we will see that along the way, there are pluses and minuses, opportunities and challenges. The success of the last six years is punctuated by some unfinished agenda that needs to be pursued to achieve continuity in a period where change is the only constant.  I recall what that celebrated columnist of the New York Times once suggested:  it looks like some central banks find themselves with much less ability to move the economy than anyone expected.3  The reason is that some of them somehow cultivated the mystique of their invincibility that now turns out to be a handicap.  In our case, while we deliver bold strokes to the market, we shall not throw caution to the wind.  We shall be fully accountable for our efforts to keep prices stable and the banking system sound, but we shall also continue to inform the markets as necessary about the boundaries of what we can do.  With this, the nation can be assured the BSP shall keep its end of the contract.   Thank you and good afternoon.                                                   3  Krugman, Paul (2003), “The Great Unravelling,”, Allen Lane, -.72.   4/4  
Xiang Junbo: The establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office Speech by Mr Xiang Junbo, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the inauguration ceremony of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office, Shanghai, 10 August 2005. *      *      * Honorable General Secretary Chen, Honorable Mayor Han, Dear guests,  Ladies and Gentlemen, Today, we are here to celebrate the inauguration ceremony of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office. The setup of the PBC Shanghai Head Office is an important decision made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council to further improve our central bank system in the new situation, an important institutional arrangement to enhance the role of the central bank in macro-economic management, and also a significant initiative facilitating the building of Shanghai into an international financial center. Now let me, on behalf of the People’s Bank of China, express our sincere gratitude to all departments of the CPC Central Committee, the State Council, the CPC Shanghai Committee, Shanghai Municipal Government and various social circles for your support in preparing the establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office. Since China adopted the reform and opening-up policy, and with the gradual improvement of the socialist market economy, the central bank system in China has been constantly improved. In 1984, the State Council decided to have the PBC function as a central bank. The Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Bank of China passed by the Third Plenum of the Eighth National People’s Congress in 1995 legally confirmed the PBC's central bank status. In 1998, the CPC Central Committee and the State Council decided to reform the administrative system of the central bank by dismantling provincial branches and setting up regional branches, which further strengthened independence of the central bank. As an integral part of the PBC Head Office, the Shanghai Head Office will operate under the guidance and authorization of the PBC Head Office in Beijing. Its major responsibilities include part of the central bank operational functions and some of the administrative functions. The establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office will help the central bank to further improve its decision-making and operational system, and strengthen its macroeconomic management capacity. Since China’s accession to the WTO, China’s opening to the outside world has escalated and the economy has become increasingly market-oriented. The consequent profound changes occurring in the financial industry have given rise to higher uncertainties in the economic and financial development, posing new challenges to the central bank’s macro-economic capability. By shifting part of its operational functions to the PBC Shanghai Head Office and leaving the Head Office in Beijing with decision-making and policy formulation responsibilities, we can take advantage of the human resources in Shanghai to build a team of experts good at central bank operations, financial market analysis and financial products development, and form scientific and rational labor division in terms of policy decision procedure and administrative methods, so as to further strengthen the professional capacity of the central bank in macro-economic management. The establishment of PBC Shanghai Head Office will enable the PBC to take advantage of the direct access to financial markets to improve the role of the central bank in macro-economic management and financial services, particularly efficiency of financial market services. At present, the nation-wide unified inter-bank market, bond market, foreign exchange market as well as the gold market, futures market and Shanghai Stock Exchange are all located in Shanghai. These markets not only form the most important markets where financial institutions, enterprises and households manage financial assets and make investment, but also serve as the platform for the central bank to conduct market operations and implementing macro-economic management policies. Setup of the PBC Shanghai Head Office will enable the PBC to obtain first-hand information on market development and give feedback directly, accurately grasp the pulse of market development and conduct monetary operations and take fine-tuning measures in a timely and effective manner, so as to enhance the efficiency of macro-economic management and financial services. Establishment of the PBC Shanghai Head Office will expand the influence of Shanghai as a financial market and speed up the building of Shanghai as an international financial center, which is an important strategic decision made by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council from the 
overall viewpoint of advancing China’s socialist modernization process. In the early 1990s, Mr. Deng Xiaoping said that China had to depend on the development of Shanghai to enhance the international competitiveness of its financial industry. In his visit to Shanghai in July 2004, President Hu Jintao called for continued efforts to make Shanghai an international center for global economic, financial, trade and marine transportation activities. International experiences show that the setup of central bank headquarters goes hand in hand with development of international financial centers. The opening of PBC Shanghai Head Office will facilitate financial innovation and financial market development, give impetus to the development of commercial financial institutions, and enhance the influence of Shanghai as an international financial center on domestic financial sector and the financial development in the Asian-Pacific region.  The CPC Shanghai Committee, Shanghai Municipal Government, financial regulatory institutions in Shanghai, and policy and commercial financial institutions have always supported the PBC in carrying out its work, which guaranteed the effective operation of the institutions of the PBC in Shanghai. The newly founded PBC Shanghai Head Office will also need attention and support from all of you. By making continued efforts to improve financial services, the PBC will seek to make new contributions to economic development and financial stability. Thank you! 
Philipp Hildebrand: Switzerland and global competition - an all-purpose strategy Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the University of St Gallen, St Gallen, 29 August 2005. The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch) *      *      * Openness was one of the major factors that made Switzerland one of the richest countries in the world. A significant portion of our industry, and one upon which our current prosperity is based, is the direct or indirect outcome of foreign expertise and the efforts of foreign entrepreneurs. These people were attracted to Switzerland – particularly in the 19th century – by its openness and its stable, liberal environment. Openness promotes competition, innovation and progress, thereby securing sustained prosperity.  But Switzerland strayed from the straight and narrow when it began erecting barriers to competition – barriers that provided ever greater protection to its domestic market. The ensuing insulation of the domestic market is probably one of the main reasons for Switzerland's growth slump today. External trade policies are always domestic market policies as well. Consequently, external trade policies have instruments that can be effective in opening up the domestic market from outside. This openness to external trade is of utmost importance, therefore, not only for exporters, but also for the domestic market.  Being open towards Europe and towards other trading blocks is not mutually exclusive. Ultimately, being open means pitting oneself against the very best, irrespective of the region they belong to, since only if we compete against the best, will we be one of the best in the future. Consequently, it would be wrong for Switzerland to limit its openness to a given geographic region. Openness must be the fundamental principle governing all of its economic policies. Even in the changing global environment of intensive competition, Switzerland can increase its prosperity if it rethinks its economic policy direction and embraces former tried and tested virtues such as openness, freedom and personal responsibility. 
Donald L Kohn: Jackson Hole Conference - panel discussion “Financial markets, financial fragility, and central banking”  Remarks by Mr Donald L. Kohn, Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,    27 August 2005  *      *      * My perspective on this interesting and stimulating paper by Raghu Rajan has been very much influenced by observing Alan Greenspan's approach to the development of financial systems and their regulation over the past eighteen years.1 I believe that the Greenspan doctrine, if I may call it that, has reflected the Chairman's analysis and deeply held belief that private interest and technological change, interacting in a stable macroeconomic environment, will advance the general economic welfare.2Chairman Greenspan has welcomed the ability of new technologies in financial markets to reduce transactions costs, to allow the creation of new instruments that enable risk and return to be divided and priced to better meet the needs of borrowers and lenders, to permit previously illiquid obligations to be securitized and traded, and to make obsolete previous divisions among types of financial intermediaries and across the geographical regions in which they operate. At the intersection of market developments and monetary policy, he has led the Federal Reserve's efforts to understand the implications of changing financial technology, such as the growing ease of housing equity extraction, and to use the newly available information about market expectations and the price of risk embodied in market prices.  The Greenspan doctrine holds that these developments, on balance, improve the functioning of financial markets and the real economies they support. By allowing institutions to diversify risk, to choose their risk profiles more precisely, and to improve the management of the risks they do take on, they have made institutions more robust. By making intermediaries more robust and by giving borrowers a greater variety of lenders to tap for funds, these developments have also made the financial system more resilient and flexible - better able to absorb shocks without increasing the effects of such shocks on the real economy. And by facilitating the flow of savings across markets and national boundaries, these developments have contributed to a better allocation of resources and have promoted growth.  That is not to say that the Greenspan doctrine holds that private markets always get it right. Prices in these markets are driven by the tendency of human nature to project the recent past - to waves of complacency and gloom - and hence are subject to overshooting. And private parties, left entirely to their own devices, do not always produce a market structure and market relationships consistent with adequate protection of financial stability. However, the actions of private parties to protect themselves - what Chairman Greenspan has called private regulation - are generally quite effective. Government regulation risks undermining private regulation and financial stability itself by distorting incentives through moral hazard and by promising a more effective role in promoting financial stability than it can deliver.  In this situation, government regulation has a function but it should be based on clear objectives, narrowly tailored to meet those objectives, and, given the iron law of unintended consequences, it should be clearly superior to private regulation. Regulation can be justified if incentives for private regulation are weak - perhaps because of other government programs, such as deposit insurance - or if market participants are likely to be ineffective, as for example small savers and borrowers. Regulation may also be justified to promote greater flow of accurate information to enable private participants to make better informed decisions.                                                        1  The views are my own and do not necessarily reflect other members of the Board or its staff. I thank Athanasios Orphanides, Matthew Pritsker, Patrick Parkinson, and Vincent Reinhart, of the Board's staff, for valuable comments. 2  Chairman Greenspan has spelled out his views on markets and regulation in many places, and much of what follows is my synthesis of this material. His remarks on "Government Regulation and Derivative Contracts" on February 21, 1997 are an especially valuable source for his approach to government regulation of financial markets 
New technologies and changing market structures imply that regulation should be constantly under review; at times rolling back regulation - for example, by lifting the Glass-Steagall restrictions on banking organizations - will benefit competition and help the financial sector deliver services more efficiently and effectively. Moreover, regulation itself can benefit from competition. Running regulated and unregulated markets side by side gives people a choice of whether they want protection and helps to constrain regulation. Some of the same purposes can be served by having multiple regulators for the same function; in some circumstances, the possible adverse consequences of competition in laxity may be smaller than the potential for regulatory conformity and regulator risk-aversion to impinge on innovation and change. The Greenspan doctrine has had a perceptible influence on the evolution of markets and the regulatory structure that applies to them. Raghu Rajan voices some concerns about this evolution. In particular, he posits that the shift from depository intermediation to professional asset management has increased tail risk to socially excessive levels and has left the world more vulnerable to rare but potentially very serious tail events; he suggests some ways in which regulation should be increased.  In assessing this argument, we might find it useful to separate the question of whether the world is riskier from the question of whether systemic risk has risen. The increased ability to disentangle risk and tailor risk profiles should mean that risk has come to be lodged more in line with investor appetites, a change that has probably tended to reduce the price of risk and encouraged riskier capital projects to be funded. But individual investors at greater risk need not imply increased systemic risk - fatter tails and greater potential for losses feeding back on the macroeconomy. In fact, industrial economies have been marked by much less variability in output and inflation over the past twenty years. Many reasons have been given for this so-called great moderation, but developments in financial markets have likely played a role in making the economy more resilient. As a consequence of greater diversification of risks and of sources of funds, problems in the financial sector are less likely to intensify shocks hitting the economy and financial market .  The experience of 2001-03 is instructive. Unusually large declines in equity prices and increases in defaults and risk spreads - surely tail events by most definitions - reduced wealth and raised the cost of capital but did not aggravate the downturn by impinging on the flow of funds. Financial intermediaries were not so troubled as to cut off the provision of credit, and in any case, many borrowers had alternative sources of funds. In addition, we have not seen a clear upward trend in volatility of financial asset prices over the past twenty-five years, as one might expect if herding had increased in importance. Judging from options prices, market participants are expecting the volatility of financial asset prices to be damped in the future; they are also requiring lower-term premiums for placing funds for longer terms.  I do not share Raghu's nostalgia for the systemic-risk implications of bank-dominated finance. Old-style crises involving impaired depository institutions had substantial spillover effects; their repair took time, during which economic activity was affected; and emergency measures to deal with them often involved moral hazard because they were aimed at stabilizing ailing intermediaries. I think we would all agree that the industrial economy that has suffered the greatest systemic strains from problems in the financial sector in the past fifteen years is that of Japan, which remained tied to the commercial bank model Raghu finds safest. The macroeconomic effects of new-style crises involving market liquidity, as in 1998, or outsized movements in asset prices may be more readily cushioned by monetary policies aimed at bolstering the general level of liquidity and reducing interest rates. Such policies also carry less risk of increasing moral hazard.  Although investment managers receive substantial funds directly from households, many of their counterparties are sophisticated investors in positions of fiduciary responsibility. In addition, most asset managers are employees of institutions - mutual fund families, bank holding companies - that are in the market for the long haul. It is not in their interest to reach for short-run gains at the expense of longer-term risk, to disguise the degree of risk they are taking for their customers, or otherwise to endanger their reputations. I would expect these counterparties and employers to enforce compensation schemes that foster their objectives. As a consequence, I did not find convincing the discussion of market failure that would require government intervention in compensation. Moreover, compensation regulation is likely to be easily evaded and fraught with risks of untoward consequences. One only has to recall the congressional action of 1993 that, by imposing less-favorable tax treatment on some forms of executive compensation, fostered the shift to stock options that in turn was thought to have contributed to some of the transparency and corporate governance problems of the late 1990s.  
Regulatory and supervisory systems do need to evolve to reflect the shift to market-based transactions. As intermediation shifts from depositories, with their specialized knowledge of borrowers, to markets, disclosure and transparency become more important to allow diverse private parties to assess risk properly, exert appropriate discipline, and contribute to the efficient allocation of resources. Greater reliance on markets also elevates the importance of the safety of clearing and settlement systems. Private-sector participants have every incentive to demand these disclosures and to ensure that their trades go through as contracted. But government may need to act in concert with private parties to arrive at collective decisions that strengthen markets and reduce systemic risk but might not be in the interest of individuals acting separately. And with more of the fluctuations in asset prices passing through to a large number and wide variety of households, educating people to make informed choices and protecting retail customers from abusive practices remain key governmental functions.  A particularly interesting strand of the debate about excessive risk-taking concerns the interaction of monetary policy and perceptions of risk in financial markets. Some analysts are concerned that several aspects of the conduct of monetary policy in the United States have induced market participants to reduce their expectations about risk too far, setting up the financial markets and the economy for an unpleasant and possibly destabilizing surprise.  In this view, the low short-term interest rates that policymakers have thought were required over the past few years to meet macroeconomic objectives are said to have encouraged reaching for yield - settling for risk compensation that the investors themselves view as probably inadequate but which they feel compelled to accept, perhaps to achieve targeted levels of real or nominal returns. The tendency of policy to react strongly to sharp declines in key asset prices, and thereby limiting the extent of the decreases, has been thought to induce risk-taking by imparting an asymmetry to asset price movements. Finally, a concern is that the fairly new practice of telling the public about our expectations for the path of the federal funds rate may have given market participants a false sense of security about the future path of policy.  These practices have been the result of a monetary policy focused on price and economic stability over the intermediate term interacting with the particular characteristics of the economy. The global decline of inflation and spending induced a global reduction in interest rates to unusually low levels in recent years. Those low rates were, in fact, intended to stimulate risk-taking and investment when private agents pulled back. The tendency for asset prices to fall more quickly than they rise has largely produced the more rapid and noticeable response of stabilizing monetary policy to declines than to increases. And the importance for economic performance of more-accurate expectations about monetary policy, along with the unusually low policy rates, led the Federal Open Market Committee to undertake a more extended discussion of its policy expectations.  To the extent that these policy strategies reduce the amplitude of fluctuations in output and prices and contain financial crises, risks are genuinely lower, and that development should be reflected in the prices of assets. To the extent that the central bank can convey something useful about its intentions, markets that take account of these intentions will be priced more accurately.  The risk is that private agents overestimate the ability or willingness of central banks to damp volatility in asset prices or the economy, or that they fail to appreciate that future policy actions depend on an imperfectly predictable economic outlook. But developments should have partially alleviated some of these concerns. Investors have had an opportunity to observe that policy actions in 1987, 1998, and 2001-03 cushioned the economy, but they did not stop major declines in the prices of equity in 1987 and 2001 or of risky credits in 1998. Short-term rates have risen substantially in the past year, reducing the profitability of "carry trades" without triggering an unwinding that drove long-term interest rates higher or widened risk premiums. And expectations that policy tightening would remain gradual over the near-term have not stopped long-term rates from fluctuating substantially in response to incoming data; the movements of future or forward rates out the yield curve after surprises in data have been at least as large since 2003 as they were before.  That is not to say that we have nothing to worry about. As I already noted, Alan Greenspan, himself, has often been concerned about market complacency - as recently as his latest monetary policy testimony. People may well perceive the economy as more stable than it is or central banks with greater power than we have to smooth the economy or to foresee our own actions.  Clearly, reminders to the public of the inherent uncertainty in economic developments and policy responses are appropriate and should have some effect. The question is whether these warnings should be supplemented by actions to inject uncertainty into policy pronouncements by saying less 
than we can or into the economy by shifting our objectives away from seeking the best outcome for the economy over the intermediate term. In my view, such policies would result in less accurate asset pricing, reduce public welfare on balance, and definitely be at odds with the tradition of policy excellence of the person whose era we are examining at this conference. 
Mervyn King: Jackson Hole Conference - remarks to the Central Bank Governors’ Panel Remarks by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2005. *      *      * Jackson Hole speakers normally draw out the lessons of economic theory for one specific area of policy. But this year we are trying to distil lessons from the practice of monetary policy in the United States - over an extraordinarily successful quarter century under the leadership of Alan Greenspan – for the theory of monetary policy. At most celebrations of a long and successful career, invited speakers talk at length and the great man himself is allowed a few minutes at the end. It is a remarkable tribute to Alan that on this occasion the tradition has been turned on its head. We all remain intrigued by what he has to say. In the few minutes I am allowed, I want to describe the three important lessons that I have learnt from Alan during my time at the Bank of England. First, to be a successful central banker requires an extraordinary degree of objectivity. The key is to recognise that economics tells you how to think, not what to think. It is not a set of settled conclusions about issues. Above all, it is vital never to confuse the world with a model. The whole point of a model is to abstract from a wide range of factors in order to think clearly about one particular issue. Let me describe an example of what I shall call “the Greenspan approach to economics”. It concerns the ‘Lucas critique’. Robert Lucas’ 1976 paper encouraged economists to construct models which incorporated explicit optimising behaviour by households and firms. Unfortunately, some of them urged policy-makers to apply the lessons from their models as literally as the enthusiasts of the engineering approach to macroeconomic policy had done so in the 1950s and 1960s. The Greenspan approach to economics would advise great caution. The insight of the Lucas critique is that we need to think about the responses of rational households and firms when analysing the consequences of alternative policies. But the likelihood that any particular model captures how the real economy would respond to a given change in policy is vanishingly small. Lucas did not pretend that there existed a single “true” model from which could be drawn unequivocal predictions about the impact of policy changes. The second lesson from Alan’s time at the Federal Reserve is that empirical knowledge is not confined to the econometric analysis of official statistics. There are other and often crucially important pieces of information that come to us in more qualitative form. These include information from businesses about what they see happening in the economy. Perhaps the most famous example of this in recent years is the productivity acceleration in the US in the mid-1990s. The extensively revised official US data now show that productivity began accelerating in 1995. However, that was not visible until the vintages released in 1998. But as Alan Blinder and Ricardo Reiss have reminded us at this conference, Chairman Greenspan did not wait until 1998 to conclude that the underlying rate of productivity growth might be increasing. The key reason was that he talked with and listened to people who work in business. Already in May 1996, when the Fed’s model was forecasting increasing inflationary pressures going forward, Alan said “it is very difficult to take the existing structure of the NAIRUs, capacity limits, and the usual potential analysis that we do and square it in any measurable way with what we sense from anecdotal reports”.1 In the UK, there does not seem to have been a productivity miracle. But we have had many examples of the importance of qualitative data in making judgements. For instance, there have been significant flows of migration that have expanded the potential labour force. By their nature, such flows are not accurately reflected in official data. But the Bank of England’s business contacts were able to tell us that the ability to recruit new migrant workers was a growing and significant response to a tight labour market. The third lesson that Alan has taught us is that it is the consistency over time of a policy framework that sustains a market economy, as the achievements of the United States over the last 200 years show very clearly. Alan, of course, has stressed this in the context of price stability. But it applies                                                       1 Transcript of FOMC meeting 21/05/1996. BIS Review 56/2005 1 
equally well to the system of taxes, property rights and public goods provision on which prosperity in a market economy relies. Alan famously defined price stability in the following terms: “price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and firms.” 2 I would suggest that implicit in this is a prescription that Alan might write for all economic policies, not just monetary policy: namely, that economic policy stability is best thought of as an environment in which the decisions of households and firms are not materially affected by the need to insure against future arbitrary or mischievous changes in government policy. Just as Alan would define a good monetary policy as one which leads people to stop talking about inflation, I think he would call a good tax policy one under which people stop talking about the tax system.  In the last decade we have had a debate about whether such stability should be implemented by quantitative targets or not. In monetary policy we have seen the spread of ‘inflation targets’, and targets have begun to permeate other areas of economic policy too. You will not be surprised to learn that I think that such numerical targets have a role. But whether they are appropriate or not is a subsidiary question, and it is one that is related to the political economy of how to ensure the transparency of policy, the accountability of those responsible for it, and the way in which households and firms form expectations of policy: monetary, fiscal or other. Since the political economy varies from one country to another, so will the appropriate method of achieving price stability in particular, and economic policy stability in general. The crucial and overriding point is that a market economy cannot flourish if policymakers behave in ways that lead private agents to expect future economic policies – be those future monetary, fiscal, or legal policies – to be subject to arbitrary or capricious changes.  Of course, an expectation of a stable regime will rarely translate into stable outcomes, and it would be irresponsible of policymakers to let such a misconception take hold. A well designed set of institutions will lead to responses being predictable, but cannot guarantee that outcomes will be.  And there is a pressing issue here. In the US, inflation has been both low and rather stable. Over the past decade it has varied between 1.0% and 3.8%, so we can with some justification say that inflation no longer “materially enter[s] into the decisions of households and firms.” In the UK inflation has, if anything, been even more stable. But this success carries a risk for the future. Inflation expectations may be sensitive to a large but temporary shock that moved inflation outside the range within which it has remained for some years. With their belief in stability jolted, households’ inflation expectations might move by much more than was justified by the temporary nature of the shock. That would make it more difficult for the central bank to bring inflation back to target. The moral of this particular story is that it may be risky to infer from the observation that inflation expectations are stable that all is well. There will be times when large and persistent shocks occur, and it would be unwise to count on inflation expectations remaining stable when actual inflation starts to deviate substantially from its recent range. So those are the three lessons that I have learnt from Alan: (i) a recognition that economics is not a set of doctrines but a way of thinking; (ii) the importance of using qualitative and quantitative information from a range of sources; (iii) there are a small number of fundamental objectives that are crucial and which we can judge by the Greenspan yardstick of whether we have freed businesses and households from the burden of expending resources to deal with unnecessary policy volatility. Alan’s departure from the central banking scene will deprive us of a source of wisdom, inspiration and leadership. To be sure, Alan’s words, whether spoken or written, will surely still reach us from the sidelines. To use a tennis analogy, I see Alan as the central banking equivalent of the non-playing captain of a Davis Cup team, encouraging the younger and less talented members, and stressing the importance of footwork, timing and getting into position early. Alan, thank you for raising the respect which others give to our discipline of economics and our profession of central banking.                                                       2 Transparency in monetary policy. At the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Policy Conference, St. Louis, Missouri, October 11, 2001. This definition was set out much earlier, in similar terms, in Alan Greenspan’s statement before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, January 25, 1990.2 BIS Review 56/2005 
Alan Greenspan: Jackson Hole Conference - reflections on central banking Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26 August 2005. *      *      * In the spirit of this conference, I asked myself what developments in the past eighteen years - both in the economy and in the economics profession - were most important in changing the way we at the Federal Reserve have approached and implemented monetary policy. The Federal Reserve System was created in 1913 to counter the recurrent credit stringencies that had so frequently been experienced in earlier decades. As lender of last resort, we had a mandate that, at least viewed from today's perspective, was limited. We did not engage in Systemwide open market operations until the 1920s. And as recently as the 1950s, the framework within which those open market operations were formulated was still being developed. Credit was eased when the economy weakened and tightened when inflation threatened, but largely in an ad hoc manner. As a consequence, the Federal Reserve was perceived by some as often accentuating, rather than damping, cycles in prices and activity. Importantly, however, the surge in prices that followed the removal of wage and price controls after World War II and again after the Korean War kept monetary policymakers wary of the threat of inflation. But concern that the monetary restraint of the 1950s had led to unnecessarily high unemployment persuaded the Federal Open Market Committee to adopt a more stimulative policy stance in the mid-1960s. Those actions appear to have been predicated, in part, on an acceptance of the then-prevalent view that a long-term tradeoff existed between inflation and unemployment.1Subsequently, however, the experience of stagflation in the 1970s and intellectual advances in understanding the importance of expectations - which built on the earlier work of Friedman and Phelps - undermined the notion of a long-run tradeoff.2 Inflation again became widely viewed as being detrimental to financial stability and macroeconomic performance. And as the decade progressed, a keener appreciation for the monetary roots of inflation emerged both in the profession at large and at central banks. Indeed, the insights from the work of Friedman and Schwartz a decade earlier gained greater prominence in the realm of practical policy.3These events, both economic and intellectual, significantly influenced the tool kits employed by macroeconomists inside and outside policymaking institutions. The large-scale macromodels that had been the focus of so much work in the 1960s came under attack on two fronts. Most prominently, greater recognition of the importance of expectations suggested that those models, which for the most part incorporated autoregressive expectations, were excessively reduced-form and backward-looking in nature and thus insensitive to changes in economic structure and the policy process. In addition, some researchers observed that simple time-series models often produced better forecasts than the large macromodels of that period.4One prescription was to focus on uncovering, at a more fundamental level, the structural parameters of the economy. Needless to say, this task has proven to be a very tall order that has yet to be filled. Partly in response to these difficulties, a substantial body of research focused on improvements in empirical modelling, such as vector autoregressions for forecasting, and in some cases, for policy analysis.                                                       1  See Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, "The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 9274 (October 2002), p. 39.  2  Friedman, Milton. "The Role of Monetary Policy", American Economic Review, vol. 58, No. 1 (March 1968) pp. 1-17. Phelps, Edmund S. "The New Microeconomics in Inflation and Unemployment Theory", American Economic Review (May 1969) pp. 147-160. 3  Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobsen Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1963. 4  Sims, Christopher A. "Macroeconomics and Reality". Econometrics, vol. 48, No. 1 (January 1980). pp. 1-48. BIS Review 56/2005 1 
Each one of these approaches has proven useful, and their descendants are currently employed in various forms in central banks throughout the world. But as yet, none of these approaches is capable of addressing the full range of policymakers' needs. At various points in time, some analysts have held out hope that a single indicator variable - such as commodity prices, the yield curve, nominal income, and of course, the monetary aggregates - could be used to reliably guide the conduct of monetary policy. If it were the case that an indicator variable or a relatively simple equation could extract the essence of key economic relationships from an exceedingly complex and dynamic real world, then broader issues of economic causality could be set aside, and the tools of policy could be directed at fostering a path for this variable consistent with the attainment of the ultimate policy objective. M1 was the focus of policy for a brief period in the late 1970s and early 1980s. That episode proved key to breaking the inflation spiral that had developed over the 1970s, but policymakers soon came to question the viability over the longer haul of targeting the monetary aggregates. The relationships of the monetary aggregates to income and prices were eroded significantly over the course of the 1980s and into the early 1990s by financial deregulation, innovation, and globalization. For example, the previously stable relationship of M2 to nominal gross domestic product and the opportunity cost of holding M2 deposits underwent a major structural shift in the early 1990s because of the increasing prevalence of competing forms of intermediation and financial instruments. In the absence of a single variable, or at most a few, that can serve as a reliable guide, policymakers have been forced to fall back on an approach that entails the interpretation of the full range of economic and financial data. Policy is implemented through nominal and, implicitly, real short-term interest rates. However, reflecting the progress in economic understanding, our actions are now better informed about the pitfalls associated with relying on nominal interest rates to set policy and the important role played by inflation expectations in gauging the stance of monetary policy. Our appreciation of the importance of expectations has also shaped our increasing transparency about policy actions and their rationale. We have moved toward greater transparency at a "measured pace" in part because we were concerned about potential feedback on the policy process and about being misinterpreted - as indeed we were from time to time. I do not intend this brief and necessarily incomplete review of events to illustrate how far we have come or to despair of how far we have to go. Rather, I believe it demonstrates the inevitable and ongoing uncertainty faced by policymakers. Despite extensive efforts to capture and quantify what we perceive as the key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many critical linkages is far from complete and, in all likelihood, will remain so. Every model, no matter how detailed or how well conceived, designed, and implemented, is a vastly simplified representation of the world, with all of the intricacies we experience on a day-to-day basis.  Formal models are a necessary, but not sufficient, system of analysis. To be sure, models discipline forecasts by requiring, among many restraints, that identities are indeed equal, inventories non-negative, and marginal propensities to consume positive. But we all temper the outputs of our models and test their results against the ongoing evaluations of a whole array of observations that we do not capture in either the data input or the structure of our models. We are particularly sensitive to observations that appear inconsistent with the causal relationships of our formal models. Tentative revisions of that structure are reflected in our add factors. Given our inevitably incomplete knowledge about key structural aspects of an ever-changing economy and the sometimes asymmetric costs or benefits of particular outcomes, the paradigm on which we have settled has come to involve, at its core, crucial elements of risk management. In this approach, a central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes about that path. The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy. The risk-management approach has gained greater traction as a consequence of the step-up in globalization and the technological changes of the 1990s, which found us adjusting to events without the comfort of relevant history to guide us. Forecasts of change in the global economic structure - for that is what we are now required to construct - can usefully be described only in probabalistic terms. In other words, point forecasts need to be supplemented by a clear understanding of the nature and magnitude of the risks that surround them. 2 BIS Review 56/2005 
In effect, we strive to construct a spectrum of forecasts from which, at least conceptually, specific policy action is determined through the tradeoffs implied by a loss-function. In the summer of 2003, for example, the Federal Open Market Committee viewed as very small the probability that the then-gradual decline in inflation would accelerate into a more consequential deflation. But because the implications for the economy were so dire should that scenario play out, we chose to counter it with unusually low interest rates. The product of a low-probability event and a potentially severe outcome was judged a more serious threat to economic performance than the higher inflation that might ensue in the more probable scenario. Moreover, the risk of a sizable jump in inflation seemed limited at the time, largely because increased productivity growth was resulting in only modest advances in unit labor costs and because heightened competition, driven by globalization, was limiting employers' ability to pass through those cost increases into prices. Given the potentially severe consequences of deflation, the expected benefits of the unusual policy action were judged to outweigh its expected costs. * * * The structure of our economy will doubtless change in the years ahead. In particular, our analysis of economic developments almost surely will need to deal in greater detail with balance sheet considerations than was the case in the earlier decades of the postwar period. The determination of global economic activity in recent years has been influenced importantly by capital gains on various types of assets, and the liabilities that finance them. Our forecasts and hence policy are becoming increasingly driven by asset price changes. The steep rise in the ratio of household net worth to disposable income in the mid-1990s, after a half-century of stability, is a case in point. Although the ratio fell with the collapse of equity prices in 2000, it has rebounded noticeably over the past couple of years, reflecting the rise in the prices of equities and houses. Whether the currently elevated level of the wealth-to-income ratio will be sustained in the longer run remains to be seen. But arguably, the growing stability of the world economy over the past decade may have encouraged investors to accept increasingly lower levels of compensation for risk. They are exhibiting a seeming willingness to project stability and commit over an ever more extended time horizon. The lowered risk premiums - the apparent consequence of a long period of economic stability - coupled with greater productivity growth have propelled asset prices higher.5 The rising prices of stocks, bonds and, more recently, of homes, have engendered a large increase in the market value of claims which, when converted to cash, are a source of purchasing power. Financial intermediaries, of course, routinely convert capital gains in stocks, bonds, and homes into cash for businesses and households to facilitate purchase transactions.6 The conversions have been markedly facilitated by the financial innovation that has greatly reduced the cost of such transactions. Thus, this vast increase in the market value of asset claims is in part the indirect result of investors accepting lower compensation for risk. Such an increase in market value is too often viewed by market participants as structural and permanent. To some extent, those higher values may be reflecting the increased flexibility and resilience of our economy. But what they perceive as newly abundant liquidity can readily disappear. Any onset of increased investor caution elevates risk premiums and, as a consequence, lowers asset values and promotes the liquidation of the debt that supported higher asset prices. This is the reason that history has not dealt kindly with the aftermath of protracted periods of low risk premiums. * * * Broad economic forces are continuously at work, shaping the environment in which the Federal Reserve makes monetary policy. In recent years, the U.S. economy has prospered notably from the                                                       5  Despite the two-year bear market following the stock market collapse of 2000, equity prices have risen at an annual rate of 10 percent since 1995. 6  Capital gains do not add to GDP. The higher prices of plant and equipment and homes are reflected in an economy's cost structure, which directly or indirectly increases prices of goods and services, leaving real output largely unaffected. Capital gains, of course, cannot supply any of the saving required to finance gross domestic investment. BIS Review 56/2005 3 
increase in productivity growth that began in the mid-1990s and the enhanced competition engendered by globalization. Innovation, spurred by competition, has nurtured the continual scrapping of old technologies to make way for the new. Standards of living have risen because depreciation and other cash flows generated by industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent technologies have been reinvested to finance newly produced capital assets that embody cutting-edge technologies. But there is also no doubt that this transition to the new high-tech economy, of which expanding global trade is a part, is proving difficult for a segment of our workforce that interfaces day by day with our rapidly changing capital stock. This difficulty is most evident in the increased fear of job-skill obsolescence that has induced significant numbers of our population to resist the competitive pressures inherent in globalization from workers in the major newly emerging market economies. It is important that these understandable fears be addressed through education and training and not by restraining the competitive forces that are so essential to overall rising standards of living of the great majority of our population. A fear of the changes necessary for economic progress is all too evident in the current stymieing of international trade negotiations. Fear of change is also reflected in a hesitancy to face up to the difficult choices that will be required to resolve our looming fiscal problems. The developing protectionism regarding trade and our reluctance to place fiscal policy on a more sustainable path are threatening what may well be our most valued policy asset: the increased flexibility of our economy, which has fostered our extraordinary resilience to shocks. If we can maintain an adequate degree of flexibility, some of America's economic imbalances, most notably the large current account deficit and the housing boom, can be rectified by adjustments in prices, interest rates, and exchange rates rather than through more-wrenching changes in output, incomes, and employment. The more flexible an economy, the greater its ability to self-correct in response to inevitable, often unanticipated, disturbances. That process of correction limits the size and the consequences of cyclical imbalances. Enhanced flexibility provides the advantage of allowing the economy to adjust automatically, reducing the reliance on the actions of monetary and other policymakers, which have often come too late or been misguided. In fact, the performance of the U.S. economy in recent years, despite shocks that in the past would have surely produced marked economic contraction, offers the clearest evidence that we have benefited from an enhanced resilience and flexibility. We weathered a decline on October 19, 1987 of a fifth of the market value of U.S. equities with little evidence of subsequent macroeconomic stress - an episode that provided an early hint that adjustment dynamics might be changing. The credit crunch of the early 1990s and the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000 were absorbed with the shallowest recessions in the post-World War II period. And the economic fallout from the tragic events of September 11, 2001, was limited by market forces, with severe economic weakness evident for only a few weeks. Most recently, the flexibility of our market-driven economy has allowed us, thus far, to weather reasonably well the steep rise in spot and futures prices for crude oil and natural gas that we have experienced over the past two years. * * * This morning I have tried to outline my perceptions of the key developments that have influenced the conduct of monetary policy over the past eighteen years. I acknowledge that monetary policy itself has been an important contributor to the decline in inflation and inflation expectations over the past quarter-century. Indeed, the Federal Reserve under Paul Volcker's leadership starting in 1979 did the very heavy lifting against inflation. The major contribution of the Federal Reserve to fashioning the events of the past decade or so, I believe, was to recognize that the U.S. and global economies were evolving in profound ways and to calibrate inflation-containing policies to gain most effectively from those changes. For reasons that may not be too obscure, I will pay close attention to, and hope to learn from, the deliberations of the next couple of days. I have been asked to make a few closing remarks tomorrow about some of the unresolved challenges facing policymakers in the years ahead and about my experiences living inside the Federal Reserve for nearly two decades, after so many years of observing our institution from afar. 4 BIS Review 56/2005 
Peter Pang: Hong Kong’s retail bond issues Opening remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the signing ceremony for the retail bond issue under HKMC’s retail bond issuance programme, Hong Kong, 18 July 2005. *      *      * Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, On behalf of the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation, I welcome you all to this signing ceremony for the retail bond to be offered to the public tomorrow. I am pleased to note that since the introduction of the current offering mechanism through placing banks in October 2001, HKMC retail bonds have been warmly welcomed by retail investors. So far, we have issued seven retail bonds for a total amount of HK$10.4 billion. The success of the Mortgage Corporation’s debt issues has been attributed to its high credit ratings (which are the same as those of the Hong Kong SAR Government) and to the wide range of notes, which can meet the different investment needs of retail investors. The upcoming issue has both Hong Kong Dollar and US Dollar denominated notes. This is the first time that the HKMC issues US Dollar notes. Apart from diversifying its funding sources, the HKMC’s issuance of USD retail bonds also serves to provide an additional investment channel for retail investors in Hong Kong. The minimum subscription amount for our USD bonds is only US$5,000, setting a reasonable threshold to make our debt accessible to a large segment of retail investors. This move by the HKMC to issue USD denominated bonds fits very well into the efforts by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority to promote the development of a safe and efficient financial infrastructure for Hong Kong, based on a multi-currency, multi-dimensional platform. In Hong Kong’s banking system, we have around HK$2 trillion in HK Dollar deposits. Our banks also have the equivalent of over HK$1.8 trillion in foreign currency deposits. About 70% or US$164 billion are US Dollar deposits. The loan-to-deposit ratio for Hong Kong Dollar deposits is 87%; the equivalent for US Dollar is only around 26%. We reckon that a significant portion of the sizable US Dollar deposits is held by retail investors and some would wish to diversify and look for investment products to increase their return. One could of course look for opportunities overseas but, as an international financial centre, Hong Kong should also try to provide more such investment products locally. In the past there have been very few local issues of US Dollar retail bonds, and the most recent one appears to have been issued as far back as in September 2003. Today’s HKMC US Dollar bond issuance would help to meet part of such investment demand. Perhaps in times to come there will be more foreign currency bond issuance in Hong Kong. This bond issuance would add to the diversity of financial intermediation channels and complement the HKMA’s effort to promote the development of a multi-currency, multi-dimensional financial system in Hong Kong. Finally, I am pleased to see many old friends of the HKMC supporting this new issue. I would like to thank the HSBC and Bank of China (Hong Kong) for underwriting a portion of the bond issue as well as placing the notes. Taking this opportunity, I would also like to thank the other placing banks, namely, Bank of America (Asia), Bank of Communications, Bank of East Asia, Chiyu Bank, CITIC Ka Wah Bank, Dah Sing Bank, DBS Bank, Hang Seng Bank, Fubon Bank (Hong Kong), Liu Chong Hing Bank, Nanyang Commercial Bank, Shanghai Commercial Bank, Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong), Wing Hang Bank and Wing Lung Bank, for their participation in this bond issue. With their extensive branch networks, and sophisticated telephone banking and the Internet banking facility, I look forward to another successful retail bond issue by the HKMC. Thank you. BIS Review 55/2005 1 
Lars Nyberg: House price developments and monetary policy Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Evli Bank, Stockholm, 19 December 2005. *      *      * Thank you for your invitation to Evli Bank. I intend to devote the bulk of my speech to a subject that has been under discussion for a fairly long time but that nevertheless has not become less topical or important, namely the developments in the housing market and the rise in household debt. These factors have potentially significant implications for both of the tasks assigned to the Riksbank – both the assignment of safeguarding financial stability and the monetary policy objective of price stability. That of course means that they also have consequences for the efforts to keep the real economy in good balance. Thereafter, I intend to say a few words about the current monetary policy situation and the decision that we took a few weeks ago to leave the repo rate unchanged. As you know, the Executive Board on that occasion – incidentally for the first time in over one and a half years – was not unanimous in its decision. Since I was one of those with a different opinion it may be appropriate for me to elaborate somewhat on my line of reasoning. I want to underline, however, that it was a question of subtle differences in our assessments which there is no reason to overdramatise. House prices and financial stability Households have been increasing their borrowing at a rapid rate for a fairly long time now. The rise in household debt has been accompanied by a fast upswing in prices in the house market. There have been no clear signs to date that this development has begun to moderate in earnest. In all likelihood, there is a limit to how long it can continue. The Riksbank’s assessment is also that the rate of increase will slow down in the coming years as interest rates rise. Developments in the property market, chiefly as regards commercial properties but also housing, play an important part in the Riksbank’s analysis of factors that affect the stability of the financial system. A central question when judging whether house price developments have the potential to pose a threat to financial stability is the extent to which they can be assumed to be driven by exaggerated optimism and speculation. If such driving forces are significant then there is a risk that households could have difficulty meeting their interest payments when interest rates rise; further, the downward adjustment in prices could be very dramatic when the lack of realism in estimates finally becomes evident. The combination of households’ payment difficulties and sharp falls in collateral values could potentially cause problems for the banks. However, this is unlikely to happen in Sweden for several reasons. One is that house price developments in the country as a whole – as indicated by the analyses in the Financial Stability Report we published about a month ago – seem to be explained pretty well by normal underlying factors. These include of course the interest rate level, which for a relatively long period has been low. At the end of 1996, when house prices began to rise again after the crisis years, the average nominal mortgage rate for households was around 9 per cent. Today, it is approximately 4 per cent. Furthermore, households’ disposable incomes have grown firmly during this period. Another factor, of course, is the developments on the supply side, where construction of new homes has been very modest. This fell dramatically in conjunction with the crisis in the 1990s and has only begun to pick up in recent years. So it appears that the upswing in house prices has not been driven by general over-optimism among households and lenders. It might also be worth mentioning here that one reason why the elements of pure speculation probably are small is that Swedish households, unlike those in some other countries, mainly buy homes to live in and not as an investment. The risk of speculative price formation increases in countries where it is common to buy-to-let, with the investor waiting for the home to rise in value before realising a capital gain. This kind of speculation has likely pushed up house prices in above all Australia, but presumably also in the UK, the US and Ireland. BIS Review 88/2005 1 
Another reason why the developments in the housing market and households’ high debt levels are unlikely to pose a threat to financial stability is that households’ ability to service debt is good. On the whole, households are judged to have financial margins that enable them to cope with rises in interest rates or a temporary loss in income without encountering payment difficulties. In addition, the banks’ earnings are good. Past experience also shows that it is unusual for the household sector to cause the banks’ particularly large loan losses. This is fairly natural in one sense. The decision to invest in a home is one of the most important a household makes, and when the decision has been taken the household is often prepared to make rather big sacrifices to meet its obligations. It is worth noting that during the crisis years at the beginning of the 1990s, losses on loans to the household sector accounted for only 7 per cent of the banks’ total loan losses. Instead, it was the commercial property market that accounted for the major losses in the banking system during the property crisis. This, too, has fairly natural explanations. An office building differs from a home in the sense that interest expenditure is intended to be covered by rental income, i.e. income that is generated by the investment itself. If the offices cannot be let, this income does not materialise and the company that made the investment may be forced into bankruptcy. A household, instead, pays its interest with income from other sources. Moreover, in the early 1990s the prices of commercial properties had been pushed up over a long period without any corresponding increase in rental income. The price rises were obviously driven by expectations of a continued strong upswing in prices in the future. When it eventually became clear that these expectations were not going to materialise and it became more difficult to let the premises as economic conditions weakened, the prices fell dramatically. Today, though, the situation in the commercial property market is significantly different. There has not been a prolonged price upswing of the kind seen in the housing market. In connection with the equity market decline in 2000, demand for office premises weakened again and rents and prices in the market for office properties began to drop. The price fall appears today to have moderated and in some regions prices of office premises have risen. Vacancy levels are still high, though, which has contributed to restraining a more general upswing in rents and prices. At the same time, property companies’ earnings and ability to pay are good. Our assessment therefore is that the commercial property market does not either pose a threat to the stability of the financial system. However, the fact that we presently cannot see any general overvaluation in the housing market does not rule out the possibility that some households may have based their decisions on overly optimistic estimates. For example, they may have interpreted the currently very low interest rates as a more or less permanent state, rather than as an exception. These households could of course run into problems when interest rates normalise. One question that might at least be worth reflecting on in this context is whether such over-optimism among some households could be an undesirable “side-effect” – albeit a temporary one – of the successful low-inflation policies in many countries. What has happened in the past ten years is that interest rates have come down fairly dramatically at the same time as the real economic performance in many areas has been remarkably good compared with previous periods. It presumably cannot be ruled out that this situation has lulled some households into a false sense of security, causing them to make overly optimistic investment decisions that subsequently prove to be less well-founded. To the extent such over-optimism exists, though, it should, as I mentioned, be a temporary phenomenon that disappears as households gain more experience of how the economy functions under a low-inflation regime. That households – and lenders – must endeavour to base their decisions on realistic estimates is something that we have recommended many times recently, but it is worth repeating. So it is not that we envisage problems for the financial system or the economy as a whole but rather that individuals and households could run into difficulties. That of course is unfortunate enough. That there does not appear to be any general overvaluation in the housing market does not in any way mean that prices cannot fall in the future either. At least from some media reports in conjunction with the Financial Stability Report the impression was that the Riksbank was almost guaranteeing that future price declines would not happen. That of course is something we cannot do. In our main scenario we do expect average house price inflation to moderate gradually – but still to remain positive – when interest rates normalise, but that does not mean that house prices cannot fall in parts of the country where they are highly elevated. Nor does it rule out a more general drop in prices in the period ahead, even though any such decline is likely to be less drastic than if prices had shot up in a way that could not be explained by developments in underlying factors. That could be the case if, for example, 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
incomes were to fall in a way that we cannot foresee today. Of course, things can also happen beyond the forecast horizon that cause house prices to drop. Allow me to come back to that in a moment and just say here that even in the event of such a more general price fall we do not deem there to be any immediate risk of problems for financial stability. The reasons again are those I gave earlier, chiefly that households on the whole can afford their homes and that experience shows that the household sector seldom causes any significant problems for the banks. So the Riksbank does not view the developments in house prices and household debt as a danger to the stability of the payment system. House prices, demand and inflation As I indicated in the beginning, developments in house prices are important to monitor also, and perhaps even mainly, because they have potential implications for the Riksbank’s second objective – price stability. If house prices fall, households’ willingness to consume goods and services – their demand– declines. If prices drop at a measured rate over a long period it does not have to be a problem. If the price decline occurs rapidly there is reason for greater vigilance. How then do house prices affect the activity level in the economy? This can happen through various channels. One such channel – which I only intend to mention in passing – is housing construction. The higher house prices are, the more profitable it is to build them, all other things being equal. In all likelihood, the fast upswing in prices has contributed to the fact that housing construction now appears to have picked up in earnest, although the low level of interest rates that has kept down financing costs has probably also played an important role. Changes in house prices also affect household consumption by altering the size of households’ wealth. Since household consumption comprises about half of total economic demand the potential effects on inflation can be considerable. The impact on consumption of an increase in wealth can come about in different ways. One is that households feel richer and therefore become more inclined to consume. In addition, the size of their wealth can affect their ability to obtain loans. The larger the collateral a household can put up for its loans, the greater its chances to borrow and thus to consume. When the value of the home owned by a household rises, it also creates the possibility to mortgage the home further, e.g. to build an extension or renovate and further raise the value of the home or to consume other goods. Another effect is that a higher valuation enables a household to refinance its second mortgage as part of its first mortgage and thereby reduce the interest costs of the debt. Historically, there has been an almost surprisingly strong relationship between changes in the value of households’ real wealth – houses and tenant-owned apartments – and how large a proportion of their incomes that households choose to consume, the so-called consumption ratio. When wealth has risen, consumption also has done so. In the current decade, though, this relationship seems to have been weaker than in previous decades. The exact causes of this are not entirely clear. A number of hypotheses exist.1 One is that the sharp equity market decline that began in 2000 may have played a part. Households’ financial assets decreased substantially in value at that time. This may have prompted many households to have high saving in financial assets in order to rebuild their wealth. That in turn has countered the positive effect on consumption of rising house prices. Another hypothesis is that the weaker relationship between developments in wealth and consumption reflect the fact that labour market growth has been relatively weak despite comparatively high GDP growth. That may have given rise to greater uncertainty about future labour market conditions and future incomes, which may have induced households to have high precautionary saving. In the assessment we make in our main scenario, with a continued economic upturn, equity prices will continue to rise while the labour market situation will finally begin to improve in a more marked way. That is anticipated to induce households to scale back their saving and to cause a rise in the consumption ratio. At the same time, as I said earlier, we expect the rate of increase in house prices to gradually moderate as interest rate levels normalise. Nonetheless, there is no getting away from the fact that the house price developments and their effects on consumption are an uncertainty factor in the assessment of the future economic situation.                                                       1  See the box “Households’ consumption, debt and saving” in Inflation Report 2005:3.     BIS Review 88/2005 3 
The debate on the role of asset prices in monetary policy Before I go on to the current monetary policy situation, let me briefly say a few words about a debate that has been ongoing in recent years in both academic circles and in the central bank world and that has some relevance to what I have spoken about so far. I am referring to what role asset prices should play more generally in the conduct of monetary policy. It has been claimed in some quarters that a monetary policy that focuses on keeping inflation low and stable is not enough to guarantee a favourable macroeconomic outcome. This claim is based on the observation that asset prices have fluctuated fairly sharply also under the regime of low and stable inflation. An example is the build-up of the IT bubble in the equity market and the subsequent dramatic decline in that market. Some have even argued that the risk to financial stability increases under a low-inflation regime. Against that background, a number of economists have recommended that inflation-targeting central banks should not only adjust interest rates on the basis of forecasts for inflation and the real economy but also should respond ”separately” to changes in assets prices. The debate on this subject has not been all that easy to follow, not least because the various conclusions from the debate are based on different models with their specific assumptions.2 However, I think you can say that the dominant view today, at least in the central bank world but – as I have understood it – also in academic circles, can be described as follows. A flexible inflation-targeting policy is a sufficiently good “tool” for dealing with problems that can arise via price developments in asset markets. A forward-looking central bank should keep in mind the long-term consequences of, for example, a prolonged rise in asset prices when making interest rate decisions, but there is no reason to take account of asset prices over and above their consequences for the ultimate objectives – price stability and real stability. On the other hand, in some situations it may be necessary for the central bank to attempt to look further into the future than normal in order to ”include” the impact on inflation and the real economy that asset price developments may give rise to in the long term. This is an important dimension of the flexibility in a flexible inflation-targeting policy. The reason I have brought up this problem is that it, in my opinion, has at least some bearing on the monetary policy considerations we face today. I will come back to that in a moment. The current monetary policy situation Let me now proceed to the current economic and monetary policy situation. The outlook presented in the latest Inflation Report can briefly be summarised as follows. On the whole, the situation looks bright for the Swedish economy. The recent months’ data releases have reduced the uncertainty over economic developments, both in Sweden and internationally. Growth is expected to be firm in the next few years, partly on account of expansionary economic policy and firm export market growth. Much also suggests that demand for labour is now finally beginning to pick up more markedly. As regards price developments, we can note that inflation is still low, largely because various supply factors are contributing to low cost pressures. However, inflation is expected to rise in the period ahead when resource utilisation increases in Sweden and abroad, albeit at a relatively slow rate. The forecast in the Inflation Report’s main scenario means that inflation a couple of years ahead is estimated to be roughly in line with the target of two per cent. The risks of a higher inflation rate, though, which mainly stem from uncertainty over the oil price and developments in the krona, are currently deemed to be larger than the risks of a lower inflation rate. As you know, we in the Executive Board decided to leave the repo rate unchanged at our latest monetary policy meeting. At the same time, however, we were in agreement that the Swedish business cycle is fairly close to the point at which it is reasonable to give monetary policy a less expansionary stance. Although we all endorsed the outlook for inflation and the economy in the Inflation Report a number of us were of the opinion that it provided scope for somewhat different interpretations of exactly when the interest rate needs to be raised. I myself and two other members                                                       2  For a more detailed overview of the debate; see Bean, C. (2003), "Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are Inflation Targets Enough?", speech at a BIS conference on "Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle", 28-29 March 2003, Basel, Switzerland. (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2003/speech200.pdf) 4 BIS Review 88/2005 
interpreted the analysis in such a way that we deemed an increase of 0.25 percentage points to be warranted already at the time of the monetary policy meeting. Allow me to say something about the reasons that, in my opinion, suggest that it would have been appropriate to take a first step towards less expansionary monetary policy at the beginning of December. One is that there hardly can be any doubt now that we are in the midst of a strong, stable cyclical upswing. The economic climate has improved in the US and Asia and the Swedish labour market is showing clear signs of a recovery – not least statistics from staffing companies are pointing to a pick-up in demand for labour. Another reason is that an interest rate rise would reduce the risk of the krona weakening further as monetary policy in other countries gradually becomes less and less expansionary. The interest rate differential in relation to the euro area and the US seems recently to have had great significance for developments in the krona exchange rate. A third reason – perhaps the most important – has to do with what I have spoken about here today. My assessment is that house prices and household debt may very well have reached levels at which there is a risk of there arising a self-reinforcing negative spiral with falling house prices and weak demand growth when the business cycle eventually turns down. Even if it were not – as I already pointed out – a case of a correction of an overvalued market, such an adjustment could be comparatively abrupt. In my opinion, an earlier initiated and more gradual raising of interest rates would increase the chances of a more orderly slowdown in the rate of price increases, in roughly the same way as in the UK and Australia. If I may take the liberty of making my own, perhaps slightly partial and favourable, interpretation of this argument you could say that it is fairly well in line with what, as I maintained earlier, appears to be the prevalent view of asset prices’ principal role in a flexible inflation-targeting regime – that developments in asset prices in some situations might make it necessary for the central bank to try to take account of what can happen beyond the normal forecast horizon. So in this situation, in my opinion, an earlier initiation of a shift in policy would help to reduce the risk of a negative self-reinforcing spiral in the cyclical slowdown that sooner or later will come. Thus, seen in a longer-term perspective, such a measure could foster stability in the real economy and inflation. I want to underline that I of course do not mean by this that my colleagues in the Executive Board have not taken these kinds of considerations into account, but only that we have made somewhat different assessments of what the risks are and what currently may be the appropriate action. So it is a question – as I noted initially – of subtle differences in our opinions rather than a case of completely different ideas about how the economy will develop and what fundamentally needs to be done. When the Executive Board convenes in January, however, we shall have two new members, and it remains to be seen what their views are on this matter. Thank you! BIS Review 88/2005 5 
Ardian Fullani: Financial sector assessment program (FSAP) Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference organised in the context of the Financial Sector Assessment Program, Tirana, 15 December 2005. *      *      * I have the pleasure to be here today next to the Minister of Finance, Mr. Bode and Ms. Laura Kodres, International Monetary Fund expert and one of FSAP mission leaders, on the occasion of introducing a very important document, such as the financial sector assessment program or otherwise recognized as FSAP.   On behalf of the institution I represent I would like to thank the joint IMF/World Bank Mission for their hard and great job during their visit in Tirana. This assessment is a very significant financial passport, a first fundamental step to a professional and straight assessment of the financial system in Albania, taking into consideration each of its segments.   A special thanks is also addressed to IMF and WB authorities, who considered our request to send to Tirana their representatives to enable the public presentation of the findings and recommendations produced by this assessment.  I honestly hope the conclusions made by Ms. Kodres shall be bluntly and objectively assessed by you. I would like to stress that the recommendations made by FSAP mission provide a great assistance, and as such, they should be correctly comprehended and interpreted. These recommendations assist to a high degree each policymaker, supervisory institution, market operator, and obviously to media which is very much part of this process. The way you will monitor and communicate information to the public is very important. In this context, I would like to underline that the Bank of Albania shall be very open to assist.   To this aim, we have recently made the Bank communication office functional, thereby meeting one of short-term FSAP recommendations.  I avail myself to this occasion to stress that our immediate plans are to provide a more contemporary communication approach, in particular in the context of preparing and launching educational and training packages, targeting different interest groups.  From the moment we were acknowledged to FSAP recommendations, our institution started listing them by priority and by institutional right. As also monitored by you, we broadly discussed in the Forum organized in the first days of December the issue of establishing a Monetary Policy Committee.  With regard to banking market developments, the Bank of Albania sticks to its engagements to augmenting the opportunities of commercial banks in the securities market. In more concrete terms, starting from September the Bank of Albania charged a fee for the operations carried out in its windows, and in early December the two-level securities register was placed into function. Pursuant to FSAP recommendation and with a view to enhancing daily liquidity management, the intra-credit regulatory basis was amended.   The new bill “On Banks in the Republic of Albania” is complete and ready to be presented to banks for discussion. With the assistance of a specialized international consultation, we believe this shall be a new, contemporary law and it shall identify a number of issues addressed in the form of FSAP recommendations.  Starting from July 2005, the automated electronic clearing house system commenced to operate. Currently, we are working on completing the regulatory framework with a view to augmenting the services provided to the economy, aiming primarily at automating utilities’ periodical settlements.     In November, the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council amended the Regulation “On licensing non-bank entities”, aiming at involving all non-bank financial institutions which operate in the territory of the Republic of Albania in the Bank of Albania licensing and supervision scheme.  In October 2005, the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council approved the new organization structure of the Bank of Albania, placing a major emphasis to enhancing legal counselling, statistical service and public communication. These tree functions are deemed as very significant, in particular when considered in the context of our objectives related to monetary policy and EU integration.  BIS Review 88/2005 1 
Another short-term FSAP recommendation related to improving Bank of Albania transparency is now accomplished. Every interested person could be informed on the rules that the Bank of Albania pursues when it intervenes in the foreign currency market or be acquainted with the present agreements between the Bank of Albania and the Ministry of Finance.   We have been intensifying our efforts to reaching to a rapid and effective solution as regards the Credit Information Bureau. Considering it as a very significant recommendation, we have recently added our contacts with the Albanian Banking Association in order to find a quick solution.  A concrete action plan on the part of the recommendations directly related to the activity of the Bank of Albania and its competencies has already been completed and introduced to IMF authorities.  What I deem as crucial is the complete assimilation of each suggestion made, and based on this absorption we have tried to build up a realistic and fully possible action plan. We believe that the successful accomplishment of the tasks included in the action plan shall be a key factor in enhancing the banking system financial stability. It shall influence the establishment of a modern payment infrastructure, increase financial market efficiency, perfect human capacities and set up a safe foundation for more sophisticated future developments.   I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize that the Bank of Albania shall provide all its expertise to the inter-institutional group established to meeting many other FSAP recommendations. We hope the commitment of other institutions, be they central or supervisory, shall be provided properly, in order for these recommendations to be accomplished in due course.   I am convinced the Minister of Finance and me share the same objective, which is to lead our institutions to stepping this process forward, aiming at achieving a sustainable and sound financial sector development in the country.  Only by doing so, we could lay the grounds for a second assessment in a three-year time, which shall not only observe the accomplishment of these recommendations, but also determine new priorities towards financial system development.  Thank you! 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
Zhou Xiaochuan: Speeding up financial reform to support economic development of the west region in China Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High-Level Forum on Economic Development and Financial Services in the Three Gorges Area, Chongqing, China, 15 November 2005. *      *      * Honorable Secretary Huang, Mayor Wang, Ladies and Gentlemen, I feel very pleased to participate in this high-level forum. Within a short period of 6 years since the central government took a decision to implement the strategy to develop the west region, tremendous changes have taken place in Chongqing, a city with long history located in Southwest China. Though less developed in terms of economic success, the west region boasts of great potentials for future development. On today’s occasion, I would like to share with you my observations on how we could improve financial services to support sustainable economic development in the west region through financial system reform and innovation. Development of the Three Gorges area plays a special and significant role in the development of the whole west region. Through discussions at this forum, the People’s Bank of China and other financial institutions will gain a better understanding of this particular area as well as its financing needs. On the other hand, many issues encountered in the process of economic development in this area are characteristic of the problems found in the development of the whole west region which merit attentive research by the financial sector for good solutions via reform and innovation. As we can see, there exists a strong demand in the west region for enhanced financial services as many enterprises face difficulties like insufficient capital, difficult access to direct financing and relatively high asset-liability ratio etc. In recent years, despite the fact that both the policy and commercial financial institutions have made great contributions to the economic development of the west region, constrained by natural conditions and other factors such as high cost and long period of investment as well as  a relatively large proportion of traditional industries in the GDP, strengthened financial support is needed in this region to modernize the agricultural industry, develop small and medium-sized enterprises and promote economic restructuring. With the national economy increasingly run by the market principles, we shall neither rely on the conventional wisdom of “allocating funds and credit quotas” , nor shall we excessively use policy loans to meet financing needs of the west region. But rather we shall forcefully promote financial reform to put in place a financial organization system with good functions and strong competitiveness that can provide quality financial services. At the same time, we shall make efforts to further improve financial eco-system in the west region and cultivate good market environment so as to retain and attract more financial resources and give the market a full play of its fundamental role in financial resource allocation. Improving financial service in the west region shall be integrated into the overall reform strategy of the Chinese financial system. In 2003, under the steering of the central government, reform of the state-owned commercial banks was officially launched, with important progress already made on various fronts. In particular, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the Bank of China, China Construction Bank and the Bank of Communications have all completed financial restructuring and been transformed into join-stock companies. The Bank of Communications and China Construction Bank successfully went public. Through the reform measures, financial situation of these banks evidently improved, internal control mechanisms were strengthened and corporate governance started to play its disciplinary roles. These banks each maintain a large branch network in the west region, and these branch offices, as I believe, will persistently improve their business management and adaptability to the market economy with the deepening of financial reform, and thus will provide better financial services to economic development of the west region. Consistent with steady growth of the Chinese economy, the policy banks also face the problem of business transformation. For a foreseeable long period of time, the policy banks are still needed to strengthen their support to economic development in the west region, however, due to limitations of BIS Review 88/2005 1 
these banks in efficient resource allocation and business development, these traditional policy banks face the challenges in the transformation of business mode. From the perspective of international experiences, we can see that starting in 1990s, policy banks in various countries embarked on the journey of business transformation. Generally, these policy banks have transformed themselves into universal development financial institutions. Successful examples include the Korea Development Bank and the German Development Bank (KFW). In line with the inherent requirements of the market economy, policy banks in China shall be transformed into development financial institutions with financial viability and strong competitiveness which mainly engage in providing development financing for the medium and long-term projects while continuing to provide policy financial services subject to the fiscal situation of the state. In this case, the policy banks could serve financing needs of industrial restructuring, infrastructure construction and the implementation of “overseas investment strategy” by enterprises in the west region and the country at large in a more sustainable way. Though limited in asset size and capital strength, local financial institutions also play an important role in supporting the regional economic development. On this account, we need to make great efforts to promote reform of the local financial institutions and encourage social participation in the restructuring of these institutions so that new mechanisms featuring self-discipline and self-development could be fundamentally established to ensure healthy growth of financial business and strengthened financial services to regional economic development. In recent years, rural economic development has set higher standards for financial services. In particular in the west region where the agricultural industry accounts for a large proportion of the GDP, there exists an urgent need to improve financial services in the rural areas. The central government has been standing highly attentive to financial work in the rural area and on many different occasions stressed the need to “introduce reform and innovation of the rural financial system”. Financial reform in the rural area shall be carried out in line with the local conditions focusing on exploring a new path for the development of rural finance. Efforts shall be strengthened to construct a rural financial system with improved functions, rationalized division of labor, clear ownership and effective supervision, and to pioneer in developing new cooperative financial institutions in the rural area as well as an effective business model ensuring combined policy and commercial financial support to rural economic development. In 2003, pilot reform program of the Rural Credit Cooperatives (RCCs) was conducted in 8 provinces and municipalities. Chongqing as one of the municipalities participating in the pilot program has so far made good progress in the reform, creating a sound foundation for future endeavors. With support of the government, the RCCs have been released from financial burdens, but this does not mean we have completed the reform. Whether we could make further progress in reforming the RCCs depends critically on the transformation of the operating mechanisms and the financial sustainability of the RCCs. Success in these areas holds great significance not only for the viability and development of the RCCs themselves, but also for the realization of the broad rural economic development strategy. With regard to supporting economic development in the west region and in the Three Gorges area, we think that financial support should be tilted towards the development of the small and medium-sized enterprises, particularly those non-public SMEs, and to the development of the external sector. As many have observed, in the government orchestrated reform process of the large commercial banks and the RCCs, the large banks and some medium-sized banks tend to emphasize on their services to the large corporate clients, emphasize on restructuring the used-to-be loose credit management system, and emphasize on strengthening internal control and consolidated management. However, we should not neglect our financial support to the SMEs, especially to the non-public SMEs. I very much appreciate the proposals Mayor Wang just highlighted, and I have more or less some similar viewpoints and would like to summarize as follows: First, financial institutions should be organized in a way more capable of providing financial services to the SMEs. Second, while continuing to provide quality service to the big corporate clients, large banks which are taking a high proportion of the financial markets should also strengthen internal research and establish new department units to improve credit services to the SMEs. Third, large enterprises are more likely to turn to capital market (equity market and bond market) to meet their financing needs in the future and this change will exert greater market pressures on the commercial banks. Therefore, in order to improve business efficiency, the commercial banks should pay more attention to serving the small and medium-sized clients. 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
Fourth, market-based interest rate reform should be promoted. Under the leadership of the State Council, the People’s Bank of China has gained important progress in advancing the market-based interest rate reform in recent years. In the days to come, we will continue to deepen the reform process. Determining interest rate following market principles will enable the lending institutions to better cover their risks and thus to improve their credit services to the small and medium-sized clients. Fifth, as Mayor Wang just mentioned, great efforts should be made to more effectively promote micro credit business. While the micro credit business has made certain progress in the rural areas, there is still a long way to go before it can meet the financing needs of the rural economy. In recent years, many developing countries in the world have gained useful experiences in growing their micro credit business and some are worth learning. We need to make careful study and research on this matter and advance the micro credit business prudently. Sixth, financial products innovation should be encouraged. The financial industry is an industry featuring brisk innovation activities. The frequent change and introduction of new products aim to improve allocation of economic resources and better meet the financing needs of the market. In terms of developing new financial products, we have gained in the past some unsuccessful experiences and lessons which we need to draw from to improve the innovation capacity of the financial institutions. Only with improved capability in product innovation, can the financial institutions better serve the financing needs of the SMEs, the non-public enterprises and the economy of the Three Gorges area. Finally, I would like to stress that the receipt of financial resources in a region is closely associated with the condition of its financial eco-system. Whether it be development or commercial financial business, a sound financial eco-system is the prerequisite to ensure its success. In recent years, with steady improvement of the internal control and risk management systems, some national banks have started to set up internal ratings system in accordance with stipulations of the Basel Capital Accord II, and adopted such an approach to assess the condition of financial eco-systems across various regions, so as to guide their exercise in internal fund allocation, credit planning or the authorization of credit lines. This will to a large extent determine the direction and amount of financial resources movement across the regions. In the west region where the industrial foundation is relatively weak and the economic development is backward, greater efforts should be made to improve the local financial eco-system to attract financial resources. Of course, backwardness in economic development does not necessarily imply a poor financial eco-system. But if the financial eco-system of the west region could be more effectively improved, it would be helpful to quickly develop a comparative advantage in attracting financial resources to provide sustained credit support to the industrial development and restructuring of the region. In terms of building a sound financial eco-system in a region, apart from the efforts by the central government in establishing a good legal and enforcement system, the local governments should also create a favorable platform to ensure justice of the judiciary system so as to provide better protection for the claims of the financial institutions, improve credit environment and foster a mutually beneficial relationship between the banks and the enterprises. Ladies and gentlemen, many issues remain to be deeply studied and deliberated with regard to accelerating financial system reform and giving the financial industry a greater role in resource allocation to more effectively support economic development of the west region and the Three Gorges area in particular. In this respect, I would like to commend the valuable research and experiments conducted by provinces and municipalities in the Three Gorges area. I have also read some excellent research papers containing good proposals presented at this conference. I think the financial industry should support the favorable polices tailored by the State to facilitate development of the west region and the Three Gorges area in a bid to improve financial services to this end. I also believe that under the leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council and with concerted efforts of all relevant parties, the vast west region including the Three Gorges area will definitely be able to embrace an economic take-off at an early date. Thank you. BIS Review 88/2005 3 
R Jayamaha: Basel II and operational risk Keynote address by Dr R Jayamaha, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the 10th SEACEN-FSI Regional Seminar for Bank Supervisors and Regulators, Colombo, 12 December 2005. *      *      * It is indeed an honour to have been invited to deliver the keynote address at this SEACEN - FSI Regional Seminar for Bank Supervisors and Regulators on the implementation of Basel II and Operational Risk.  I would like to take this opportunity to share some thoughts on this important subject, which is currently engaging the attention of the Bank regulators, not just in our region, but worldwide.  I will first deal with why Basel II requires a separate capital allocation for operational risk and what it intends to accomplish.  Next, I will discuss how Basel II deals with operational risks and how it contributes to financial system stability.  Finally, I wish to mention a few steps regulators can take in preparation for adopting Basel II and mitigating operational risk.  2. Deregulation and globalization of financial services, together with the growing sophistication of financial technology are making the activities of banks and their risk profiles more complex.  In this context, not only well known credit, interest rate and market risks, but also other risks can be substantial and threaten the stability of a financial system. A growing number of high-profile operational losses worldwide have led banks and supervisors to increasingly view operational risk as an integral part of risk management policy.   Management of specific, more common or day-to-day operational risks is not a new practice; it has always been important for banks to prevent fraud, maintain the integrity of internal controls and reduce errors in data transaction processing, ensuring the availability of information technology infrastructure and their back up systems when needed. More often than not, operational risks are taken as given and very little attention has been paid to it. Operational risk is intrinsic to financial institutions and it should be an important component of their firm-wide risk management systems. However, operational risk is harder to quantify and model than market and credit risks. Operational risk differs from other banking risks.  It is a risk that is not willfully incurred in return for an expected reward but is implicit in the ordinary course of banking business and has the potential to affect the risk management process.  However, ignorance of operational risks or failure to properly manage such risk can result in a misstatement of an institution's risk profile and expose the institution to significant losses.  Such institutions can become a regulatory burden. These and a few other factors have led the Basel Committee to recommend a separate capital for operational risk.  3. Definition of operational risk has evolved rapidly over the past few years.  First, it was commonly defined as every type of unquantifiable risk faced by a bank, which has been refined considerably to include modern day risks. According to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, operational risk is the “risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events”. This definition is based on the underlying causes of operational risk at the broadest level and includes legal risk, but it excludes strategic and reputational risks.  The Basel Committee has also asserted, “the most important types of operational risk involve breakdowns in internal controls and corporate governance.” That’s why Basel II aligns with a variety of other regulations and supporting frameworks for enhancing corporate governance.  'Management of operational risk is thus taken to mean the 'identification, assessment and / or measurement, monitoring and control of mitigation of this risk. While many of these risks are inherent and visible in day to day operations of banks, some components are applicable to supervisors and regulators.  4. The banking industry’s awareness of operational risk and efforts to manage it have accelerated in recent years, driven in part by an increasing desire to improve operating efficiency, reduce earnings volatility, rationalize the allocation of capital between competing businesses.  It is not easy to get banks to identify and assess the operational risk inherent in all material products, activities, processes and systems and in particular to follow such practices when new products are introduced.  To encourage banks to focus attention on assessment of operational risk on products and processes, regulators should be aware of new products, improvements in management information systems and computing technology that have opened the way for improved operational risk measurement and BIS Review 88/2005 1 
management. In the next few years, financial institutions and their regulators will continue to develop various approaches for operational risk management and capital budgeting techniques.    5. Let me focus on some key areas of operational risks and regulatory responsibility in the interest of financial system stability.  6. Sound management of operational risk is particularly important in payment, clearing, and settlement systems as such risks can spread across systemically.  All owners and operators of payments, clearing and settlement systems face operational risks but the degree may vary from system to system and from country to country. Operational problems in a payment, clearing, and settlement system may impede the control of, or even exacerbate, other types of risk such as market, liquidity, or credit risk in an unanticipated way that could pose a systemic risk, resulting in participants incurring significant losses. It may not stop there.  Payment and settlement related operational risks could filter into businesses of banks’ clients, governments and the country’s international correspondents as well.  This aspect of banking operations was ignored for many years and it is fairly recently that regulators and banks started addressing payment and settlement related operational risks.  Today’s consensus is that payments, clearing, and settlement systems must be safe, reliable, efficient, and secure, which are critical to financial system stability. That’s why most regulators, the central banks in particular, have become owners and operators of clearing and settlement systems. Although the tendency is to outsource this function, many regulators at some stage or other have owned or operated these systems.  7. Another technology related risk is the desire of banks to acquire the leading edge with propriety systems, stand alone systems and specific IT systems.    Banks tend to hang onto this short-lived approach. Individual systems are costly not only to banks themselves, but also to customers. The norms should be not attracting customers, but reducing their operational risks and reduction of transaction costs to customers. Both are often forgotten or ignored by banks and continuous reminding has become a regulatory responsibility.  Despite moral suasion banks in many countries have not realized the gains of having common ATM platforms, back-up sites, disaster recovery sites and sharing of costs.  8. It may also be necessary to for banks to recognize that different risks matter in different lines of businesses.  A comparison of business unit economic capital requirement by risk type indicates that operational risk is highest in fund management, private banking, and in retail banking when compared to corporate banking, insurance business (if banks are allowed to engage in). The new operational risk element is expected to hit banks specializing in areas - such as custodian arrangements and asset management.  The regulators should be mindful of high operational risks in these businesses and bring them to the attention of banks.     9. Uncertainties, regulatory challenges in promoting banks In a lighter vein, operational risks can be categorized into two, i.e. man-made risks (mistakes, faulty models, frauds, terrorism, wars etc.,) and god-made risks (earthquakes, floods, Tsunami disasters, electrical blackouts, telecom interruptions etc.)  Some of these are well known and banks handle them in their own ways.  Complexity of the assessment process and required changes to it, uncertainty in the implementation date of Basel Accord, the US and some European banks’ attitude towards implementing the Accord, variability in data reporting are a few factors that have created uncertainties in banks as well as regulators’ minds.  I believe that these challenges can be overcome if banks can be encouraged to adopt a systematic approach as set out in Basle II.  First and foremost, regulators have to get banks to commit to a risk mitigation cycle which consists of (a) risk diagnosis (i.e. prioritization of objectives, documentation review/meetings and building up of a risk control culture profile); (b) risk identification within a framework; (c) risk assessment and preparation of action plan; and (d) risk reporting.    10. The choice of the approach/models banks wish to adopt may have significant implications.  Score card, loss distributions and internet modeling are some of the popular risk models. All of them have implementation challenges, in particular, skills shortage, non-availability of reliable data and suitable IT systems.   In-house training courses tailored to each business unit, commitment by senior management of banks, understanding of benefits of implementing Basel II by all stakeholders and hiring of right skills would help in mitigating skills shortage related risks. Regulators and supervisors have to be at it to assess progress within a reasonable  time frame.    2 BIS Review 88/2005 
11. Without data, there are no models and without models, the risk management capability is reduced. This does not mean that commonsense approach in handling matters should be discarded altogether.  Given the heavy competition and highly leveraged nature of businesses, banks, at minimum, should record historical data for computing the probability of default loss, and operational risk losses.  This is a difficult task. The challenge for banks is to build up databases for operational losses, both historical and potential future losses. The challenge for regulators is to ensure that banks start collecting this type of data in a systematic manner.  Banks often see regulators as a pain in the neck due to constant nagging. Perhaps, moral suasion and organizing peer pressure might encourage banks. 12. Unbundling risk related capital charges in the new Basel II Capital Accord requires an explicit capital charge for operational risk.  Calculating such a capital charge has proved extremely difficult because of a lack of an accepted methodology and credible industry data.  This has required the adoption of a strategy to permit banks to use their own internal measurement approaches – subject to quantitative and qualitative criteria and, on a transitional basis, to a minimum or floor capital charge. Assessing and validating different internal risk mitigation measures would be a regulatory challenge.   13. The Basel Committee has put forward a framework consisting of three options for calculating operational risk capital charges in a ‘continuum’ of increasing sophistication and risk sensitivity. There are three approaches under Pillar I: (i) the Basic Indicator Approach for Operational Risk I, which requires a flat rate of 15% or a fixed percentage of gross annual income;   (ii) the Standardized Approach for Operational Risk II which requires a risk charge based on annual income per each business line, multiplied by a risk factor per business line; and (iii) Advanced Measurement Approach for Operational Risk III which requires full reliance on bank’s internal risk management system subject to supervisory  review.  Many Central Banks including the Central Bank of Sri Lanka propose to initially allow banks to adopt the Basic Indicator Approach for computing regulatory capital for operational risk. They are expected to move along the range towards more sophisticated approaches as they develop acceptable operational risk management systems and practices, which meet the prescribed qualifying criteria.  According to DC Independent Survey 2003 and KPMG’s 2nd Global Survey on Basel Readiness Assessment of 190 institutions in 19 countries, increasingly, banks appear to be moving towards Advanced Measurement Approach rather than Standardized Approach in dealing with operational risk. As for the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, we have decided to follow a consultative process while implementing Basel II norms and move in a gradual, sequential and co-coordinated manner, for which dialogue has already begun with the banks. A steering committee comprising representatives of banks and supervisors is taking stock of all issues relating to its implementation.    Here too, the regulators need to be on top of things to assess readiness of banks.    14. Conclusion Let me sum up the key messages of this address.  Today, the degree of sophistication in financial markets urge all market participants, including regulators and supervisors, to increase their focus on risk management in an effort to build more robust and sound financial systems and to position themselves to participate more fully in this complex and fast-paced financial environment.  In that sense, Basel II, aiming at further strengthening of the soundness and stability of the international banking system, offers a unique opportunity to respond to all these concerns and pay attention to the main sources of risk and vulnerability that could pose challenges for the financial system stability. 15. Implementation of Basel II has been described as a long journey rather than a destination by itself.   The journey is certainly tougher than we thought.  Undoubtedly, it would require commitment of substantial capital and human resources on the part of banks and the supervisors.  For banks, the main challenges appear to be the skills shortages and data inadequacies coupled with uncertainties regarding costs associated with implementation.   Banks all over the world have started to voice concerns over the mounting regulatory costs.  It is a regulatory responsibility to encourage banks to have a phased implementation programme starting from a traditional baseline scenario of identification of operational risks, assessment, and awareness monitoring and integrating these elements over a period.  Basle II implementation and operational risk mitigation process puts heavy burden on supervisors to detect problems in banks, to stay on top of the latest advances in risk management and to avoid abuses of many powers that are given to supervisors.  All these are too much for supervisors to bear as many of us are still on the learning curve.  Exchange of information both within and outside the region would be very important particularly in capacity building for evaluation and validation of risk assessment models of banks.   This seminar is one such joint effort by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka BIS Review 88/2005 3 
and the SEACEN Centre, which would provide a good opportunity to exchange information and learn from each other. 16. Basel II is expected to foster financial stability through its risk sensitive framework through encouragement of banks to adopt improved risk management practices. Supervisors and regulators are required to review the efficiency of banks’ risk management practices and capital allocation methodologies, and empower market participants to make informed judgments on the efficiency of banks.  Despite challenges, many researchers suggest that Basel II leads to rising rewards and discipline in banking industry.  The indicators are that pay back for getting Basel II right and for looking beyond mere compliance to the real business benefits will be greater than originally anticipated.  Encouraging banks to understand and believe that enhanced economic capital framework would be the key to high performance is undoubtedly a regulatory challenge. 17. I believe the deliberations of this seminar will improve our knowledge on ways and means of dealing with regulatory challenges posed by Basel II and operational risk mitigation measures.  I wish the seminar a success and thank you all for your attention.  4 BIS Review 88/2005 
Xiang Junbo: Deepening financial reform to create a favorable environment for enterprises Speech by Mr Xiang Junbo, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Euro Finance China Conference 2005, Shanghai, 9 November 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, Good morning. It’s a pleasure to be here today to participate in the Euro Finance China Conference. In recent years, China has been enjoying a rapid economic growth, gradually pushing forward its financial reform, and continuously pursuing the opening-up policy. Against this background, there have been significant changes in the business environment of multi-national enterprises. It is of vital importance for us to discuss the issues regarding Cash, Treasury and Risk Management, which is the theme of this conference to facilitate an improved business pattern and efficiency for multi-national enterprises.  As we know, economy and finance serve complementary to each other. An equilibrium and rapid development of national economy is needed to create a favorable external environment for the deepening of financial reform. While the introduction of various financial reform measures contributes to a better business climate for micro-economic participants.  China has been maintaining a stable and rapid economic development momentum in recent years, and has achieved marked success in many sectors; new progress has been made in the course of opening up, which guaranteed a smooth conduct of financial reform.  First and foremost, national economy witnessed a steady and quality growth. With the GDP growth of 2005 expected to register at 9.4 %, China’s annualized GDP growth rate during “ the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period ” is likely to average at 8.8%, representing an acceleration of 0.5 percentage points over that of “ the Ninth 5-Year-Plan Period”, while the volatility of economic growth is likely to be controlled within a band of 2 percentage points, 0.5 percentage points lower compared with that recorded for the “Ninth 5-Year Plan Period”. Generally, China has enhanced the capability for economic growth, and is much more resilient against fluctuations with heightened economic stability.    Secondly, employment continued to scale up. Employment has become an increasingly pressing issue for China due to its large population. During “the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period”, newly created jobs in the urban areas increased from 7.89 million in 2001 to 9.8 million in 2004. And the figure is expected to exceed 9 million this year, which to certain extent will ease the unemployment pressure. Thirdly, consumption has been steadily upgraded. During “the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period”, per capita disposable income of the urban and rural residents is expected to increase by 9.5% and 5% respectively a year on average. The continuous and rapid income growth expanded household consumption, fostering a shift of consumption from focusing on satisfying basic needs to that seeking to live a comfortable life.  Fourthly, social security system was further improved.  A sound social security system constitutes the basis of maintaining a stable social and economic development. During “the Tenth 5-Year Plan Period”, China’s social security system has further been consolidated, with the pilot program of urban social security system further developed with notable progresses achieved in terms of building pension, unemployment, and the medical care security system. Efforts have also been made to explore a security system committing minimum protection for residents in the rural areas. Fifthly, external sector recorded a rapid development. After the accession into WTO, China engaged itself more deeply and broadly in the international arena in terms of division of labor. The shift of international industries stimulated the substantial growth of processing export. China’s rapid industrialization and urbanization process combined with the factors such as abundant labor forces and cheap prices, etc, created new opportunities for international manufacturing industry. FDI also maintained rapid growth.  Sixthly, agricultural production remained stable. China’s grain production experienced large fluctuation in the past several years. The shrinkage of grain production and the rise of grain prices once exerted negative influences on the economic development. Thanks to the concerted efforts, grain production BIS Review 87/2005 1 
of this year started to rebound, removing the supply-demand gap, which has contributed to the stability of grain production and prices. In the context of a sustained and rapid development of national economy, China has continuously introduced various measures to speed up the share holding restructuring of the wholly stated owned commercial banks, to foster an improved financial market, to conduct the reform on RMB exchange rate regime, and to advocate the construction of financial eco-system, etc. All these measures will definitely impose profound influences on the business environment of enterprises.  First, the share holding reform of the State-owned commercial banks has helped establish credit discipline, which could gradually reduce the enterprises’ reliance on the banking system for finance. In recent years, China has consistently pursued the principles to establish a standard corporate governance structure and to transform the operational mechanism. Through the deepening of internal reform, and backed by the favorable government policies and financial support, the restructuring aims to develop a new system and new mechanism required by the modern financial institutions. So far, the Bank of Communications has successfully completed IPO, China Construction Bank also was successfully listed in HK Stock Exchange on October 27. The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China has completed their share holding restructuring. The credit business of commercial banks will be more rationalized on one hand with the gradually improved corporate governance structure and the strengthened external supervision, on the other hand, commercial banks have to adopt cautious stance for their business expansion due to the rigid requirement on capital adequacy ratio. Against this background, enterprises are encouraged to explore new financing channels instead of overly depending on bank loans for financing needs. Meanwhile, financial innovations are advocated to mitigate potential risks in the economic and financial operations. Secondly, financial market was further improved, facilitating the market access of enterprises, and making it possible to rationalize the financing structure. We speeded up the development of financial market especially the inter-bank bond market in order to address the waning direct financing proportion and to diversify financing channels for enterprises while further steps were taken to implement the commercial bank share holding restructuring. Highlighting market principles, institutional investors were cultivated in the course of inter-bank bond market development while priority attention was paid to preventing new risks. With major measures in place, qualified enterprises were allowed to issue short-term financial bills in the inter-bank bond market; foreign-funded commercial banks with RMB business license can join bond underwriters' syndicate to provide underwriting services in the inter-bank bond market; International development agencies were approved to issue RMB bonds in the national inter-bank bond market; Pan-Asia Bond Index Fund and ABF China Bond Index Fund have been launched in the inter-bank bond market; Bond forward transaction has been introduced; Efforts have been made to improve information disclosure system, and strengthen market disciplinary mechanism. etc. The adoption of these measures signified an important step forward to enhance the influence of financial market as well as its role in resource allocation; Enterprises could enjoy the access to broader financing channels, and favorable conditions were created to prevent them from exposing to risks. At the same time, these measures lay a foundation for the rapid development of financial derivative products. Thirdly, better exchange risk management of enterprises is required by the RMB exchange rate regime reform. On July 21 this year, the PBC announced to reform the exchange rate regime by moving into a managed floating exchange rate regime based on market demand and supply with reference to a basket of currencies. This reform is a self-initiated action consistent with the reality of China’s market economy situation. In the short term, some less competitive enterprises are bound to face intensified pressures. In this case, the enterprises should lose no time to learn and master all possible instruments to hedge foreign exchange risks and to become more adaptable to the floatation and movement of exchange rate. However, in the long run the adjustment of the exchange rate will provide incentives for these enterprises to transform their operational mechanisms, strengthen their self-innovative capability, accelerate economic restructuring, shift growth patterns of foreign trade, and upgrade the overall efficiencies of national economy. It is also conducive to achieving a basic equilibrium of the trade balance in goods and services, strengthening the independence of monetary policy, and enhancing the preemptiveness and effectiveness of financial macro control policies. Fourthly, 9 reform measures on foreign exchange capital management were launched on a trial basis in Pudong district Shanghai with the purpose to create a favorable policy environment for multinational enterprises. Previously, taking the facilitation of trade and investment, and the improvement of exchange market construction into consideration as the basic principle, reform on foreign exchange management was spearheaded in an innovative, gradual and controllable way as required in Pudong 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
District of Shanghai by introducing the 9 policy measures, steps will be taken to conduct centralized management of foreign exchange capital in the domestic market, centralize the management of RMB capital, deal with cross-border capital operation, streamline the procedures of trade revenue and expenditure in foreign exchange, streamline the procedures under non-trade item, pursue financial innovation, and establish a monitoring and assessment system. The introduction of these policies is bound to facilitate the centralized foreign exchange management of multi-national enterprises, enhance their regional headquarters’ capability of foreign exchange management, it also marks great significance to expand cross-border capital utilization of enterprises, support domestic enterprises’ overseas investment, encourage banks to conduct derivative products innovation, and to create a favorable policy environment concerning foreign exchange management. Fifthly, financial eco-system was improved, laying a solid foundation for the sustained development of various enterprises. The concept of financial ecology construction initiated by the People’s Bank of China has received nation-wide attention recently. Financial ecologic situation will not only affect the transmission of monetary policy, efficiency of resource allocation, financial stability and development, but also directly take effects on the operation and transaction costs of enterprises as well. A sound financial ecologic environment comprises not only comprehensive and integrated institution building on a macro basis, but also improvements in micro infrastructures related to corporate governance, credit culture both for individuals and enterprises, bank-enterprise relationship, intermediary services, etc. With regard to the financial ecology construction, great efforts have been made to enhance the legal system building, engaging in the research, deliberation and draft work on some related clauses in the “Property Law”, “ Enterprises Insolvency Law” and the “Criminal Law” in terms of property right and financial claim protection and the definition of financial crimes. On the other hand, a nation-wide publicity campaign concerning financial ecology construction has been launched to create a sound institutional and public environment, so as to ensure various enterprises develop on an equitable basis.      These financial reform measures not only stressed the market-based orientation of China’s financial reform, but also reflected the goals of our reform to create a favorable environment for enterprises. The People’s Bank of China will continue to push China’s financial reform forward in a steady manner, guaranteeing a better monetary and financial environment for enterprises. Taking future development trend into consideration, China’s economy is expected to enter a stage characterized by steady growth. Currently China is speeding up its urbanization and industrialization process with corresponding growth in investment and demand. Consumption is expected to expand further due to the large population; steady increase of household income and an upgraded consumption structure will also benefit consumption; and favorable external environment will continue to serve a strong engine for China’s economic growth. All these positive factors will provide a sound macro economic environment for the deepening of financial reform. Now I would like to share my insights with you on the financial reform and development trend closely related to the development of enterprises. First, continue to pursue a sound monetary policy. In 2006, China will continue with its sound monetary policy, measures will be taken to maintain the steady growth of money and credit, monetary policy will play a greater role in keeping RMB value stable and managing the equilibrium of money and credit aggregates. Based on the changes of economic and financial situation, PBC will maintain appropriate growth of money and credit by using a mix of monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner and controlling the scale of policy. Efforts will be made to provide quality financial services to enterprises by strengthening the coordination between RMB and foreign currency policies, and improving the formation mechanism of RMB interest rate and exchange rate. In the future, on one hand the PBC will make adjustments of the exchange rate band when necessary in line with the market development as well as the economic and financial situations. At the same time, the PBC will exercise due responsibility to conduct management and adjustment of the RMB exchange rate based on market supply and demand so as to safeguard a more flexible exchange regime on a market basis and to ensure that the RMB exchange rate is basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. On the other hand, it’s not enough by the exchange rate alone to keep the equilibrium of BOP due to the price rigidity existed in some aspects of China’s economy. Continuous internal economic policy adjustments are needed to strengthen the coordination between various macro policies, expand consumption, and ensure a balanced development between economic restructuring and the BOP.  Secondly, Actively promote the construction of financial market. Currently, the financing structure, featuring high proportion of indirect financing and low proportion of direct financing, remains to be BIS Review 87/2005 3 
rationalized. Financial risks are too much concentrated in the banking sector, which weakens the role of market in resource allocation and results in the high financial leverage ratio of enterprises. Such a financing structure has also brought about difficulties in the conversion of savings into investment, asset and liability management and risk control. Prime attention will be paid to developing direct financing products and risk management instruments, further promoting financial innovation and market system construction. Financial bonds issued by commercial banks as a new liability instrument will be launched on a timely basis to improve the status of maturity mismatch between asset and liability. Efforts will also be made to actively develop institutional investors, and expand the scope of investors. The market infrastructure will be strengthened to create a sound legal and technical environment for the development of financial market. More financial derivative products will be gradually introduced in line with the market situation, while the monitoring, analysis and regulation concerning market risks will be intensified to ensure a sound, effective performance of financial market.  Thirdly, speed up the reform of financial institutions. Under the overall guidance of financial system reform, China will continue to conduct the share holding restructuring of wholly state owned commercial banks by introducing various measures to transform their operational mechanism and improve corporate governance. The overhauling of policy banks will escalate to transform them into development financial institutions with strong competitiveness and financial viability in accordance with the requirements of the market economy. Comprehensive financial reform will be carried out in rural areas, steps will be taken to deepen the reform of RCCs, and some pioneering work will be launched to explore an effective pattern to combine policy and commercial financial support for the rural economy. Participation of social capital in the restructuring of small and medium-sized financial institutions will be encouraged. With strengthened supervision and capital base, financial institutions with various ownership structures will be cultivated. Deposit insurance system will be improved in order to develop a deposit insurance system compatible with Chinese situation.  I would also like to take this opportunity to give you a brief introduction of the People’s Bank of China Shanghai Head Office. The PBC Shanghai Head Office was established on August 10 this year; its establishment will promote the development of Shanghai as an international financial center, take advantage of the first-hand contacts with the financial markets, and enable the central bank to better serve the financial markets. As an integral part of the PBC Headquarters, the PBC Shanghai Head Office will perform its functions under the guidance and authorization of the PBC Headquarters, and is mainly responsible for the implementation and management of part of the central bank’s business. The goal is to build Shanghai Head Office into “Two Platforms, One Window and One Center”, namely, the platforms for the open market operation and the monitoring of financial markets, an important window for international exchange and cooperation, and a center for some financial services and related researches and development work. By far, the construction of Shanghai Head Office is undergoing smoothly, I hope through joint efforts by all relevant parties, Shanghai Head Office will play an active role in boosting financial market construction, promoting the efficiency of central bank’s financial services, and creating a better financial environment for enterprises. Finally, I wish this conference a complete success. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 87/2005 
Lucas Papademos: Interview with Financial Times and Financial Times Deutschland Interview with Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, conducted by Mr Ralph Atkins and Mr Marc Schieritz and published in the Financial Times and Financial Times Deutschland on 19 December 2005. *      *      * Mr Papademos, you have responsibility as ECB Vice-President for financial stability issues. Are the risks to financial stability of interest rates remaining low greater than the risks involved when short-term rates are rising?  A comparison of the risks involved when short-term rates are rising with the risks to financial stability of rates remaining low is not easy, as it depends on the relative assessment of the two types of risks and on the magnitude of a potential increase in short-term rates.  On the whole, I would expect that potential increases in global interest rates – not necessarily in the euro area – that are moderate and anticipated should not involve risks to financial stability. Needless to add, the size of possible risks will differ across countries and sectors. Let me elaborate. When interest rates remain at a low level for a long period of time, they may entail risks to financial stability as a result of their effects on households, corporations and financial institutions. For example, low interest rates have contributed to the rapid rise in household debt and the fast increase in house prices in many countries in the euro area, but also elsewhere. The sustainability of household indebtedness and related credit risks when interest rates rise depend on the ability of households to service their debts and on their buffers. In the euro area, despite increased indebtedness, households have comfortable buffers. Debt-to-asset ratios are sufficiently low in the euro area as a whole, and the ability of households to service their debt is not expected to be substantially affected by potential future increases in interest rates. Of course, the impact of higher rates on household debt-servicing costs will differ across countries and socio-economic groups. Among investors, the low level of global interest rates has contributed to the so-called “search for yield” and the flattening of the yield curve. At least some investors have tended to acquire assets of higher risk without requiring a commensurate higher rate of return. The low interest rates may have influenced investors’ risk-return preferences. And in an environment of higher interest rates, there may be a readjustment of these preferences with consequences for the level of long-term interest rates. For corporations, the low level of interest rates has helped to improve their balance sheets after a period of excessive investment and borrowing. This restructuring, or repair of balance sheets, has been very important in the euro area. More recently, however, low interest rates have fuelled an increase in borrowing and a tendency of firms to borrow short term, rather than long term. But despite this development over the past year, the ratio of short-term to long-term obligations of euro area firms is not high.  The flattening of the yield curve has exerted some pressure on bank profits. However, the profitability of euro area banks has evolved in a very satisfactory manner as a result of the positive influence of other factors, increased lending, especially mortgage lending, higher non-interest income and as a consequence of cost cutting and a reduction in the flow of provisions. Low interest rates may encourage banks to increase their holdings of more risky assets and this could have implications if credit conditions change when interest rates increase.  Is that the same as saying that there are no risks to economic growth of rising interest rates?  It is not the same thing, but under the present circumstances the consequences would be similar. With respect to the specific adjustment in the monetary policy stance of the ECB that took place earlier this month, I would not expect this to have a significant adverse effect, if any, on the ongoing economic recovery in the euro area. Will the general global monetary policy tightening have an impact on euro area growth?  BIS Review 87/2005 1 
In principle, a tightening of monetary policy – global and domestic - would be expected to contain aggregate demand growth. The extent, however, of this effect depends on the initial conditions and on the influence of a variety of other factors. In the US, despite the substantial increase in interest rates since the middle of 2004 which followed a fairly long period of low interest rates, economic growth has remained robust because of the cumulative impact of the previous monetary accommodation and of other factors that have at least partly counterbalanced the effects of higher interest rates. An important channel through which monetary policy influences the economy is through its effects on long-term interest rates. If long-term interest rates remain at a low level – as a result of favourable inflation expectations influenced by a credible monetary policy oriented towards price stability and as a consequence of the impact of other factors– then the effect on economic activity of a rise in short-term interest rates is going to be more muted. Moreover, the expected strength of euro area economic growth in the coming year is mainly based on the projected evolution of internal demand. Which effect is stronger - the impact of higher short-term rates on growth, or the beneficial effects of low long-term rates?  Well, it depends of course on the term-structure of debt and the proportion of long-term debt with variable rates. But the general point that I would like to emphasise is that although a higher level of short term rates can be expected to dampen growth in principle, it may not dampen growth in practice because of the influence of other factors, including those that determine the functioning of labour markets and productivity growth.  Could it be that the recent move by the ECB represents a case where increase interest rates might stimulate growth?  I would agree with this. Public perceptions and expectations of future inflation should be favourably influenced by a change in the monetary policy stance that aims at preserving price stability. It [a higher level of interest rates] could foster expectations of lower inflation and higher real disposable incomes, and increase confidence, particularly in countries where public perceptions of current inflation are less favourable than actual inflation and financial markets’ inflation expectations. [So] you expect the adjustment to higher interest rates to be orderly?  Your question suggests that it is a certainty that higher interest rates are coming. I think that we have clarified that we have not decided, ex-ante, to engage in a series of interest rate increases. So I will answer the question in a general way, as a hypothetical question on whether an evolution of interest rates towards a higher level will be orderly? As far as policy rates [set by central banks] are concerned, it is important that any future changes are well understood by the markets and the public and are predictable. As regards changes in market rates, particularly potential adjustments in long-term rates partly in response to a change in the monetary policy stance, I would say that the likely scenario would be one of an orderly adjustment, although the relationships between long-term and short-term rates are complex.  Although there is a risk of an abrupt correction in the level of long-term interest rates as a result of the impact of other developments, this is not the likely outcome on the basis of currently available information. Is there a risk of house price bubbles bursting?  It is always difficult to identify whether property price rises are indicative of a bubble because property prices are influenced by changes in fundamentals as well as by speculative behaviour. We know that in a number of countries, including those where house prices have increased at a fast pace, such as France, Spain or Italy, fundamental factors can account for at least a substantial part of the change in prices. On the basis of some estimates that have been made to try to assess the extent to which bubbles exist, one can say that in some countries there are indications of an overvaluation of property prices, but there are many caveats associated with these estimates which have to do with the difficulties in disentangling fundamental and speculative effects. On the whole, I would say that a slowdown in the pace of increase of house prices is likely but the risk of a correction – that is, of a decline – is small in the period ahead. Needless to say, conditions in housing markets and the size of associated risks differ considerably across countries, and even across regions within countries, in the euro area. 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
Will the ECB raise interest rates again in coming months?  The change in the ECB’s monetary policy stance in early December was both necessary and prudent. It was necessary in order to preserve price stability over the medium term in view of several upside risks to price stability that had been identified and in order to send a clear signal that the ECB is determined to continue pursuing a credible policy that will preserve price stability over the medium term and continue to anchor inflation expectations to price stability. It was prudent to act promptly in view of increased upside risks, taking into account the long lags involved between a change in monetary policy and its effects on price developments. It was also prudent to decide on a moderate change in the stance, taking into account the uncertainty surrounding the evolution and effects of other determinants of inflation dynamics. With regard to the future, we did not decide ex ante to engage in a series of interest rate increases. In the future we will assess, as usual, all relevant information and analyse it in order to reach a conclusion about the outlook for price stability over the medium and long term. On the basis of this assessment, decisions will be taken with regard to the monetary policy stance but there is no reason or case for communicating anything more than what we have said. What should be perfectly clear is the ECB’s commitment and determination to fulfil its mandate to deliver price stability. In general, is the ECB following a different strategy to that followed by the US Fed in raising interest rates? Do the differences relate to changes in economic circumstances, or conceptual differences?  The difference is mainly related to the economic circumstances and, to be more precise, to differences in the assessments about the economic outlook and in particular the outlook for price stability. In the US, the policy stance changed and the decision to preannounce a measured increase in interest rates was made at a time when interest rates were at the very low level of 1 per cent and had stayed at that level for a considerable period and also at a time when it was assessed that inflationary pressures were building up on both the demand and the supply sides of the American economy.  Our case is somewhat different. First, we had a higher level of interest rates when the decision was taken to change the monetary policy stance. Second, our assessment about the outlook for price stability is that inflation is expected to stay above 2 per cent for a period of time but it is expected to moderate gradually.. In the absence of second-round effects, the relatively modest increase in unit labour costs, partly related to the fact that the pace of the recovery is moderate and there is still an output gap and a high rate of unemployment, is expected to help contain inflationary pressures. But several and significant upside risks surround this assessment.  It is therefore important that second-round effects of oil prices are avoided and that monetary policy helps to minimise the likelihood that other risks materialise.  From a conceptual point of view, I agree that monetary policy predictability is a desirable feature that enhances policy effectiveness. However, predictability does not require, in general, giving explicit signals or pre-announcing the medium-term evolution of the monetary policy stance. What is your perspective for the long- term growth potential of the eurozone? Have you lowered your estimates?  In the past, we reported a range of estimates for potential growth of 2 to 2.5 per cent in the euro area that had been obtained by academic research. There is a risk that, unless there are changes in policies – more reforms in labour and product markets - as well as in the behaviour of private economic agents, this range may have to be revised downwards. But it is not our working assumption that no action will be taken to strengthen potential growth in the euro area.  To cut a long story short, the main way that potential growth could increase is through policies that boost productivity growth and raise labour utilisation by increasing the average hours worked and the participation rate in the labour market and by making this market more flexible and adaptable. I would agree that the pace of reform in these areas has been relatively moderate, but progress has been made in a number of countries and the overall sentiment on the need for, and the support of, reforms is changing in the right direction.  The experience of the Nordic countries illustrates that it is possible to implement reforms that have a significant positive impact on employment and growth without at the same time changing in fundamental ways the social model that is in place. BIS Review 87/2005 3 
What are the implications of your assumptions about potential growth and productivity for the what economists would see as the neutral level of eurozone interest rates?  A simple concept of the neutral, or natural, rate of interest over the long term is the one derived from models of long term economic growth in which the equilibrium real interest rate is determined by productivity growth, demographics and saving preferences. Estimates of this concept of the natural real interest rate have ranged between 2 and 3 per cent. The estimated range suggests that there is uncertainty about its value – and the uncertainty is greater than that implied by the fact that I mentioned a range and not a number. Another, more short-term, concept of the natural interest rate is that it is the real rate that ensures macroeconomic equilibrium at every point in time at the potential output level and it is consistent with price stability. This real rate can fluctuate considerably precisely because the different factors and shocks that impinge on supply and demand in product and asset markets vary over time. Estimates of this concept of the real interest rate are broadly similar to the range that I mentioned earlier [2-3 per cent], though closer to the lower limit. But the uncertainty surrounding these estimates is higher. These are useful concepts to monitor and see how they evolve over time, but they do not play a prominent role in the ECB’s strategy for determining the monetary policy stance. They are useful benchmarks – not intermediate objectives – that can be used together with other measures – such as the output gap and the difference between the unemployment rate and what could be labelled the ‘natural’ rate of unemployment – to provide information about the strength of inflationary pressures in the economy. At what unemployment rate do inflationary pressures start to build up in the eurozone?  There are various estimates. Recent research at the ECB and by academic economists and international institutions suggests that the natural rate of unemployment or the NAIRU [non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment] is currently close to 8 per cent. This is surprisingly and disappointingly high, because it implies that, other things equal, there are certain limits imposed by the functioning of the labour market on the conduct of a stability-oriented monetary policy. These estimates emphasise the importance of reforms that would contribute to reducing the unemployment rate that is compatible with price stability. If the NAIRU is reduced, a higher level of employment and a lower rate of unemployment can be supported by monetary policy without creating inflationary pressures.  Some eurozone politicians suggest that the eurozone or eurogroup could form the basis for enhanced cooperation within the European Union. If the eurozone does not develop a political character, can it survive over the longer term?  There are suggestions that may be potentially useful but I have not seen precise proposals that specify the framework and mechanisms for achieving enhanced cooperation in practice. As a central banker I feel that it would not be appropriate to comment on means of enhancing political integration in the euro area. If there are no changes in the institutional structure or deeper political integration within the euro area, can monetary policy function effectively? My answer would be a straightforward yes, without this implying that certain institutional improvements on the economic and political front would not help enhance the functioning of the European monetary union. What is important is that economic policies and, in particular, fiscal policies are consistent with, and supportive of, the objectives of monetary union, including the objective of price stability. The present institutional framework is overall adequate to allow the ECB to perform is tasks effectively.  Otmar Issing steps down as executive board member next may. Would you like to take over his role as ECB chief economist?  I have read the speculation in the press but I prefer not to comment. The decision will be taken by the Executive Board together with our new colleague. 4 BIS Review 87/2005 
David Dodge: Promoting economic integrity Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the RCMP management retreat, Ottawa, 25 October 2005.  *      *      * Thank you, and good evening. When Commissioner Zaccardelli asked me to speak at this retreat, I was glad to accept. In fact, I'm honoured to be part of this inception of the RCMP's new strategic priority - Economic Integrity. It's not surprising that the Bank of Canada is interested in promoting economic integrity. After all, the Bank of Canada Act mandates us, as far as possible within the scope of monetary policy action, to "promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada."  We are committed to promoting the economic well-being of this country and its citizens. We do this through our monetary policy, through our role as the federal government's banker, and through the issuance of Canada's paper currency. And we constantly work to promote confidence in a sound, safe financial system.  A few years ago, your Commissioner coined the phrase "Safe Homes, Safe Communities". Your new strategic priority adds a third element to this phrase - "A Safe Economy". More than ever before, the law-enforcement community has a critical role to play in strengthening and preserving the security and economic interests of Canada. Now more than ever, the Bank of Canada, the RCMP, and other police agencies across Canada are working together to achieve this goal.  Good policing is economic policing  A focus on promoting a safe economy is not new for the RCMP and other police agencies. It is part of everyday policing - providing a safe place for citizens to live and work.  But what do we mean by safety in our economy? For those of us involved in the nation's finances, it means preventing activities that undermine Canadians' confidence in their economy. It means fighting against the counterfeiting of currency and goods, credit card fraud, identity theft, money laundering, and so on. And it means preventing the erosion of confidence in our financial markets. Public companies need capital to invest and create jobs. Governments need capital to build infrastructure. Investors provide capital on the expectation that it will be put to good use and yield good returns. In turn, investors rely on these returns to finance their own needs, their homes, their retirement, and the education of their children. All of this activity will not take place unless the players are confident that they will be treated fairly, and that they operate on a level playing field.  We know that all investments are subject to some risk of loss - that is the nature of markets. Properly-functioning financial markets price investments according to their degree of risk and their economic merit. But these markets can only function properly, and price appropriately, if the information on which they function is correct. If there is misinformation and deception - or the suspicion of fraud - markets cannot work efficiently.  Let me explain further. When there is fraud, the market is operating on incorrect information. Clearly, that can result in private losses for individual investors who acted on the wrong information. But it can also cause a general loss in confidence - a loss which affects the economy as a whole. In the absence of trust that information is correct, the market cannot function, and society as a whole is the poorer for it. That's why we have accounting standards, securities regulations, and laws prohibiting economic crime. There are significant social benefits of a properly functioning market. And there are severe social costs of a market that functions poorly.  Economic crime erodes the faith of Canadian and foreign investors in the integrity of our financial systems, our currency, our governments, our businesses, and our products. These crimes undermine the financial health and reputation of our country. They are far from victimless. Ultimately, we are all BIS Review 87/2005 1 
victims of these crimes, as they erode confidence in the financial system. And it takes a long time and a lot of effort and investment to re-establish public confidence once it is lost. That's why we have to view economic crime as every bit as serious as certain crimes of violence. It is true that fraud is less physically dangerous than an armed robbery. But its social damage is every bit as severe. Both types of crime undermine the trust that people have in their society. That's why a computer hacker who steals from a company is just as much a criminal as a bank robber who steals from a bank branch. And an illegal inside trader that has hijacked a million dollars from the pockets of investors is no less a criminal than the thief who commits an armed robbery. In all of these cases, the specific loss of property is exacerbated by a more widespread loss of confidence. Let's look at an example that's closer to home for the Bank of Canada - paper currency, our one tangible product. When an individual gets stuck with a fake bill, the amount he or she loses may be very small. But again, it is the aggregate impact that matters. Cash transactions still account for a large percentage of our economy, and the use of cash continues to grow every year. If people lose faith in their currency, the economic and social costs are immense. The impact of the Windsor $100 counterfeits a few years back is a lasting reminder of those costs. Maintaining the public's trust in Canada's paper money is a job that the Bank takes very seriously.  Many police agencies are already working, either implicitly or explicitly, to protect economic integrity. You've been fighting the economic components of conventional crime - such as the laundering of the proceeds from drug sales - as well as economic crime itself - such as fraud, counterfeiting, and computer hacking. By improving your ability to fight these specific economic crimes, you improve your ability to fight all crime.  In matters of personal and public safety, police organizations have known for a long time that enforcement cannot be effective without active cooperation from citizens and communities. Enforcement alone is not sufficient to improve safety in our homes and in our streets. Prevention, education, and community initiatives all have their role to play. Police officers also rely on the help of a broad range of complementary experts: psychologists, lawyers, community workers, public health officers, and so on.  That spirit of cooperation is just as vital when it comes to protecting economic integrity. No one policing agency can fight alone against terrorist financing, money laundering, counterfeiting, or financial market fraud. This has become especially true in recent years, because of the growing sophistication of financial instruments and trading technologies. It's now much easier to hide one's own identity, or to steal someone else's, using Internet and other anonymous networks. And it's easier to confuse people with ever more complex financial schemes. The good news is that we've already seen how effective the police can be when they mount a sustained and coordinated effort to reduce these types of crime. Integrated Proceeds of Crime Teams have made it increasingly difficult for criminals to profit from their illegal activities. The launch of the Integrated Market Enforcement Teams in 2002 has helped boost public confidence in our capital markets. These are still early days, but the work of these teams is being noticed.  The Bank is solidly behind this integrated approach to enforcing laws against economic crime. Special teams have the skills and resources needed to conduct complex investigations leading to the successful prosecution of these so-called "professional criminals." This year, you developed the National Counterfeit Enforcement Strategy. As a result of this initiative, it appears that we may soon have specialized Integrated Counterfeit Enforcement Teams (ICETs) in place, to fight the serious threat posed by currency counterfeiting. Be assured that my colleagues and I applaud and strongly support these vital efforts.  However, I know how difficult it is to generate support and funding for these new initiatives. I understand how frustrating it must be to investigate these complicated crimes without adequate and skilled resources or support. And I understand the frustration of police who spend time and resources investigating these offences, only to see the criminals walk away with little punishment because the social costs of their crimes aren't always fully recognized. That's why the Bank is working with the law enforcement community on training materials and legal tools to help prosecutors present their cases more effectively. Further progress will require a coordinated effort and a multidisciplinary approach. Vocal championship by leaders from the public and private sectors is needed if Canadians and their governments are to appreciate and support investment in specialized enforcement teams and more effective prosecutions and sentencing. As Governor of Canada's central bank, it is my responsibility 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
and my intention to do all that I can to increase awareness of the importance of protecting economic integrity. That is why the Bank has been, and continues to be, committed to partnering with law-enforcement authorities and other participants in the legal system.  Challenges in protecting economic integrity  You and the Bank of Canada share a compelling objective: Making Canada a safe place to earn a living, to do business, and to invest. So, what challenges do we face in this regard?  Canada has a strong financial system, low and stable inflation, and a healthy economy. Our regulatory and governance structures are sound, and they are evolving to meet the challenges of new technology. So are Canada's bank notes - they now contain some of the best security features in the world But there is evidence that Canada is at risk of becoming a safe haven for opportunistic criminals who deal in white collar crime. This may be because we have lacked an adequately resourced enforcement regime and strong sentencing precedents. It may also be because there is a perception that our markets may not be as safe as they should be, and a perception that our enforcement is not as tough as it ought to be. So we're battling on two fronts: we need to thwart these opportunistic criminals, and we must be seen to be doing so.  Another challenge is also a traditional strength of Canada's economy, and that is its openness. This openness has helped us to become one of the world's great trading nations, and a model of multiculturalism. Canada is seen as an attractive place for people to live, to invest, to do business, and to trade with. But, as I've said, this open economy makes us a target for international economic criminals. That's why we need more effective public and private sector governance and sound regulatory and enforcement practices to nurture strong businesses and sound financial systems. A third challenge is the need to ensure that our laws are current and that the judiciary is well-informed. The mere detection of crime - not to speak of its prosecution - is now a very sophisticated activity. It requires accountants, actuaries, commercial lawyers, financial specialists, and computer experts. Most importantly, it needs skilled investigators who are able to collect, analyze, and assemble complex evidence. And it requires informed prosecutors who are able to effectively marshal this evidence in the courtroom.  To meet these three challenges, we need to continue to work efficiently together - across specialties and institutions. No single institution can gather and manage all the experts who have to cooperate in this new environment.  Police know their role in fighting economic crime. But manufacturers, issuers of high-value instruments (such as currency, securities, and passports), and financial institutions also have key roles to play. We must make our products and services as secure as possible. And we must do this while remaining profitable or, in the case of public sector institutions, cost effective. Now more than ever, this entails considerable expenditure to create and deploy highly sophisticated, reliable, and easy-to-use products and services. Our new Canadian Journey series of bank notes is a good example of the effort that we are making in this regard.  As organizations make these investments, they must put even greater emphasis on security, quality, and service. They must be audited and supervised to the highest standards. Regulators, overseers, users, boards of directors, the legal community, and the general public all have a stake in the outcome.  Tracking down the bad guys and collecting the evidence is the responsibility of the RCMP and other law enforcement agencies. Bringing a strong case to court for the Crown rests with the prosecutors. By working together, we can hope for sentencing that reflects the importance of the crime. But achieving that goal requires active collaboration. That is easy to say, but devilishly tough to achieve. Knowledge sharing is difficult even within a homogeneous organization. Sharing information and expertise across separate and independent organizations is even harder. But it is critical if we are to succeed. The RCMP's creation of the strategic priority of Economic Integrity is a tremendous step towards achieving that goal, for two reasons. First, this initiative is the vehicle by which your internal resources can be mobilized. The IMETs are an excellent example of this and I'm confident that the ICETs will be, too. Second, this initiative will become the conduit for sharing knowledge, information, and resources BIS Review 87/2005 3 
with other partners, including the Bank of Canada. Through a well-organized partnership, we can succeed in our goal of enhancing and preserving the economic integrity of our country. On behalf of the Bank of Canada - and I'm sure that I speak for securities commissions and other market regulators on this - let me say that we appreciate your efforts, and that you have our full and enthusiastic support.  Conclusion Everybody in this room is committed to making Canadians secure, in their homes, in their communities, and in their business and working lives. As we do so, it is imperative that we continually remind ourselves that crime extends beyond the physical. Economic crime is harder to investigate and to prosecute. But it is every bit as damaging to the well-being of Canadians, and it is just as important to fight it with all of our effort.  That's why I applaud your decision to make economic integrity a strategic priority. And I renew the Bank of Canada's commitment to work together with the RCMP and all enforcement agencies to help make the Canadian economy a safer place for investors, for businesses, and for all of our fellow citizens. 4 BIS Review 87/2005 
Niklaus Blattner: Switzerland’s real estate market Introductory remarks by Mr Niklaus Blattner, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. *      *      * Competition in the Swiss real estate market has undoubtedly become stiffer in recent times. This is basically a good thing. Moreover, different market players and other observers have been pointing out for some time now that banks have not only become more competitive, but also less cautious. Mortgage lending is part of the banks’ core business. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) therefore decided to analyse the current situation and development in the Swiss real estate market in more detail. The SNB is mandated to contribute to the stability of the financial system. The question asked was the following: Are there any signs that the fiercer competition in the real estate market is associated with excessive risks which may ultimately threaten the stability of the banking system? The National Bank’s analysis is based on both statistical data regarding banking activity and on the results of a survey conducted among a number of banks specifically for this purpose. The random sampling covers banks with a total market share of over 70%. The main result of our survey shows that stronger competition in the real estate market has so far not had a destabilising effect on the banking sector in Switzerland. Modest rise in Swiss real estate prices overall Among other things, our assessment is based on the development of real estate prices. In Switzerland as a whole, real estate prices have only experienced a moderate rise in the past few years. Moreover, the general price level is still considerably lower than the record highs reached over ten years ago. By contrast, owner-occupied apartments are an interesting deviation from this trend. They have risen sharply of late, almost equalling their 1990 high. Econometric estimates of equilibrium prices which have been additionally carried out also fail to indicate any overheating in the Swiss real estate market as a whole. We arrive at the same conclusion even under the assumption of a significantly higher interest rate level than today’s, which would result in a marked correction of the capitalised value of real estate. Our assessment is based on an observation for Switzerland as a whole. It does not exclude the possibility that there have been excesses in individual regions or in certain parts of the real estate market.  BIS Review 86/2005 1 
Graph 1: Development of mortgage claims and real estate prices Source: SNB, Wüest & Partner No sign of banks taking greater risks Since the end of 2002, mortgage claims have recorded annual growth rates of up to 6%. This is quite substantial compared with the rather moderate trend in real estate prices. It appears that the expansion of mortgage claims has not been driven so much by real estate prices, but by the number of loan requests. Consequently, the growing demand for loans is more likely attributable to factors other than the expectation of a speculative boom in real estate prices. The crucial question is the following: Is the higher demand for loans due to excessively harsh competition among banks that has led to cheaper credit not reflecting the actual risks incurred? How has the relatively strong growth in mortgage loans impacted on bank risks? To answer this question, we took a closer look at the banks’ risk behaviour. Several indicators led us to believe that banks have hardly engaged in excessive risk taking. While it is true that interest rate margins, i.e. the spreads between mortgage rates and the banks’ financing costs, had fallen slightly by mid-2005, other bank expenses declined at the same time. In the final analysis, therefore, the profit margin was virtually constant or even slightly higher. The profit margin corresponds to the difference between the interest rate margin and the total operating expenses expressed in percent of the loan volume and – to reflect expected risks – of total value adjustments and provisions. The banks’ profit margin thus also serves to cover unexpected risks. Given that the profit margin has remained constant or moved slightly higher, the banks’ risk-taking capacity has not diminished in spite of pressure on interest rate margins. This presupposes, however, that the banks have made realistic value adjustments and provisions. We currently assume that this is the case. Moreover, average lending limits for mortgage loans have changed only insignificantly and may be regarded as cautious. For instance, the proportion of low-risk first mortgages – i.e. those mortgages with the lowest lending limit – is over 90%. The criteria used in extending loans can also be rated as conservative. As a rule, assessments of a debtor’s future solvency are based on considerably higher interest rates than the current ones. Mortgage debtors should therefore be able to meet their liabilities even if there is a marked increase in the interest rate level. Our analysis focuses on system-relevant banks and on different groups of banks. We rely on aggregated data and on a random sampling of banks or groups of banks. Problems with individual institutions cannot be excluded but should not threaten system stability. Increase in interest rate risks These assessments, which have so far been positive, are becoming slightly clouded because of higher interest rate risks. Smaller banks in particular have seen a relatively strong increase in direct interest rate risks. A sharp rise in the interest rate level could affect the valuation of assets and liabilities of such banks to such an extent that their capital resources would in some cases be reduced considerably. While such losses could still be absorbed, we would, however, consider a further rise in interest rate risks as critical. 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
 Graph 2: Interest rate risks by bank groups (reduction in net present value as a percentage of equity following an interest rate shock of +100 basis points) Source: SNB Conclusion: Increased efficiency without higher risks The slight narrowing of interest rate margins supports the assumption of increasingly fierce competition in the mortgage market. From the viewpoint both of consumers and of economic efficiency, this would be a welcome development. However, in the banking business there is always a danger that fiercer competition might encourage excessive risk taking by the banks. A bank can outperform its competitors by offering more favourable conditions while at the same time accepting poorer risk cover. However, as already mentioned, our aggregated analysis suggests that caution has not waned. Banks’ gross margins are declining slightly because their cost savings and improvements in efficiency are being passed on to customers. The capacity to absorb risks is not compromised by granting customers better conditions. Currently, the positive aspects of healthy competition are taking hold without apparently having any negative side effects. The SNB will nevertheless keep a close watch on trends in the real estate market. In particular, we will monitor interest rate risks, which have already reached a high level. With an appropriate normalisation of money market rates, the SNB contributes to limiting the danger of an abrupt rise in interest rates. In the current environment of historically low rates, however, there is no guarantee that the future trend in interest rates will be moderate. Sharp fluctuations in market rates are a possibility. This is a fact banks must bear in mind when managing interest rate risks. BIS Review 86/2005 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: European financial integration Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 10th Symposium on Finance, Banking, and Insurance, University of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, 16 December 2005. *      *      * 1.  Introduction  Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to speak to you today on the occasion of the 10th Symposium on Finance, Banking, and Insurance. I would like to congratulate the organisers for arranging this internationally esteemed conference at the University of Karlsruhe. Karlsruhe, the former residence of the Dukes of Baden, is not only beautifully located between the Rhine and the Black Forest, it is also situated right in the middle of Europe. And Europe is at the heart of the topic that I will discuss in my speech today.  This symposium traditionally aims to strengthen the links between theory and practice, addressing the latest developments in a wide range of finance issues. This is the second factor underlying my choice of topic. Today, I will talk about European financial integration. This subject is of interest to market participants, policy-makers and academics alike, and is of the utmost interest to the European Central Bank (ECB). In fact, the Governing Council of the ECB has formulated the mission of the Eurosystem (comprising the ECB and the euro area national central banks) as follows: “We in the Eurosystem have as our primary objective the maintenance of price stability for the common good. Acting also as a leading financial authority, we aim to safeguard financial stability and promote European financial integration.”1  I will structure my remarks as follows. First, I will explain the link between financial integration and monetary policy and financial stability. I will then present the current state of financial integration in the euro area based on the indicators of financial integration recently published by the ECB. Finally, I will mention some specific activities by which the Eurosystem contributes to fostering financial integration, and I will highlight some topical EU policy issues in the field of European financial integration.  2.  The link between financial integration and monetary policy and financial stability In accordance with the tasks referred to in the Eurosystem’s mission statement, I will first discuss the link between financial integration and monetary policy, before addressing the relationship between financial integration and financial stability. In line with good academic practice, I will start with a definition. The ECB defines financial integration as follows: we consider the market for a given set of financial instruments or services to be fully integrated when all potential market participants in such market (i) are subject to a single set of rules when they decide  to deal with those financial instruments or services, (ii) have equal access to this set of financial instruments or services, and (iii) are treated equally when they operate in the market.  While this definition describes a state of full, or perfect, integration, we know that in practice we are faced with a process. The two actors striving to foster financial integration are the market participants and the relevant public authorities. More specifically, the Eurosystem is of the view that financial integration first and foremost is a market-driven process. In addition to this, we believe that it is a basic task of the relevant public authorities to create a framework that is conducive to fostering financial integration. If the opportunities this creates are exploited by market forces, true financial integration will have been achieved.                                                       1  See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/ecb/html/mission.en.html. BIS Review 86/2005 1 
Financial integration affects the three major components of the financial system, namely the financial markets, the related market infrastructures, and the financial institutions. In fact, financial integration affects these components simultaneously and alters their functioning and interaction. Financial integration is therefore directly relevant for the ECB’s tasks.  With regard to the relationship between financial integration and monetary policy, first, a well-integrated financial system is essential for the implementation of our monetary policy as it enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy impulses throughout the euro area, which is the process through which monetary policy decisions affect the price level in particular and the economy in general.  In fact, if the financial system were not fully integrated, there is a possibility that the single monetary policy decisions would sometimes be channelled to countries in a not completely uniform manner. The degree of financial integration is therefore important in determining the effectiveness of this transmission: the higher the degree of financial integration, the more effectively this transmission will work in practice. Second, it is generally accepted that financial integration is a key factor in the development and modernisation of the financial system, which, in turn, leads to a more efficient allocation of capital and an increased potential for economic growth. The recently renewed Lisbon programme has two main goals: to strengthen growth and increase employment in Europe. The ECB fully supports this programme. The structural reforms that are necessary in this respect, such as improving the flexibility and adaptability of labour markets and increasing competition in the markets for goods and services, will also enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy in maintaining price stability and minimise output volatility in response to adverse price shocks.  The need to proceed with structural reforms fully applies to European financial integration. Financial markets that are not yet fully integrated have a potential to increase economic growth which must be exploited. For example, a study estimates the potential resulting from the integration of European bond and equity markets in terms of additional GDP growth at around 1% over a ten-year period, or approximately EUR 100 billion.2 Moreover, the 311 million people in the euro area, or, more generally, the 459 million citizens of the European Union, expect Europe to deliver such economic benefits. As a central banker, I am very conscious of the fact that the implementation of structural reforms which increase the economic potential of the euro area also facilitates the conduct of monetary policy. To summarise, enhanced European financial integration increases the potential for greater and more sustained non-inflationary economic growth. I now turn to the links between financial integration and financial stability. The task of contributing to the safeguarding of financial stability is provided for in the Treaty establishing the European Community. The ECB provides the outcome of its monitoring of euro area-wide financial stability in its Financial Stability Review that is made available to the public. Our latest report was published just one week ago.3  Let me first make some general remarks about the task to assess the stability of the financial system. Although, like it is the case for monetary policy assessment, there is not yet a widely accepted, rigorous framework that summarises developments in financial stability in a single quantitative measure, many of the financial stability assessments that are undertaken by a growing number of central banks around the world are based on a broad and forward-looking notion of financial stability.4  Financial stability is often seen from the perspective of the avoidance of financial crises, but it has a larger dimension. Financial system stability requires the financial system’s principal components – financial markets, the related market infrastructures, and financial institutions – to be jointly capable of                                                       2  London Economics (2002), “Quantification of the macro-economic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, Report to the European Commission. 3  The December 2005 ECB Financial Stability Review, published on 8 December 2005, is available from the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf. 4 See the special features “Assessing financial stability: conceptual boundaries and challenges”, June 2005 ECB Financial Stability Review, and “Measurement challenges in assessing financial stability”, December 2005 ECB Financial Stability Review, from the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200506en.pdf and http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview200512en.pdf, respectively. 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
absorbing adverse disturbances. It also requires that the financial system is facilitating a smooth and efficient reallocation of financial resources from savers to investors, that financial risk is being assessed and priced accurately and that risks are being efficiently managed. Financial stability has an important forward-looking dimension: inefficiencies in the reallocation of capital or shortcomings in the pricing of risk can, by laying the foundations for future vulnerabilities, compromise future financial system stability and, therefore, economic stability. A lack of stability can be directly related to inefficiencies that may arise from a non-integrated financial system. Being aware of the links between financial integration and financial stability is therefore essential.  The links between financial integration and financial stability are twofold. On the one hand, more integrated financial markets offer better opportunities for financing and risk diversification, and thus help to improve the capacity of economies to absorb shocks. Cross-border banking broadens and deepens financial markets and increases liquidity and risk sharing. As the pool of available assets for investment is broadened, potentially enhancing the heterogeneity of financial institutions’ portfolios, the ensuing wider spread of portfolio-related risks should reinforce the resilience and shock-absorption capacity of financial intermediaries, thus improving the soundness and robustness of an integrated financial system.  On the other hand, as intermediaries benefit from the greater availability of assets, a parallel convergence of the individual portfolios may result. We therefore need a good degree of understanding of the effects of cross-border linkages in an increasingly integrated financial system. To summarise, financial integration will progressively strengthen the stability of the financial system over time. But the structural transformation of the financial system through enhanced financial integration, including the creation of intensified cross-border financial links, requires that we closely monitor the financial integration process.  I would finally like to emphasise that financial integration is relevant to both monetary policy and financial stability. This brings me neatly to the second part of my speech, namely to illustrate the current state and the evolution of financial integration in the euro area. 3.  The state of European financial integration In discussions on this topic, the arguments are often of a qualitative nature, stating the general need for enhancing financial integration in view of the related benefits. Notwithstanding this, quantitative measures offer the advantage of being able to assess both the current level of financial integration as well as its evolution over time, i.e. whether integration is progressing, stable, or even regressive. The ECB has therefore sought to devise a way to capture, in quantitative terms, the state of financial integration in the euro area. About two months ago, for the first time, the ECB published a set of indicators regarding the state of integration of euro area financial and banking markets. With the accompanying explanatory report, which will be published on an annual basis, the ECB aims to measure and monitor financial integration in the euro area over time.5 Before turning to the actual assessment of the state of financial integration, let me briefly mention a few conceptual issues. First, checking the validity of the law of one price is a natural basis for the development of quantitative measures of financial integration. The law of one price states that if assets have identical risks and returns, they should be priced identically regardless of where they are transacted. The law of one price is an implication of our definition of financial integration, which I mentioned earlier. And, in fact, most of our integration measures explicitly depend on it.  Still, there are cases where the law of one price is not directly applicable. For instance, an asset may not be allowed to be listed on another region’s exchange. While the law of one price has little to say about this case, we would consider this to be an important obstacle to financial integration.                                                        5  The ECB report is available at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/indicatorsfinancialintegration200509en.pdf on the ECB’s website. The statistics underlying the financial integration indicators can be accessed at http://www.ecb.int/stats/finint/. The financial integration indicators will be updated semi-annually. BIS Review 86/2005 3 
I should like to note here that our first publication of indicators of financial integration will be further expanded. While the first publication contains a total of 20 indicators, covering the main euro financial and banking markets, the coverage of our indicators will be further enhanced, in particular by adding indicators relating to the integration of market infrastructures and financial institutions.  Second, starting from our definition of financial integration, two broad categories of indicators are considered: price-based indicators and quantity-based indicators. Price-based indicators measure discrepancies in asset prices based on their geographic origin. In a perfectly integrated market, prices of assets with similar characteristics should mostly be influenced by common euro area factors. Quantity-based indicators are used to investigate the extent to which investors engage in cross-border asset portfolios.  Finally, it should be noted that the indicators are either computed or model-based. Computed indicators – such as standard deviations and ratios – are summary measures of the underlying data, whereas the model-based indicators are derived from econometric models. Obviously, these estimates depend on the specific set of modelling assumptions.  Now that I have addressed these conceptual issues, I will report some of the results that form our assessment of the state of financial integration in the euro area. Now and then, I will additionally mention some figures for the United States that usefully serve as a comparison for the euro area.  Our first publication covers the money market, the government bond market, the corporate bond market, the equity market and the banking markets. The euro acted as a major catalyst for the integration of the euro financial markets. However, the degree of integration differs between market segments, with integration being more advanced in those market segments that are closer to the single monetary policy, above all the money market.  Our indicators measure the financial integration of the euro money market based on the dispersion of lending rates for actual transactions or rates offered by EONIA, EURIBOR and EUREPO panel banks.6 The unsecured interbank deposit market was almost perfectly integrated right at the start of the Monetary Union. This is a sine qua non for monetary policy implementation, since only an integrated interbank market ensures an even distribution of central bank liquidity and a homogeneous level of short-term interest rates across the euro area. This rapid integration has been mostly supported by the establishment of the related payment system infrastructure, i.e. our TARGET system that has been operational since the first day of Monetary Union.  In fact, the cross-country standard deviation of the average overnight lending rates among euro area countries was as low as three basis points in early 1999 and has since decreased even further to just one basis point. By comparison, in January 1998, i.e. one year before the start of Monetary Union, this indicator stood higher than 130 basis points.  Our indicators for the one-month and 12-month maturities also consistently show a highly integrated unsecured money market. While the respective cross-country standard deviation of EURIBOR lending rates among euro area countries stood at more than 100 basis points for the one-month maturity, and at around 50 basis points for the 12-month rates in January 1998, since early 1999 both of these indicators have shown values not higher than, and normally below, one basis point.  Finally, our indicators also confirm a relatively high degree of integration for the repo market. The EUREPO index was launched in March 2002, and since then, the euro area cross-country standard deviation of the one-month EUREPO rates has been around, and normally below, one basis point. The indicator for the 12-month maturity shows a standard deviation of around, and normally below, two basis points.  The decisive role of the euro in enhancing financial market integration is also visible in the interest rate derivatives markets. The total of euro interest rate OTC derivatives contracts reaches a daily turnover of around EUR 380 billion, and is thereby larger than the US dollar segment (a daily turnover of around EUR 290 billion). A particularly important segment is the euro interest rate swap market (including, for example, the euro overnight index swap market). This is, in fact, the largest interest rate                                                       6  Data referring to the time before the introduction of EONIA and EURIBOR are average overnight, one-month, 12-month rates, respectively, of euro area countries. 4 BIS Review 86/2005 
swap market in the world. With a daily turnover of around EUR 250 billion, the euro interest rate swap market is about one third larger than the equivalent US dollar segment (around EUR 160 billion).7  The least integrated money market segment is the short-term securities market. Compared with the equivalent US commercial paper market, which has an outstanding amount of around EUR 1.3 trillion, the aggregate size of the commercial paper and certificates of deposit markets in Europe is around EUR 0.8 trillion. In addition, while the US market is integrated, the short-term securities markets in Europe continue to be segmented, with de facto several markets based in several market places. Issuers and investors in the European short-term paper markets therefore face reduced depth and liquidity and less diversification opportunities than in the US. I now turn to the government bond market. Our indicators of the integration in government bond markets encompass the standard deviation of government bond yield spreads, measures based on regressions, such as the evolution of beta coefficients, and variance ratios. Government bond markets have achieved a very high degree of integration, mainly due to the disappearance of intra-euro area exchange rate risk. Since then, government bond yields in different euro area countries have been driven mainly by euro area-wide factors and news. Naturally, one should not expect common factors to fully explain changes in bond yields, as different assessments concerning credit and liquidity risk will continue to have an impact on bond yields in different countries.  The euro corporate bond market has grown considerably since 1999. While this market had been predominantly open to the highest quality credits, it has since broadened to facilitate the funding needs of riskier issuers. However, the gap with the US market is still large in terms of absolute size, with the outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations of around EUR 2.5 trillion in the United States being around three times larger than in the euro area. The degree of integration of the euro corporate bond market is reasonably high. The yield on a corporate bond depends typically on a number of factors, such as the credit rating, time-to-maturity, liquidity and cash flow structure. Our indicators for the state of integration of the euro corporate bond market are based on (econometric) models, investigating whether or not risk-adjusted yield spreads have a systematic country component. Our studies suggest that this market segment is fairly integrated in the sense that the country of issuance is only of marginal importance in explaining yield differentials.  Other market segments have even more potential for greater integration. In fact, the euro area equity markets are still quite fragmented, but a gradual integration process is ongoing. For example, our indicators show that stock prices across the euro area increasingly react to euro area-wide factors and news. Another indicator to measure the degree of integration in euro area equity markets is the relative importance of sector versus country-based investment strategies. The indicator is derived by calculating and comparing the cross-sector dispersion with the cross-country dispersion of equity returns. The more integrated the euro area equity market, the greater the benefits of spreading investments across sectors as opposed to country-based equity investment strategies. Our statistics show that the elimination of intra-euro area currency risk has encouraged integration in the sense that the “home bias” in the equity holdings of institutional investors has been significantly reduced. Nevertheless, the country effect is still too important for it to be concluded that the euro area equity market is satisfactorily integrated.  As regards banking markets, integration is generally lagging behind, and the degree of integration is different for the types of banking activities, i.e. capital market-related activities, interbank (or wholesale) activities, and retail banking.  Cross-border interbank loans and holdings of securities have, in relative terms, experienced substantial growth. While securities issued by non-monetary financial institutions of another euro area country accounted for only 16% of the securities held by euro area monetary financial institutions (MFIs) at the end of 1997, this share has now reached almost 40%, pointing to a higher degree of capital market integration in the euro area. In addition, although loans granted between domestic MFIs still account for more than 50% of the total EU MFI loans, the respective euro area cross-border activity has increased from just 15% at the end of 1997 to around 23% at present.                                                        7  See BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey - Foreign exchange and derivatives market activity in 2004 (March 2005). BIS Review 86/2005 5 
Last but not least, integration in retail banking has, by contrast, not progressed to any great extent, as shown by both price and quantity-based indicators. For example, while the share of euro area cross-border MFI loans granted to non-MFIs stood at 2% at the end of 1997, this figure has risen to no more than 3.5% today. Also, taking a price-based indicator, the cross-country standard deviation of interest rates on consumer credit has been rather high and constant, on average 0.9% over the past three years. To give a final indicator for the level of retail banking integration, the cross-country dispersion of interest rates on lending for house purchase amounts to, on average, 0.5% over the past three years, with no clear declining trend visible as yet, thereby confirming the not very benign picture of euro area credit market integration.  4. Eurosystem contribution to fostering financial integration and topical issues relating to the EU policy framework for financial integration An analysis of the state of financial integration and the monitoring of its progress over time are prerequisites for possible action in those fields where the analysis has identified gaps and shortcomings. Let me provide you with a few examples of how the Eurosystem contributes to fostering financial integration. I will list them using the same sequence of financial and banking markets that I used when describing the state of financial integration. Starting with the money market, the obvious example for a central banking service that is conducive to fostering financial integration is the large-value payment system, “TARGET”, that we run. In addition, the launch of the single shared platform, “TARGET2”, is planned for November 2007. This will enhance financial integration even further, given that it will provide a harmonised service level, ensuring a level playing field for banks across Europe, which will be supported by a single price structure for domestic and cross-border payments. Another example is the short-term paper market. Here, I expect that its current fragmentation will be reduced with the help of the so-called Short-Term European Paper (STEP) initiative, which was set up and is being led by ACI – The Financial Markets Association. This initiative aims to promote the convergence of standards and practices prevailing in the European short-term securities markets through market players’ voluntary compliance with the standards set out in the STEP Market Convention, which covers aspects such as information disclosure, documentation, settlement, and the provision of data for the production of STEP statistics. The STEP initiative is expected to provide an impulse towards integration, thereby increasing the depth and liquidity of this market in Europe. The promoters of this initiative expect the first STEP-labelled programme in early 2006. The Eurosystem acts as a catalyst to support this market-led initiative. Specifically, the Eurosystem will provide technical support for the labelling process for some time and will produce and publish STEP statistics on yields and volumes on an ongoing basis.  Furthermore, the European Master Agreement (EMA) is another example of integration relating to the legal infrastructure. The EMA, a major European legal documentation initiative, contributes to financial integration by permitting cross-border trading on the basis of a master agreement which is both a domestic and a pan-European standard. It is the first project undertaken at European level to develop a pan-European market standard for trading operations. The EMA is a multi-lingual, multi-jurisdictional, multi-product master agreement which may be used, in particular, to document repurchase agreements, foreign exchange, derivatives and securities loans. The ECB participated in the drafting of the EMA and has been using it since 2001 for all its European foreign reserve management and own funds repo counterparties. Since June 2005, the ECB has also been using the EMA for its derivatives operations in 15 European jurisdictions, thereby maximising cross-product netting, cross-product margining possibilities and reducing documentation basis risk. As regards the further integration of securities (bonds and equity) markets, a prominent role should be attached to the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure. The Eurosystem strongly supports further integration in the securities infrastructure, the lack of which has, among others, also been identified by the Giovannini Group as a barrier to integration that should be removed. To this end, the ECB participates in the Clearing and Settlement Advisory and Monitoring Experts Group and in the Legal Certainty Group, set up by the European Commission. Furthermore, and also in the central bank’s capacity to act as a catalyst for collective private-sector activities, meetings are held with the Contact Group on Euro Securities Infrastructures, bringing together representatives from the banking and securities settlement industry of the euro area to discuss the further integration of the euro securities settlement industry. Furthermore, I would like to highlight the work that we have been carrying out since 2001 in cooperation with the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), 6 BIS Review 86/2005 
where we published in October last year 19 standards for securities clearing and settlement systems in the European Union.8 These ESCB-CESR standards aim to adapt international recommendations to the European context. They promote a harmonised approach and are conducive to the integration of EU capital markets, placing emphasis on common solutions and interoperability between systems.  Last but not least, I come to the banking and retail markets. I will use the mortgage market as an example. The importance of this retail market segment is evident from its size, where an outstanding volume of more than EUR 4 trillion in residential mortgage debt in the EU corresponds to around 40% of EU GDP. I mentioned earlier that the cross-country dispersion of euro area interest rates on lending for house purchase did not show a clear declining trend over the past years. Furthermore, if one compares the euro area mortgage market with its US counterpart, it is revealed that, over the past three years, the cross-country dispersion of rates in the euro area was higher than the cross-regional dispersion of mortgage rates in the United States. All this suggests that the euro area mortgage market is not yet fully integrated. In this respect, I highlight a recent initiative by the European Commission that led to a Green Paper on Mortgage Credit in the EU. With its public consultation, the Commission launched a broad discussion about the possible benefits and ways of further integrating European mortgage markets. The Eurosystem is of the view that this kind of investigation into the possible benefits of and obstacles to the further integration of European mortgage markets is very much warranted. The Eurosystem therefore explained its view on this in detail in a recently published contribution to this consultation on the Commission’s Green Paper.9 More generally, this contribution can also be seen as an example of the Eurosystem’s role in providing advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system to be conducive to financial integration.  And, as with securities markets, retail markets also need an integrated infrastructure in order to reap in full the benefits of financial integration. The European citizens’ possible cross-border banking activities also depend on the possibilities and costs of cross-border payments. This brings me to the last example of Eurosystem activities that I would like to highlight today, namely the Eurosystem’s support, together with that of the European Commission, for the banking industry’s initiative to create the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The first SEPA milestone is that, by 2008, European citizens should be able to make payments throughout the euro area from a single bank account, using a single set of payment instruments, as easily and safely as in the national context today. This means that, in parallel to national instruments, banks should provide to customers also SEPA instruments. A second milestone involves that national infrastructures migrate to a pan-European payments infrastructure by the end of 2010, so that full competition applies to all euro area infrastructures. The way to achieve this would be to demand complete interoperability between SEPA compliant infrastructures. Acting as a catalyst for private-sector activities, the ECB actively supports the European Payments Council (EPC), and high-level coordination between the Eurosystem and the banking industry takes place on a regular basis. Furthermore, the ECB has arranged a number of meetings to involve SEPA end-users, including consumer organisations, small and medium-sized enterprises, retailers and corporate treasurers. The ECB recognises as a major achievement the EPC’s work on defining standards and business rules for SEPA cards, credit transfers and direct debits. At the same time, we note the large amount of work that is still ahead. For this, we count on the industry’s commitment to undertake the necessary SEPA investments and to deliver the results of the SEPA project as foreseen.  My references to the slower pace of integration of banking and retail markets leads me to the last theme I would like to address today, namely the EU policy framework for financial integration. As you know, the European Commission has recently issued a White Paper on Financial Services Policy (2005-2010).10 Among others, the further integration of retail markets has been targeted by ongoing or future projects, such as a White Paper on mortgage credit, to be released in 2006, and a                                                       8  See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/escb-cesr-standardssecurities2004en.pdf. 9  See the ECB’s website at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/eumortgagecreditconsultationen.pdf, dated 1 December 2005. 10  See the European Commission’s website at http://europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/finances/policy/index_en.htm, dated 5 December 2005. BIS Review 86/2005 7 
proposal for a Payments Services Directive. In some ways, this also complements the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) of the past five years that focused mainly on the wholesale markets. In line with its provision of advice on shaping the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial system to be conducive to financial integration, in summer 2005, the Eurosystem provided its response to the European Commission’s consultation on the priorities for financial services policies over the next five years.11 As we explained in our contribution, the Eurosystem supports the key policy orientations of the financial services policy over the next years. With regard to the regulatory framework of the financial system, there is a need to proceed with the adoption of the remaining measures envisaged in the FSAP and hence with the effective implementation and enforcement of such measures at national level. Also, we agree with the Commission’s proposal for “better regulation” based on open, transparent and evidence-based policy-making, including an ex ante evaluation of possible costs and benefits.  As far as the supervisory framework is concerned, in order to realise the economies of scale and scope offered by financial integration, the framework should facilitate the development of cross-border consolidation of financial institutions and the cross-border exchange of services and products, while maintaining the effectiveness of supervisory standards and action in a more integrated financial system. It is our view that the current institutional set-up, and in particular the Lamfalussy framework, provides the appropriate structure for achieving these broad policy objectives, if it is used to the maximum extent possible. To this end, the work of the Level 3 Committees, i.e. the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS), the Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors (CEIOPS) and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), is expected to strongly promote supervisory convergence and cooperation. Furthermore, in a more and more integrated financial system, increased supervisory cooperation across financial sectors is required. In this respect, the Level 3 Committees recently signed a joint protocol that aims to foster cooperation and coordination on tasks of common interest.12 Overall, the review of the Lamfalussy approach that is due by the end of 2007 will provide an opportunity to form a comprehensive judgement about the progress made. * * * In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me tell you how I appreciate today’s Symposium on Finance, Banking and Insurance. As I have pointed out, financial integration is at the heart of the European construction and the ECB and the Eurosystem are strongly attached to foster this historical process of financial integration through all the means that are in our domain of responsibility. Equally we trust that research in this field is of extreme importance. We must understand better the very complex transformations that are at stake. And that is the reason why our permanent dialogue with the academic world is for me of fundamental importance.                                                        11  See at http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/ecgreenpaperfinancialservicespolicy2005en.pdf, dated 1 August 2005. 12  See “Banking, insurance and securities supervisors enhance EU-wide cooperation”, press release dated 24 November 2005, at www.c-ebs.org, www.ceiops.org, www.cesr-eu.org. 8 BIS Review 86/2005 
R Basant Roi: Overview of macroeconomic policies in Mauritius Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Bank of Mauritius’ annual dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic-en-Flac, 2 December 2005. *      *      * Honourable Judges Ladies and Gentlemen Good Evening I am once again pleased to welcome you all to the Bank of Mauritius Annual Dinner.  In my last seven end-of-the-year addresses, I persistently focused more on regulatory and supervisory issues than on monetary policy issues. The repeated emphasis on the desirability of a sound and strong banking industry was motivated by several critical important considerations. Against the backdrop of recent developments in our export markets and the evolution of our balance of payments position I find it quite appropriate to briefly look back in order to throw some light on future orientation of our macro-economic policies.  The 1980s witnessed a rapid process of financial sector liberalization in most parts of the world. The long repressed financial sector in developing countries underwent a process of gradual deregulation. Layers upon layers of direct controls in the financial sector, fashionable in the 1950s, 1960s and in the early years of the 1970s, were gradually removed. Decision makers in Mauritius rightly bent with the then prevailing wind of change. Direct controls on interest rate determination, ceilings on bank credit expansion and exchange control were done away with. With hindsight, it appears that the wide-ranging implications of the move from a system of direct controls to a fully liberalized financial system have not been fully appreciated. Financial sector liberalization imperatively requires monetary discipline, fiscal discipline, financial market discipline, labour market discipline and very importantly a sound and solid financial industry. These requirements are all, in one way or the other, closely related. The lack of appreciation of the complexity of the relationships among them seems to trigger the on and off criticisms against the Bank of Mauritius regulatory and supervisory policy and other policy stance.  The emphasis on regulatory and supervisory issues relating to the banking industry has been driven by four principal considerations:- 1. Financial sector liberalization intensifies competition. Obviously, banks operating in the country necessarily have to be sound and strong, as otherwise competitive forces would drive out of the market the inefficient ones. I need not overstate that it takes only one small bank to fail to undermine confidence in our banking system and threaten financial stability in a small economy like ours; 2. The process of financial sector liberalization, throughout the world in the 1980s, was quite likely to be followed by a process of trade liberalization at the level of individual countries, regional level as well as the global level. Having taken the view that, at some stage, trade liberalization might eventually affect the balance sheets of banks thereby undermining their soundness, the Bank of Mauritius far-sightedly intensified its regulatory and supervisory activities in a bid to stave off as far as possible its adverse impact; 3. There exists a solid body of research strongly suggesting that improvements in financial arrangements precede and contribute to economic performance. Developing countries with relatively deep and efficient financial markets in the 1960s and the 1970s grew faster than those with relatively shallow markets. The Bank of Mauritius has thus been committed to initiate credible regulatory and supervisory measures with a view to strengthening the banking industry; and 4. The efficacy of monetary policy implementation in a liberalized financial system depends greatly on the strength and efficiency of the players in the financial marketplace. We have a bank-centered financial system. In other words, banks are at the epicentre of our financial system. Evidently, the players in our market are banks and bankers. Banks are the medium through which the monetary policy impulses of the Bank of Mauritius are transmitted to the rest of the economy. The weaker the medium for transmission of monetary policy impulses BIS Review 86/2005 1 
the lesser is its efficacy in achieving the desired objectives. The medium, that is banks, had to be strengthened and hence the repeated emphasis on the need for a sound and solid banking industry.  These have been the inter-related objectives envisioned in the approach adopted by the Bank of Mauritius in the last seven years with regard to the banking sector. Despite a number of hurdles and unforeseen happenings, the Bank of Mauritius relentlessly pursued its objectives, for it is in the best interests of the economy to have a banking industry sufficiently strong to meet emerging challenges. All through the road traveled so far, the Bank of Mauritius has not been short of criticisms from commentators. In January 1992, the Financial Times carried a headline “Man bites Watchdog”. The man was Robert Maxwell. In the list of watchdogs, pension fund trustees, external auditors and accountants, institutional shareholders, the Bank of England and a number of other regulators were identified as potential scapegoats. In private conversations and in the media everyone had his favourite scapegoat. Some carefully avoided including themselves in the list of potential candidates for the scapegoats, as is the case in Mauritius. The history of troubled financial institutions is littered with eventful episodes of “Men biting Watchdogs”. “Watchdogs biting watchdogs” is however an uncommon happening. I guess you must be familiar with the story of the man who discontentedly wailed, “We were so poor in our childhood, we could not afford a dog; we ourselves had to do the barking.” Certain recent remarks against the regulator of the banking industry gave an incorrect perspective of the role of regulators. Some smart – pretentiously smart - but not necessarily persons of enviable integrity and probity have attempted to advertise colossal untruths. I refer to them as smart persons, for they are fully conversant with the laws that bind the Bank of Mauritius with regard to its duty of confidentiality of banking transactions. They are equally aware that the Bank of Mauritius has certainly no interest in street fighting with “respected” delinquent borrowers however provocative the unpleasant and unfair remarks. Any form of public retaliation against certain “law-abiding” delinquent borrowers is obviously not the business of any regulator. The Bank of Mauritius wisely chose to take the aspersions leveled against it cool headedly – with an elevated sense of respect to the laws governing the banking industry. They have talked the talk. We have walked the walk. In the last six years the Bank of Mauritius has been involved in clearing the banking system, through thick and thin, of outdated practices. We are today at the tail end of the clearing process. And we have had a rich experience in tackling problematic banks and ‘gentlemen’ delinquents – I mean habitual delinquent borrowers making a good, open and public show of piety of monks in monasteries.  It is generally wondered why the Bank of Mauritius does not aggressively resolve problems that afflict certain financial institutions, whether at the board of directors level or the managerial levels. Ailing financial institutions can never be brought back on rail by simply applying mechanical procedures to complex operational problems. It’s like a man undergoing several medical procedures simultaneously. One physician is in charge of the head injury, someone else is setting the broken leg, another physician is working on the displaced shoulder and still another one is getting rid of the gallstone. Each operation is perfect and is indeed a success. But to the dismay of the physicians the patient dies - dies of shock. It is certainly not in the interest of any regulator - nor is it in the interest of society - to give shocks and kill financial institutions; its primary concern is rather to rescue ailing institutions, help restore their financial soundness and sustain overall financial stability. Breaking problems into small pieces and then managing the pieces, more so if the problems stem from the highest level of decision-making in a financial institution, is the surest way to a crash. The regulator’s responsibility in such cases is to manage the dynamics, not the pieces. No regulator would ever envy the plight of an ambulance crew at the scene of a car crash. I regret having to use metaphors for I am bound by a duty of confidentiality even in respect of the ‘gentlemen’ delinquent borrowers.  Institutional shareholders or any individual shareholder in any enterprise, be it a financial institution or a non-financial enterprise, are expected to be the first and foremost watchdog of its operations. The watchdogs are supposed to look after the best interests of the enterprise rather using their authority to advance their own agendas. As is generally observed the sinews of good behaviour can hardly be reinforced by regulation. Financial regulations are not designed to catch deceit but to create markets and promote good corporate habits - habits that are indeed transparent to savers and investors who can vote with their money and why not with their feet, if the need arises.  The dissemination of reliable information to the public at large and the ability to trust each other are the pillars of market-based economies. A former professor at Harvard rightly observed that trust 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
constitutes a decisive ingredient of a society for it to be a successful capitalist society. People, who do not trust their neighbours, do not trust other groups, do not trust distant people, cannot trade among themselves. The economy is reduced to the level of a bazaar economy. The regulator needs to be trusted. I am absolutely certain that none of us would ever wish our economy to be reduced to a bazaar economy. As I said earlier, we have reached the tail end of the clearing process. We are now in the process of constructing a framework for the implementation of Basel II, taking into account the specificities of our economy. The year 2006 will quite likely be marked by acquisitions in the banking industry. We have had a number of expressions of interest for take-overs from several banks of good reputation. Despite a few consequential setbacks beyond our control, business confidence in the economy is not as bad as is being painted.  Once an economic system is on a path of financial sector reform, the process is self-reinforcing; it cannot be stopped as one measure of reform engenders other reforms. The Mauritius Credit Information Bureau launched on Wednesday last is an innovative step that is expected to go a long way towards imposing discipline in the credit market. In the longer term this Bureau will definitely play a catalytic role in improving the quality of our financial sector. Let me clear one misconception. The Bureau is a repository of credit information on borrowers. When processing application for loans banks are required to consult the Bureau through an electronic network before deciding whether or not to approve the application for the loans. The decision whether or not to approve the loans however rests with the banks themselves, not with the Bank of Mauritius.  Ladies and gentlemen, right at the outset I mentioned that financial sector liberalization necessarily requires monetary discipline, labour market discipline and fiscal discipline. Wages and salaries levels over and above productivity levels persistently lasting for a protracted period of time combined with unsustainable budget deficits are bound to influence monetary policy-making. I have to reiterate the point I stressed here, during previous annual dinners, and elsewhere that the Bank of Mauritius does not operate in isolation, irrespective of developments in the domestic economy and of developments in our major trading-partner countries. Its policies are designed in the light of the dynamics of the domestic economy and developments in foreign exchange markets abroad.  In most large and resourceful economies, economic growth is to quite an extent driven by consumption expenditure. Consumption expenditure, amongst other things, is a propelling force to investment that, in turn, generates economic growth. In small economies like ours it is investment that propels economic growth that, in turn, gives rise to consumption expenditure. Ours is an investment driven economy and is not a consumption driven economy. The point I wish to make here is that in a highly open economy like ours, overwhelmingly dependent on imports, rising levels of consumption expenditure, not matched by production for exports, rather leads to deficits in the trade balance.  After four successive years of surpluses, the current account of our balance of payments posted a deficit of over Rs5 billion in fiscal year 2004-05 - close to 3 per cent of GDP. The Goods Account, commonly understood as the Merchandise account, posted a deficit of over Rs20 billion, roughly twice the deficit recorded in the preceding year. May I underline that the rupee value of petroleum products imported in fiscal year 2004-05 amounted to Rs11 billion, twice the value recorded only three years ago. It is projected to attain over Rs13 billion in the current fiscal year. For every Rs100 worth of imports, Rs13 account for petroleum products.  Only in a society that embraces self-criticisms can decision-making processes produce real facts to cope with real problems. A back-of-the-envelope arithmetic shows that in certain organizations, employees, after making allowances for week-ends, vacation leave, casual leave and sick leave entitlements, are at work for only 200 days in a year; I do not wish to say that they consume during 400 days in a year. Household consumption expenditure grew by 8 per cent in 2005, twice the average growth rate of 4 per cent in the four years ended 2003.  Fortunately, the incisiveness of the Bank of Mauritius led to an accumulation of net international foreign currency reserves amounting to Rs54 billion today. We cannot lean against the wind for long. The policy implications of these developments are fiscal rectitude and strong demand management policies. Why fiscal rectitude? Let me explain. Two different hypotheses exist in regard to the relation between trade deficits and budget deficits. One of them is the twin deficit hypothesis postulating that budget deficits cause trade deficits. The policy implication of this theory is that budget deficits need to be reduced to restore trade balance. The other hypothesis is what economists refer to as the Ricardian Equivalence hypothesis: an increase in government expenditure is absorbed by a rise in private savings and therefore no increase in consumption expenditure, which in our case, means no increase in imports and therefore no impact on the balance of trade. Contrarily, our consumption rate BIS Review 86/2005 3 
has gone up meaning that savings rate has gone down. Trade deficit has widened. The first hypothesis seems to be more valid in the case of our economy. Although there is no one to one relationship between budget deficits and trade deficits in our context, the case for a reduction in budget deficit is strong. Fiscal dentistry needs to be carried out; the cavities need to be filled in. On the monetary policy side, stringent demand management policy is the order of the day. Finally, let me share with you the reflections made in the 1980s by a former Prime Minister of the U.K. on the state of mind of the British public, “I think we’ve have been through a period where too many people have been given to understand that if they have a problem, it’s the Government’s job to cope with it. ‘I have a problem, I’ll get a grant.’ ‘I’m homeless, the Government must house me.’ They are casting their problems on society. And you know there is no such thing as society. There are individual men and women, and there are families. And no Government can do anything except through people, and people must look to themselves first. It’s our duty to look after ourselves and then, also, to look after our neighbours. People have got their entitlements too much in mind, without obligations. There is no such thing as entitlements, unless someone has first met an obligation.” Aren’t these reflections equally valid for Mauritius? Ladies and gentlemen, the way forward is to carry out a really big and rapid change rather than proceeding with small gradual changes. A plunge in cold water is less painful than a slow submersion. We have to open up the economy, without any form of deleterious barriers. Problems do exist and will continue to exist. They exist to be redefined and transformed. They exist to be tackled and overcome. A problem shared is a problem halved.  Let me on behalf of the Board of Directors, the staff of the Bank of Mauritius and on my own behalf wish you and your family a Merry Xmas and a very prosperous New Year 2006. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 86/2005 
Alan Greenspan: The role and resilience of open and competitive markets Remarks by Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, in acceptance of a New York University honorary degree, New York, 14 December 2005.  *      *      * President Sexton, Provost McLaughlin, Chairman Lipton, faculty and students, it is for me a day of nostalgia to be back at New York University, especially having the opportunity to again visit with Bob Kavesh--my classmate of so long ago and partner in founding the classical music society at what is now the Stern School.  I am most appreciative of the honorary degree you have chosen to bestow upon me, and especially honored to be sharing the platform this afternoon with my good friend Gordon Brown. The Chancellor, as you heard a short while ago, has achieved an exemplary record as steward of the economy of the United Kingdom and, indeed, is without peer among the world’s economic policy makers.  Gordon, I would like to thank you in particular for your leadership of the Group of Seven this past year. It has been a challenging year, and your voice and vision have been indispensable to the G-7's efforts to maintain global stability and growth in the face of terrorism, further rises in global oil prices, and protectionist pressures.  In the more than fifty-seven years since I received my first degree from this university, I have had a front-row seat in observing the exceptional growth in world living standards. With all that exposure, it was inevitable that I would gain some useful insights into the role of open and competitive markets in engendering the wealth of nations. But it is evident, especially in retrospect, that the thorough grounding in fundamentals that I received at this university was an essential preparation.  The resilience of open and competitive markets was particularly in evidence in the aftermath of the terrorism of September 2001. Fears were widespread that a contraction of international commerce would halt the widening globalization of most of the previous half-century. And, for a short while, these fears were realized. Global trade faltered. Travel contracted. New projects were postponed. But the freeing of markets over the previous quarter-century had imparted a flexibility that enabled cross-border commerce to quickly stabilize and, by early 2002, to resume its expansion.  Despite worrisome pockets of violence and destruction, commerce and wealth-building continues apace. On average, world standards of living are rising, in large part because of the widening embrace of competitive free markets, especially by populous and growing China and India. Since the autumn of 2001, global gross domestic product per capita has grown more than 8 percent. And growth in developing Asia, where so many of the world’s poor reside, has been considerably faster.  Open and free markets are the antithesis of violence. They rest not only on voluntary exchange but also on a necessary condition of voluntary exchange: trust in the word of those with whom we do business. To be sure, all market economies require a rule of law to function--laws of contracts, protection of property rights, and a general protection of citizens from arbitrary actions of the state. Yet, if even a small fraction of legally binding transactions required adjudication, our court systems would be swamped and immobilized.  In practice, in virtually all our transactions, whether with customers or with colleagues, we rely on the word of those with whom we do business. If we could not do so, goods and services could not be exchanged efficiently. The trillions of dollars of assets that are priced and traded daily in our financial markets before legal confirmation illustrates the critical role of trust. Even when the law is followed to the letter, appeals to legal authority guide only a few of the day-to-day decisions required of business and financial managers. The rest are governed by whatever personal code of values that market participants bring to the table. Commerce is inhibited if we cannot trust the reliability of counterparties' commitments. Indeed, the willingness to rely on the word of a stranger is integral to any sophisticated economy.  This necessary condition for commerce was particularly evident in freewheeling nineteenth-century America, where reputation and trust became valued assets. Throughout much of that century, laissez-faire reigned in the United States as elsewhere, and caveat emptor was the prevailing prescription for guarding against wide-open trading practices. A reputation for honest dealing was thus particularly BIS Review 85/2005 1 
valued. Even those inclined to be less than scrupulous in their private dealings had to adhere to a more ethical standard in their market transactions, or they risked being driven out of business.  To be sure, the history of world business is strewn with Fisks, Goulds, and numerous others treading on, or over, the edge of legality. But they were a distinct minority. If the situation had been otherwise, nineteenth-century market economies would never have achieved so high a standard of living.  Over the past half-century, societies have embraced the protections of the myriad initiatives that have partially substituted government financial guarantees and implied certifications of integrity for business reputation. As a consequence, the value of trust so prominent in the nineteenth century seemed by the 1990s to be less necessary.  Most analysts believe that the world is better off as a consequence of these governmental protections. But corporate scandals in the United States and elsewhere have clearly shown that the plethora of laws of the past century have not eliminated the less-savory side of human behavior.  We should not be surprised, then, to see a reemergence in recent years of the value placed by markets on trust and personal reputation in business practice. After the recent revelations of corporate malfeasance, the market punished the stock prices of those corporations whose behavior had cast doubt on the reliability of their reputations. There may be no better antidote for business and financial transgression.  Corporate scandals and evidence of fraud and malfeasance notwithstanding, the history of rising standards of living in a world fearful of violence is extraordinary testimony to the resilience of free peoples engaged in commerce.  Our system works fundamentally on trust and individual fair dealing. We need only look around today’s world to appreciate the value of these traits and the consequences of their absence. While market economies have achieved much in this regard, more remains to be done.  Prejudice of whatever stripe is unworthy of a society built on individual merit. A free-market capitalist system cannot operate effectively unless all participants in the economy have the opportunity to achieve their best. If we succeed in opening up opportunities to everyone, the affluence within our borders will almost surely become more equally distributed. Of even greater import, all people will come to recognize that they are part of a system that is fair and worthy of support.  * * * America’s founding fathers, whose thought had deep roots in the concepts of the British and Scottish enlightenments, bestowed upon us a system of government and a culture of enterprise that have propelled the United States to the greatest material prosperity the world has ever experienced. Today’s students, both here at NYU and throughout our country, are carrying forward those traditions. I know they will improve upon this inheritance of democratic government and free markets in ways that we have yet to imagine.  2 BIS Review 85/2005 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Enhancing financial literacy for sustained economic prosperity Dinner address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Citigroup-INSEAD Financial Education Summit 2005: A Forum Promoting Financial Education in Asia Pacific, Kuala Lumpur, 12 December 2005. *      *      * It is my great pleasure to be here tonight at this second Citigroup-INSEAD Financial Education Summit. Malaysia is particularly pleased to host this year's Summit here in Kuala Lumpur given that enhancing the levels of financial literacy is being accorded a high priority on our agenda. Effective participation in the economy essentially needs to be an informed participation. This is more so now than ever before. We are now living in an environment of rapid change. The advances in technology, product innovation, the removal of regulatory restrictions, deregulation and greater competition have dramatically transformed the financial system and the economy. The environment is marked by increased access to financial services, broader range of products and services, a far more competitive financial services industry and more complex financial transactions. It is the demands of this new environment that has created a greater need for financial literacy to not only ensure the efficient functioning of the financial system but also enhance the potential for the economy to prosper and thrive.  This evening, I would like to focus on financial literacy from the perspective of the Central Bank, given that the function of the Central Bank has widespread implications on financial markets, businesses and the public as large. The main responsibilities of the Central Bank includes the formulation and implementation of monetary policy, ensuring the soundness and stability of the banking system, and finally ensuring the integrity and reliability of the payments systems. In all these areas, the actions of the Central Bank have direct implications on the business community and the public at large. The ultimate aim of the policies are to make the economy strong, and to ensure the health of the financial system that is vital to supporting the economic growth and development process. Knowledge of what the Central Bank does and the reasons for its actions are essential for the efficient functioning of the financial markets and the effectiveness of the policy initiatives. In all these areas, the behavior of businesses and consumers at large are important in determining the final outcome. Having the knowledge and understanding of the issues would better equip consumers to manage their financial matters and to make well informed decisions regarding their own finances. In addition, it would also contribute to the soundness of the banking system and the efficiency of the payments system. In this current environment, the issue of financial literacy from these perspectives has become more urgent, particularly in the emerging market economies of Asia, where household consumption is becoming an important driver of growth. The expanding cumulative domestic market in Asia is becoming massive, a factor that has been important in facilitating intra-Asian trade and thus driving the economic integration of the Asian region. This trend has the potential to contribute to the rebalancing of global growth and thus to address the structural imbalances currently prevailing in the global economy. Households therefore need to be financially strong if this trend is to be sustainable. Financial literacy will allow households to have the increased confidence to make sound decisions regarding their consumption expenditure. Of importance to Central Banks is that consumer credit remains within prudential limits and do not impose undue risk to the consumers that can often result in financial stress. Consumers not only need to be able to assess their capacity for expenditure, savings and debts but also have to be able to select from the array of financial products and delivery systems that will best meet their requirements. Households need also to be aware of and understand the financial risks associated with their transactions. Greater financial literacy can contribute to mitigating these financial risks. The growth in household debt is an increasingly evident phenomenon in Asia. Over the period of 2000 to 2004, the volume of consumer loans across seven major Asia Pacific economies grew at an average annual rate of 9 percent, relative to total loan growth of 5.2 percent and corporate credit growth of 2.6 percent. The risk emerges when debt reaches a level where it cannot be sustained, and ultimately leads to increased financial stress. It is therefore important that borrowers are financially savvy to manage financial risks in a proactive and constructive manner. BIS Review 85/2005 1 
The environment we are operating in is becoming increasingly challenging. Individuals may not know where to seek information or do comparative shopping. The aggressive marketing by financial institutions may lure naÃƒÂ¯ve borrowers into financial transactions that cannot be sustained in the longer term. A number of regional economies have seen aggressive marketing of credit cards, that have led to situations where financial institutions were eventually compelled to write-off many bad loans. The observation from surveys is that many consumers do not fully understand relatively simple financial calculations, and hence do not realise the risks involved. For some countries, the cost of borrowing may increase substantially depending on the prevailing conditions. This may result in difficulties in servicing the debt. Also this would depend on the extent of the household gearing. For Asia Pacific economies, this ratio of debt servicing to total income ranges from a low of two percent for economies that do not have sophisticated financial systems, to 74 percent at the high-end, where consumerism is well entrenched. While there is no magic number to determine prudent gearing, this ratio can be used to assess whether the financial risk is increasing. Over time, it could provide an indication of the level of debt that is manageable. Basic financial literacy would be necessary for such self-assessment. A further risk, which is linked closely to the high cost of borrowing, is the reliance for financing from the informal financial sector. Very often such type of predatory lending results in perpetual debt since the interest rate is prohibitively high, and the borrower does not have recourse to legal aid or proper financial advice given that the transaction takes place in the informal financial sector. Increased financial literacy would avoid recourse to such financing and would facilitate greater reliance on the formal financial service providers. An important objective of enhanced financial literacy is to achieve greater personal accountability for post-retirement financial, medical and social needs. Unlike in the developed economies, the financial burden of those who have retired with respect to health and retirement costs are usually borne by the individual. This requires understanding of the various insurance products and other health care plans. The most sustainable approach to mitigating this type of risk is to have informed participation in health and retirement funding schemes. Greater understanding and knowledge of these financial risks through improved financial literacy is the first step towards actively managing these risks.  Enhanced financial literacy can also contribute towards a more stable and sound banking system. A more discerning household sector can drive greater innovation, greater efficiency in terms of lower fees and charges and better quality of services. This combined with the monitoring by Central Banks to ensure that financial services are provided fairly and to ensure appropriate risk management and governance practices adopted by the industry increases the potential for enhanced stability and performance of the industry. This in turn enhances the potential for the industry to provide financing to households and enterprises thus contributing to the economic growth process.  Another instance where efficiency and potential of the industry can be enhanced is migration from paper-based payments to electronic payments. This would provide significant benefits to all parties as it provides a more efficient and reliable payment instrument and it attracts lower costs, increased convenience and a higher level of security. In promoting financial literacy, several issues need to be addressed. One of the most critical issues is the apathy towards information. Irrational behavior, the inability to comprehend complex information, the perception that information is unreliable, or more often than not the reluctance to invest the time to study the information, are all reasons that increase such apathy.  In addressing financial literacy, the information provided to consumers needs to be simple, brief, contextualised to the needs of the consumer and delivered at the right time. An example is providing special, inclusive programmes for financially excluded groups that are at different levels of development and that face different challenges in managing their financial affairs.  The emerging best practices in enhancing financial literacy clearly suggest that an integrated and coordinated delivery of financial literacy initiatives is needed to address the issues highlighted above. This requires a comprehensive approach involving central banks, government ministries, NGOs and corporations to work collaboratively to promote financial literacy. Attention needs to be given to greater strategic focus on the outcomes to be achieved by the financial literacy programs. It will require concerted, deliberate and sustained efforts by all parties concerned. Finally, the progress made in advancing financial literacy needs to be tracked. This will allow for insights to assess the capacity of the financial system to handle greater levels of innovation and free market practices. 2 BIS Review 85/2005 
In Malaysia, a comprehensive approach has been adopted to enhance financial literacy in the country. The Financial Sector Master Plan, which was launched in 2001, includes a 10-year consumer education program. This agenda includes infrastructure and institutional capacity development in the areas of financial education, advisory services, distress management and rehabilitation. For this purpose, the Central Bank in partnership with the financial industry and other government agencies, has introduced the Financial Mediation Bureau, Deposit Insurance Scheme, Basic Banking Services Framework, Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency, as well as created a new class of licensed Financial Advisers. These initiatives are also being reinforced by a higher level of transparency and disclosure. A series of consumer education programs has been introduced, such as Bankinginfo and Insuranceinfo, both of which are delivered through various channels. These include road shows, pamphlets at the branches of financial service providers and dedicated Internet sites hosted by the central bank. Savings and education programs are also being promoted in schools.  More recently a one-stop centre was established within the Central Bank for the public to obtain information about financial services in Malaysia and to provide face-to-face customer service on general enquiries and complaints. This Centre was established to act as a centralised point of contact to facilitate a rapid and effective response for members of the public and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in matters related to their requirements. Also a Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency will be launched early next year. The Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency is being established to undertake credit counselling and loan restructuring for individuals. This institutional arrangement will help consumers who encounter difficulties in meeting their financial commitments. Apart from being a source of information and advice on financial management, the arrangement would represent a more cost effective and prompt means of debt settlement through out-of-court procedures. All these measures to enhance financial literacy involve all the parties concerned - the consumers, the financial service providers, the regulators and relevant Government ministries, the corporate and the NGOs. This collective approach reflects the importance of shared responsibility in helping consumers manage their financial risks more effectively. In this regard, the financial institutions who are the first line of contact with consumers, and who bear a major part of the financial risk in the event consumers suffer financial stress, need to play a greater role in helping create more informed participation in the financial system. The dividends in terms of lower non-performing loans and increased profitability makes this a win-win proposition. Financial institutions with their extensive branch networks, qualified financial management officers and extensive experience in assessing the risks facing consumers are best positioned to increase the level of institutional capacity that can enhance financial literacy. We need to recognise our shared responsibility to equip the communities in our countries with the necessary skills and confidence in managing their personal financial matters. Collective efforts to develop institutional capacity to share information and knowledge about financial literacy across the region can also bring about mutually reinforcing results. Financial literacy needs to be elevated to a more important level on the national and international agenda for a greater shared economic prosperity.  On that note, thank you for your attention. BIS Review 85/2005 3 
David Dodge: Our approach to monetary policy - inflation targeting Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Regina Chamber of Commerce, Regina, Saskatchewan, 12 December 2005.  *      *      * I am happy to have the opportunity to speak in Regina during Saskatchewan's centennial year. Throughout 2005, the people of Saskatchewan have been celebrating the many remarkable contributions that this province and its citizens have made to Canada. Gerald Bouey and Gordon Thiessen, two of my predecessors as Governor, are examples of individuals with deep Saskatchewan roots who have made great contributions to the Bank and to our country. As this province turns 100, you can be proud not only of your history, but also of your modern, increasingly diversified economy that positions Saskatchewan for success in the future. This year also marks the 70th anniversary of the creation of the Bank of Canada, and we too have taken the time to celebrate our contributions to Canada. At such times, while it is appropriate to look back and celebrate history and accomplishments, it is also a good opportunity to look forward and think about where we are headed. In this spirit, I'd like to talk to you today about one of our main responsibilities; that is, the conduct of monetary policy. I want to recount a bit of the Bank's history and talk about how we developed our current framework for conducting monetary policy. At the Bank of Canada, we strongly believe that targeting inflation is the best way for us to fulfill our mandate to Canadians. I also want to look forward a bit, and talk about the future of inflation targeting, as we prepare to renew our inflation-targeting agreement with the federal government next year. The Bank's mandate Let me begin with a brief discussion of the Bank's legislative mandate. The preamble to the Bank of Canada Act instructs us to "regulate credit and currency in the best interest of the nation." It goes on to say that the Bank should mitigate "fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and generally . . . promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada." So the question is, How can the Bank best provide the conditions for sustainable economic growth, bearing in mind the words in our mandate: "so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action"? Over time, it has become clear that the best way for monetary policy to promote sustainable economic growth is to anchor expectations about the future purchasing power of money. In other words, it is important for Canadians to have confidence that the value of their money will not be eroded over time. Focusing on domestic price stability is the best contribution that monetary policy can make to economic stability and sustainable long-term growth. After the bitter inflationary experiences of the 1970s, it became clear that central banks needed to focus on achieving low inflation. But monetary authorities around the world were struggling to figure out how best to do this. At the Bank of Canada, we were trying to determine how to achieve price stability in a way that would allow us to accomplish three things: first, as I just said, we wanted to anchor Canadians' expectations about the future purchasing power of their money; second, we wanted an operational framework for the conduct of monetary policy; and third, we wanted an approach that would help markets, politicians, and the Canadian public to understand what we were doing, and what actions they could expect from us.  Throughout the 1980s, we at the Bank worked to come up with such an approach. By 1991, we had decided that targeting inflation was the best way to achieve high, sustainable growth in output and employment. And so the Bank and the Government of Canada agreed on a series of explicit targets for inflation. To be clear, however, inflation targeting is not an end in itself. Rather, as I said, it is the best means of fulfilling our commitment to promote the economic and financial welfare of Canadians. The Canadian version of inflation targeting Once the Bank and the government agreed on the concept of inflation targeting, we needed to make some choices to put the concept into practice. Like many other central banks, we chose a target for BIS Review 85/2005 1 
the annual rate of inflation. Initially, our focus was on reducing the rate of inflation, which was running at more than 5 per cent annually in 1991. The target was set to bring inflation down gradually - first, to the 3 per cent midpoint of a 2 to 4 per cent target range by the end of 1992, and then to the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent range by the end of 1995. The target has remained there since then. Let me take you through some of the other key decisions that we made in 1991, and the rationale behind our choices, as we set out the details of our framework. First of all, why did we choose the consumer price index (CPI) as our measure of inflation? The key reason is that the CPI is the measure of inflation most familiar and relevant to Canadians. Choosing a well-known indicator as a target makes it easier to explain our actions and to be accountable. Second, why do we have a range? This is because there are some components of the CPI - such as some energy and food items - whose prices tend to move a lot, both up and down. These movements can cause large fluctuations in the index. If we tried to target inflation too precisely, we would then be adjusting our policy interest rate sharply and frequently, which would lead to greater instability in the economy. Having a range reflects the inherent volatility of the CPI. But to be clear, the range is not a zone of indifference - we do aim to achieve the 2 per cent target. Another concern is that this volatility can obscure the underlying trend of inflation. So for operational purposes, we use a measure of core inflation. This measure strips out eight of the most volatile components of the CPI and the effect of changes in indirect taxes on the rest of the items. In this way, core inflation provides a better forward-looking indicator of the trend of inflation.  Finally, since today's monetary policy actions only affect future inflation, we needed to choose a time frame in which to achieve our target. From the beginning, we said that if inflation was pushed off target, we would conduct monetary policy so as to return inflation to target over a period of 18 to 24 months. This is because research has suggested that historically it takes 12 to 18 months for changes in interest rates to have most of their impact on output, and 18 to 24 months to have most of their impact on prices. Of course, there is always uncertainty about the lags involved, and I'll have more to say about this later on. Before I move on, I want to emphasize three points about our inflation-targeting framework. The first is that we operate in a symmetric way, and we make it clear to everyone that we do so. By this, I mean that we worry just as much about inflation falling below target as we do about it rising above target. When the demand for goods and services pushes the Canadian economy against the limits of its capacity, and inflation is poised to rise above target, the Bank will raise interest rates to cool off the economy. And when the economy is operating below its production capacity, and inflation is poised to fall below target, the Bank will lower interest rates to stimulate growth. Paying close attention to signs that inflation is moving away from our target - in either direction - promotes timely action. This is how we keep the economy operating near its full capacity and thus keep inflation low, stable, and predictable. The second point I want to stress is that having an inflation target as an anchor is very helpful in terms of the Bank's accountability. If inflation persistently deviates from the target, we are committed to explaining the reasons why, what we will do to return it to target, and how long we expect the process to take. The third point is that any central bank that runs an independent monetary policy and targets inflation must allow its currency to float. It is simply not possible for a central bank to successfully control both the domestic and external values of its currency at the same time. We have only one instrument - our policy interest rate - so we can have only one target. Thus, with inflation as our target, we naturally operate with a floating currency. Canada's experience under inflation targeting Now, let me quickly review our record with inflation targeting. As we look at inflation and economic growth in Canada since 1991, it is quite clear that the benefits we had hoped would come from inflation targeting have, in fact, materialized. We expected inflation to become more stable - and it did so, sooner than we had anticipated. Since settling on the 2 per cent target for inflation at the end of 1995, actual inflation has averaged very close to 2 per cent. And it has remained within the 1 to 3 per cent target range, with only rare exceptions. We expected our credibility to increase and inflation expectations to become well anchored - and this has also happened. 2 BIS Review 85/2005 
We also thought that inflation targeting would help the economy to avoid the exaggerated "boom-bust" cycles of previous decades - and it has. The business cycle is still with us, but economic volatility has diminished. By keeping inflation close to the target, monetary policy has helped to keep the economy operating near its potential.  Finally, and very importantly, our transparent framework has allowed markets and analysts to better predict how we will react to different economic outcomes. Within the Bank, too, focusing on inflation has brought increased discipline and clarity to our monetary policy decision process.  Canada was the second country after New Zealand to adopt explicit inflation targets. But over the past decade and a half, about 20 other central banks have also adopted this framework. Some, like the central banks of the United Kingdom and Sweden, are from advanced, industrialized economies. Others, such as the central banks of Chile and Brazil, are from emerging-market economies. In every case, inflation targeting has been a success: inflation rates have been reduced, and central banks have generally been able to hit their targets. Inflation has become less persistent where inflation targeting is practiced, and it is reasonable to assume that well-anchored inflation expectations are a good part of the reason why. Given this success, it seems likely that other countries will join the ranks of inflation targeters in coming years - indeed, just last week the central bank of Turkey announced that it will move to formal inflation targeting next year. Inflation targeting is also being discussed in the United States where Ben Bernanke, Alan Greenspan's designated successor at the Federal Reserve, has been an enthusiastic proponent.  However, some have argued that inflation targeting is too limiting an approach, and that it can constrain a central bank's ability to act or to apply judgment in the case of extraordinary events. But this has not been our experience in Canada. For example, in the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, we lowered interest rates quickly and decisively to underpin confidence. When a major loss of confidence did not materialize, we were able to reverse course in fairly short order and withdraw some of that monetary stimulus. Our inflation-targeting framework did not restrict our ability to act. Indeed, because our framework is transparent, financial markets were able to appreciate why we made these rapid rate adjustments. The Bank of Canada focuses on inflation at the national level. This can lead to suggestions that some of Canada's regions may not have the appropriate policy for their particular circumstances. We hear these comments more often during times such as these, when economic prospects and growth rates vary from sector to sector and - because of the geographic concentration of sectors in Canada - also from region to region. These comments reflect a fairly common misunderstanding about monetary policy. Remember that in any market economy, adjustments are always taking place. Markets and prices send clear signals that indicate how economic resources should be allocated, shifting resources to rapidly growing sectors from slower-growing ones. Because our monetary policy targets inflation for the country as a whole, it does not try to mask these important price signals - nor should it. To do so would impede the adjustment process and, ultimately, lead to lower economic growth. But this does not mean that we ignore what is happening on a regional basis - far from it. Indeed, the information we receive from our five regional offices, and from our Business Outlook Survey, is an important input to our monetary policy deliberations. Our job is to add up what is going on across the country and to conduct monetary policy so that we achieve our inflation target for the country as a whole. The future of inflation targeting Despite our success to date with inflation targeting, I shouldn't leave you with the impression that this somehow represents the end of monetary policy history. Prudent policy-makers should always be striving to find better ways of getting things done. As I said at the beginning, our agreement with the federal government is up for renewal next year. So at the Bank, we have been busy thinking about those elements of our framework that we would not want to change, as well as others where changes might be considered. From the Bank's point of view, the basic arrangement of aiming inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range has served Canadians well, along with the use of the total CPI as the target, and a measure of core inflation for operational purposes. The Bank will also continue to recognize the importance of communications and transparency. Inflation targeting does a good job of BIS Review 85/2005 3 
anchoring expectations, but it works better when a central bank communicates well. I expect that these basic elements of our framework will remain in place.  This is not to say that we haven't examined these elements. Indeed, we have asked ourselves if 2 per cent is the right target. When we last renewed the inflation-targeting agreement in 2001, we looked closely at this issue. At the time, our research could not convincingly demonstrate that the benefits of moving to a lower target would outweigh the costs. More recent research, while still inconclusive, provided a little more support for a lower target. Of course, we will continue to look at this question, but the evidence would have to be quite compelling before the target would be changed. Another issue that we continue to examine is whether we should target the actual level of prices rather than the inflation rate. Let me explain what I mean. Had the annual rate of inflation been exactly 2 per cent since 1995, when we settled on that figure as our target, the consumer price index would have risen from a level of 102.8 in December 1994 to 127.6 in October of this year. The actual price level for October was 128.5 - a minimal difference, as it turns out. But in the future, it is possible that we could get a series of shocks that moved inflation predominantly in one direction, either up or down. And so, the price level could move significantly away from where it would have been if we had hit the 2 per cent target exactly over a period of years. Under price-level targeting, monetary policy would be set so as to offset those deviations from the desired price level. But under inflation targeting, those past price-level movements are essentially forgotten; they would not change the conduct of policy going forward. Economic theory tells us that, over the longer term, having certainty about the future price level would yield somewhat greater benefits than just having certainty about the future rate of inflation. But to date, it has not been possible to conclusively measure the costs and benefits of targeting the price level versus targeting the inflation rate. We are still working at building better analytical tools and methods to examine these questions, and we will continue to look at new evidence as it becomes available down the road. Another issue that we are looking at is the appropriate time frame for returning inflation to target following various kinds of shocks. As I said before, we now conduct monetary policy with the goal of bringing inflation to target within an 18- to 24-month time frame. But there are questions as to whether this time frame is appropriate for every type of unexpected development that could affect inflation. There could be reasons to look at adjusting the time frame in response to inflationary pressures from major movements in asset prices - be they real estate, equity prices, or the exchange rate. Given the success we have had to date in dealing with various shocks within an 18- to 24-month horizon, we should not change that horizon lightly. But as inflation targeting and the global economy evolve, we will need to continue considering the appropriate time horizon and some of the other issues I discussed today. The Bank of Canada remains committed to conducting and encouraging research in these and other important areas. Conclusion I want to conclude by emphasizing a few key points. Despite the issues I've just raised, the economic record of the past 15 years shows that inflation targeting has served Canada well. The Bank's symmetric approach of keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable has laid the groundwork for solid, sustainable growth in output and employment. With inflation targeting, monetary policy is more focused, our communications are clearer, and inflation expectations are more solidly anchored. As we look forward, it is important that we maintain an anchor to keep monetary policy focused. From my perspective, inflation targeting is the best anchor we've seen.  4 BIS Review 85/2005 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Migration to E-payments  Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Payment Systems Forum and Exhibition 2005, Kuala Lumpur, 28 November 2005. *      *      * Bismillahhirrahmanirrahim Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the Payment Systems Forum and Exhibition 2005. The theme of this inaugural forum is the "Migration to E-Payments" with a focus on the issues and challenges in the transition from paper-based payments to electronic payments in Malaysia. The issues that need to be addressed for a nation to effectively migrate from paper-based payment instruments to electronic means of payments are multi-faceted. This will require changes in the infrastructure and business processes, developing and sustaining users'confidence and inculcating a change among all the relevant stakeholders, including the service providers and the customers. Our objective is to transform the payments system into one that is competitively leveraged on a modern market-based system. Indeed, this will need to be achieved by the cumulative efforts of all parties involved, including the industry and the authorities. This forum and exhibition has, therefore been organised to provide a platform to discuss the range of significant issues and challenges in achieving the common vision of migrating to e-payments in Malaysia and to increase public awareness of the various payment channels available in the market today, as well as to discuss views on the development of services and infrastructure for the next generation of systems. The forum is designed to encourage active dialogue and deliberations from the different perspectives, notably between the service providers and the users. The dialogue will also serve as a platform to discuss how the industry may effectively operate in the context of the prevailing regulatory environment, policies and practices. From the regulators'perspective, the aim is to develop an enabling environment to facilitate and foster greater use of more efficient payment mechanisms in Malaysia. Ladies and Gentlemen An efficient, reliable and secure electronic payment system is critical to the soundness of the financial system, the efficiency of the financial markets and the economic growth and development process. With the rapid technological advancements and increasing consumer demands for more efficient delivery services, the Malaysian financial landscape has continued to transition towards the increased significance of an electronic payment systems and channels. Despite the progress that has been achieved, Malaysians however, remain high users of currency notes and coins, with the currency-in-circulation amounting to about 6.4% of GDP. In contrast, the average ratio for high users of electronic payments such as in the Scandinavian economies is only 2.9%. The use of cheques is also dominant in our financial system, accounting for 96% of the total value of non-cash payment instruments. These indicators suggest that measures to encourage more active use of e-payments would need to go beyond building the electronic payment infrastructure. It needs to address the broader issues revolving around building public awareness and confidence, promoting greater convenience; reviewing business and operating practices and finally, addressing the commercial interfaces between the customers and the service providers. Allow me to take this opportunity to elaborate on these issues. Ladies and Gentlemen, E-payment increases operational efficiency and improves productivity levels through expedient payments and receipts of funds as well as through the reduction or redeployment of resources used for handling cash and cheques. Whilst the migration to e-payment may require considerable investment and effort to provide the enabling infrastructure, the use of e-payments provide consumers with greater convenience and security that would result in cost savings in the long run. In this regard, it is important for the financial institutions and payment service providers to provide more widespread access points for electronic payment services via multiple channels, including the automated teller machines, the point-of-sale terminals, the gated toll and parking gantries and through the network channels and devices, such as the Internet and the mobile phones. Needless to say, the payment products and services need to be continuously enhanced to meet the changing needs of the consumers. BIS Review 84/2005 1 
In addition, the efforts to increase the use of e-payments will not only hinge on the capacity of the service providers to ensure that e-payment services are convenient, but also secure. In the area of fraud prevention, the industry would need to be constantly vigilant to maintain consumers'confidence. Robust technology and strong internal controls must be in place to protect and preserve the integrity of the financial system. In line with this objective, our banking institutions have successfully replaced the magnetic stripe ATM and credit cards with chip-based cards to ensure a more secure environment for payment cards. This move has effectively eliminated counterfeiting and fraud involving ATM and credit cards in Malaysia. This has provided Malaysia with the platform to further enhance payment card services by maximising the chip infrastructure. The conclusion of this year will see the completion of the industry-wide migration to Europay-MasterCard-Visa (EMV) standards with all of the point-of-sales terminals being fully EMV-compliant. With this, Malaysia will become the first country in the Asia-Pacific region to successfully migrate on a national scale from the magnetic stripe environment to the EMV chip-based credit card infrastructure. Ladies and Gentlemen, For Malaysia to fully adopt e-payments, the task ahead requires great determination and commitment from all sectors. From the Central Bank’s perspective, a strong motivation for promoting e-payments is in the eventual savings from the reduction of paper processing and printing, and the more efficient distribution of money in electronic form in the financial system that generates immediate economic value. Research studies have shown that shifting from an all paper-based to an electronic-based payment system will generate annual savings of about 1% of the GDP. All stakeholders, including the financial institutions, payment system providers, the authorities, the corporate sector, and the consumers, have their respective roles to play to support this national agenda to reduce the use of paper-based payment instruments, particularly cheques, in Malaysia.  In this regard, the Government had recently announced in the 2006 Budget its intent to increase the acceptance of electronic means of payment with the Government and to promote the use of e-payments nationwide. This should provide a catalyst for the adoption of e-payments on a national scale, as most individuals and businesses have payment transactions with the Government. Key to making this a success is the need to review the business and operating practices and address any impediments that may hinder the use of e-payments. These practices ranges from the inability to store and collect bank account numbers, acknowledging electronic payment and receipt notices, instructing payments electronically, and many more that may be identified during the discussions at this forum. All corporations and institutions that are present at this forum should consider undertaking a business process reengineering in your own organisation to fully use the e-payment channels that are being offered by the service providers and the financial institutions. As a national agenda, I would like to propose that this forum debates and considers the feasibility of setting a realistic target date, perhaps by the year 2010, for a full implementation of a national e-payment roadmap that specifically outlines the strategies and realignments of the business processes and operating practices, for the nation to be fully engaged in making the migration a success. Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me now move on to the third key point mentioned earlier on the commercial interfaces, whereby the underlying business models and pricing mechanisms for electronic payments, should take into account the need for an incentive structure that promotes the increased use of e-payments. In recent years, several notable developments in e-payments in Malaysia have taken place. Following its introduction in 2000, the Inter-Bank GIRO system, an electronic credit transfer system, had recorded on annual average increase in transactions of 160% in terms of volume and nearly 200% in terms of value between 2003 and 2004. The credit card is also becoming a popular means of payment card, with the total value and volume of increasing annually by 15 and 20 percent respectively. The growing acceptance of Internet banking as a convenient delivery channel for accessing banking services has translated into a significant growth of Internet banking subscribers, which today comprise two thirds of the total internet subscribers. The latest mode of electronic payments channel is the mobile banking services that provide convenience to consumers to access a range of payment services such as funds transfers, bill payments and credit card services through mobile phones. In addition, the establishment of an Internet-based multi-bank payment system in Malaysia, the Financial Process Exchange in October 2004, would facilitate online payments for a variety of payments by providing convenience and an efficient channel for businesses and consumers to undertake their payment transactions through the internet. 2 BIS Review 84/2005 
While these positive developments will support the attainment of the objective of migration to e-payments, the commercial issues between the consumers and the service providers have often times inhibited growth in the volume of the e-payments. The business and pricing models have at times inadvertently promoted a less efficient system, such as in the case of the low price that customers pay for using cheques compared to the Inter-Bank GIRO payments, and the popularity of the credit card against debit card, which is a more efficient system that carries less risk. In addition, service providers have also had difficulties in agreeing on a common business platform, due to their own competitive positioning strategies. Such differences have contributed to containing the increased acceptance of e-payments, which is further reinforced by the consumers'need to see a wide spread acceptance by merchants before deciding to use the e-payment mode, while the merchant needs to see a critical mass of consumers before putting in place the required infrastructure. In this regard, a comprehensive review of the industry-wide related issues involving payment instruments and systems needs to be undertaken to make Malaysia more competitive, with a view to promoting the more efficient payment systems and addressing the commercial hurdles. In order to further improve the growth and promote the e-payments, the payments industry may wish to consider establishing a Payment System Association to deal with the industry-wide issues involving electronic payments. A Payment System Association would be able to address the lack of common technology standards between service providers to promote interoperability, and the lack of a collective forum to identify, understand and manage the spectrum of stakeholders' interests and expectations. I should add that this idea is not new, as payment associations are already in existence in several other countries. Ladies and Gentlemen The future landscape of the payment industry is one that will continuously evolve with market innovations, resulting in enhanced services that offer improvement in efficiency and cost savings compared to traditional payment methods. Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to play the role of a facilitator to spearhead the development and improvement of the payments system infrastructure and to promote a conducive enabling environment for such developments to take place. In this respect, Bank Negara Malaysia has taken several initiatives to promote greater use of electronic payments by the public sector and in bringing about a mindset change amongst the users. Several taskforces have been established, involving users and service providers to promote the sharing of information and cooperation amongst the players, to develop industry-wide best practices and security standards, and to collaborate with relevant agencies to promptly deal with security infringement issues. Bank Negara Malaysia is also currently undertaking a series of measures to increase the efficiency and reduce risks in the payment systems, and facilitate a progressive transformation and migration of the payment systems infrastructure. In this regard, a cross-border link between the Ringgit and the USD settlement systems in Hong Kong, that is the RENTAS and USD CHATS in Hong Kong, will be established to reduce foreign exchange settlement risk via a simultaneous payment versus payment mechanism between Ringgit and USD in the same time zone. A cheque truncation system is also being developed to improve operational efficiencies through the elimination of the physical movement of cheques with the use of electronic images and data. Bank Negara Malaysia also aims to provide a conducive regulatory framework that is supportive of market-based innovation and ensuring transparency for the benefit of consumers. In this regard, I certainly hope that the results of your deliberations in this Payment Systems Forum and Exhibition 2005 will provide valuable input for the formulation of strategies and modalities for both the industry and authorities to accelerate the migration to e-payments in Malaysia. It is also hoped that the exhibition will heighten public awareness of the various payments products and services available in Malaysia, as well as globally. On this note, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have great pleasure in declaring open the Payment Systems Forum and Exhibition 2005. Thank you. BIS Review 84/2005 3 
Sunil Mendis: Basel II - preparation of implementation in the Asia-Pacific region Keynote address by Mr Sunil Mendis, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at the SEACEN Seminar on Basel II: Preparation of Implementation in the Asia-Pacific Region, Colombo, 7-10 December 2005. *      *      * Dr Subarjo, Executive Director of the SEACEN Centre, Deputy Governors and Distinguished Guests,  Thank you for the invitation to speak at this SEACEN Conference of Bank Supervisors and industry participants in the Asia Pacific Region, on a topic that is currently occupying centre stage in the regulatory arena – the implementation of Basel II and its challenges.  Basle II has been the major preoccupation of bank regulators all over the world for the last seven years. This seminar is of particular significance as it brings together regulators and industry participants to a common arena to share experiences and challenges in the operational and policy issues involved in the implementation of this new capital accord. I am particularly happy because this first ever seminar bringing together the industry participants in a SEACEN programme on this important subject was a result of a suggestion made by me at the last SEACEN Governors’ Conference held in Fiji earlier this year and that it is held in my own country. Its implementation is seen as one of the most significant challenges facing the banking industry the world over, in recent times. Unlike Basel I, which was simple and user friendly, Basel II is complex. Therefore, the Basle Committee has quite rightly advised that regulators and banks should approach it with caution even with regard to the simplest approach to Basel II. We commenced our journey one year ago, together with the industry, and we will move slowly, but steadily, towards full implementation of the basic approach, hopefully in 2008. We will, however commence our test runs in parallel with Basle I in 2006, fine tuning our systems for full compliance as we go along. This would be in line with the widely accepted policy that countries should adopt the options and approaches that are most appropriate for the state of their markets, their banking systems, and their supervisory structures.  In Sri Lanka, as in most countries, the banking sector enjoys predominance in our financial system. As is to be expected, the financial environment, domestically, is becoming more innovative and competitive to meet the sophistication of peer foreign banks and the needs of investors and consumers. This naturally increases their risk profile. Increasingly, therefore, our remit as regulators is to ensure an efficient risk management framework and the adequacy of resources to mitigate risk. Against this background, therefore, Basle II is synonymous with good risk management, not only of the core risk of credit default, but of a wider range of risks such as market risk and operational risk in Pillar I . Together with the mutually reinforcing pillars II and III, of regulatory review and market discipline, Basle II represents a formidable tool to insulate banks against inherent risks in the highly leveraged business of banking. In this process, we must be mindful of the fact that Basle II has been built on the experiences and risk parameters of developed, sophisticated economies. Through customization to suit conditions and markets in emerging economies, which have fundamentally different characteristics, the principles of Basel II should be appropriately adapted to suit such conditions. The “one size fits all” solution of Basle I will not suit the complexities of Basle II. The markets in which we operate have their own peculiarities and their own cultures. Promoting international best practice in such a culture is, indeed, a challenge which demands a fundamental change in credit cultures, attitudes, and policies. The will to change is important and in the case of banking institutions, has to be mandated, if it is to be in the best interests of the major stakeholders, the depositors.  Full implementation of Basel II is, indeed, demanding for banking institutions and regulators alike. Capacity building is an imperative on both sides, as is the framework for good risk management built on risk models. The supervisory capacity to assess and validate these models must be enhanced and developed. The magnitude of the investment in technology by the banks must be justified in a business sense. We must ensure that the cost of compliance does not outweigh the benefits from Basle II. Emerging market economies are very vulnerable to the reputational risk of non-compliance. Therefore we must take one step at a time. The infrastructure for compliance - legal, accounting and market - must be established and is an essential pre-requisite which underlies the success of these initiatives.  BIS Review 84/2005 1 
The implications on the several sub sectors of our economy from Basle II will have to be examined carefully with regard to access to finance and the pricing of risk. Uneven playing fields may arise as a result of the internationally active foreign banks adopting more advanced approaches, thereby improving their competitiveness over their local counterparts. Will the models developed by the foreign banks be relevant for the risks in our markets? These are the regulatory challenges which have to be addressed by the regulators.  In meeting these challenges, the local banks must make best use of the existing resources to minimize the cost of full compliance. They can build on their existing data bases and leverage on the default data available in institutions such as the Credit Information Bureau. They can benefit from data pooling within the industry. All these resources must be harnessed. It is important that the banks do not lose sight of the long term benefits of Basle II of better capital allocation and consequently, better pricing, because they are embroiled in the details necessary to meet the deadline. The ultimate objective is financial stability. I am sure that this dialogue that we have initiated today will result in a fruitful exchange of views on this important subject and will help to consolidate our implementation plans on this long journey that we have all commenced. I therefore wish you all a very stimulating and useful discussion and a very successful seminar. Thank you. 2 BIS Review 84/2005 
V Leeladhar: Taking banking services to the common man - financial inclusion  Commemorative lecture by Mr V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Fedbank Hormis Memorial Foundation, Ernakulam, 2 December 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I am truly honoured to deliver the Fedbank Hormis Memorial Foundation commemorative lecture. The illustrious list of the previous years’ speakers indicates the kind of significance this commemorative lecture has acquired over the years. The late Shri K.P.Hormis, founder of Federal Bank, was a visionary and left behind an institutional set up in the form of Federal Bank which has been doing yeoman service for well over seventy five years. The Fedbank Hormis Memorial Foundation, a public charitable trust, has been furthering the cause of banking and finance by providing knowledge and training in the areas of banking, finance, economics and management to banking professionals as well as deserving students who are specializing in these areas. As the life and times of late Shri K.P.Hormis were spent largely in taking banking to the masses, which is indicated by Federal Bank’s mix of urban and rural coverage, I thought it would be appropriate for me to speak on taking banking services to the common man – financial inclusion, a topic of contemporary significance and relevance.  The banking industry has shown tremendous growth in volume and complexity during the last few decades. Despite making significant improvements in all the areas relating to financial viability, profitability and competitiveness, there are concerns that banks have not been able to include vast segment of the population, especially the underprivileged sections of the society, into the fold of basic banking services. Internationally also efforts are being made to study the causes of financial exclusion and designing strategies to ensure financial inclusion of the poor and disadvantaged. The reasons may vary from country to country and hence the strategy could also vary but all out efforts are being made as financial inclusion can truly lift the financial condition and standards of life of the poor and the disadvantaged. What is financial inclusion? • Financial inclusion is delivery of banking services at an affordable cost to the vast sections of disadvantaged and low income groups. Unrestrained access to public goods and services is the sine qua non of an open and efficient society. As banking services are in the nature of public good, it is essential that availability of banking and payment services to the entire population without discrimination is the prime objective of the public policy.  The scope of financial inclusion  The scope of financial inclusion can be expanded in two ways.  a) through state-driven intervention by way of statutory enactments (for instance the US example, the Community Reinvestment Act and making it a statutory right to have bank account in France). b) through voluntary effort by the banking community itself for evolving various strategies to bring within the ambit of the banking sector the large strata of society. When bankers do not give the desired attention to certain areas, the regulators have to step in to remedy the situation. This is the reason why the Reserve Bank of India is placing a lot of emphasis on financial inclusion. In India the focus of the financial inclusion at present is confined to ensuring a bare minimum access to a savings bank account without frills, to all. Internationally, the financial exclusion has been viewed in a much wider perspective. Having a current account / savings account on its own, is not regarded as an accurate indicator of financial inclusion. There could be multiple levels of financial inclusion and exclusion. At one extreme, it is possible to identify the ‘super-included’, i.e., those customers who are actively and persistently courted by the financial services industry, and who have at their disposal a wide range of financial services and products. At the other extreme, we may have the financially BIS Review 83/2005 1 
excluded, who are denied access to even the most basic of financial products. In between are those who use the banking services only for deposits and withdrawals of money. But these persons may have only restricted access to the financial system, and may not enjoy the flexibility of access offered to more affluent customers.  Consequences of financial exclusion Consequences of financial exclusion will vary depending on the nature and extent of services denied. It may lead to increased travel requirements, higher incidence of crime, general decline in investment, difficulties in gaining access to credit or getting credit from informal sources at exorbitant rates, and increased unemployment, etc. The small business may suffer due to loss of access to middle class and higher-income consumers, higher cash handling costs, delays in remittances of money. According to certain researches, financial exclusion can lead to social exclusion.  International experience in promoting financial inclusion  An interesting feature which emerges from the international practice is that the more developed the society is, the greater the thrust on empowerment of the common person and low income groups. It may be worthwhile to have a look at the international experience in tackling the problem of financial exclusion so that we can learn from the international experience.  The Financial Inclusion Task Force in UK has identified three priority areas for the purpose of financial inclusion, viz., access to banking, access to affordable credit and access to free face-to-face money advice. UK has established a Financial Inclusion Fund to promote financial inclusion and assigned responsibility to banks and credit unions in removing financial exclusion. Basic bank no frills accounts have been introduced. An enhanced legislative environment for credit unions has been established, accompanied by tighter regulations to ensure greater protection for investors. A Post Office Card Account (POCA) has been created for those who are unable or unwilling to access a basic bank account. The concept of a Savings Gateway has been piloted. This offers those on low-income employment £1 from the state for every £1 they invest, up to a maximum of £25 per month. In addition the Community Finance Learning Initiatives (CFLIs) were also introduced with a view to promoting basic financial literacy among housing association tenants.  A civil rights law, namely Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in the United States prohibits discrimination by banks against low and moderate income neighborhoods. The CRA imposes an affirmative and continuing obligations on banks to serve the needs for credit and banking services of all the communities in which they are chartered. In fact, numerous studies conducted by Federal Reserve and Harvard University demonstrated that CRA lending is a win-win proposition and profitable to banks. In this context, it is also interesting to know the other initiative taken by a state in the United States. Apart from the CRA experiment, armed with the sanction of Banking Law, the State of New York Banking Department, with the objective of making available the low cost banking services to consumers, made mandatory that each banking institution shall offer basic banking account and in case of credit unions the basic share draft account, which is in the nature of low cost account with minimum facilities. Some key features of the basic banking account are worth-mentioning here. • the initial deposit amount required to open the account shall not exceed US $ 25 • the minimum balance, including any average balance, required to maintain such account shall not exceed US $ 0.10 • the charge for periodic cycle for the maintenance of such accounts to be declared up front • the minimum number of withdrawal transactions which may be made during any periodic cycle at no charge to the account  holder must at least be eight • a withdrawal shall be deemed to be made when recorded on the books of the account holder’s banking institution • except, as provided below, an account holder shall not be restricted as to the number of deposits which may be made to the account without incurring any additional charge • the banking institution may charge account holders for transactions at electronic facilities which are not operated by the account holder’s banking institution as well as other fees 2 BIS Review 83/2005 
 and charges for specific banking services which are not covered under the basic banking account scheme • every periodic statement issued for the basic banking account should invariably cover on it or by way of separate  communiqué maximum number of withdrawals permitted  during each periodic cycle without additional charge and the consequences of exceeding such maximum and the fee if any, for the use of electronic facilities which are not operated by the account holder’s banking institution. An interesting feature of basic banking account scheme is the element of transparency i.e. the banking institution should, prior to opening the account, furnish a written disclosure to the account holder describing the main features of the scheme i.e. the initial deposit amount required to open the account, minimum balance to be maintained, charge per periodic cycle for use of such account, maximum number of withdrawal transactions without any additional charge and other charges imposed on transactions for availing electronic facility not operated by the account holder’s banking institution, etc. Coverage of Banking Services (Ratio of Demand Deposit Accounts to the adult population) Region/State/Union Territory Current Accounts Savings Accounts Total Population Adult Population (Above 19 years) Total No. Of accounts No. of acc. Per 100 of population No. of acc. Per 100 of adult pop. NORTHERN REGION 4215701 524161251326764626782231256631826 4384Haryana 572660 803147221082989113080258604132 4176Himachal Pradesh 134285 2433595607724835668862567880 4272Jammu & Kashmir 277529 30947901006991753795943372319 3363Punjab 1156137 13742201242892961418519014898338 61105Rajasthan 689657 12139302564731222847374312828959 2345Chandigarh 80607 11266969009145461711207303 134221Delhi 1304826 1184806913782976792958913152895 95166NORTH-EASTERN REGION 476603 689108138495089197089827367684 1937Arunachal Pradesh 10538 2090731091117544582219611 2040Assam 378729 507105826638407140743935449787 2039Manipur 12514 20059323886341222107213107 917Meghalaya 24305 45877923060691088165483084 2144Mizoram 3441 117885891058476205121326 1425Nagaland 13819 1954521988636995523209271 1121Tripura 33257 63824131911681784212671498 2138EASTERN REGION 1814219 4787614022761307312213613349690359 2241Bihar 464511 13225242828787964093417013689753 1733Jharkhand 166007 583434126909428137374856000348 2244Orissa 228160 703000436706920210654047258164 2034Sikkim 4097 125365540493288500129462 2445West Bengal 942733 21544753802211714589691422487486 2849Andaman & Nicobar Islands 8711 116435356265213660125146 3559CENTRAL REGION 2202217 6425418925571349512931667766456406 2651Chhattisgarh 192067 334689820795956112094253538965 1732Madhya Pradesh 553381 11731918603851183140499012285299 2039Uttar Pradesh 1324509 458043501660528598222974847128859 2857Uttaranchal 132260 3371023847956244725143503283 4178WESTERN REGION 3178102 495251011490717478618220652703203 3561Goa 81551 158417713439988914111665728 124187BIS Review 83/2005 3 
Gujarat 95596416220262505969922886309517176226 3460Maharashtra 212724031568184967522475620760433695424 3560Dadra & Nagar Haveli 60766930822045112276575384 3461Daman & Diu 7271831701580599733190441 5793SOUTHERN REGION 46660148338689822344538113557422588052912 3965Andhra Pradesh 115640523974580757275414423191825130985 3357Karnataka 108666219147819527339583062328920234481 3866Kerala 60006517669723318386192056032318269788 5789Tamil Nadu 178651422052812621108393951103823839326 3860Lakshadweep 49122997605953368623488 3970Pondicherry 35877518967973829613971554844 5790ALL-INDIA 165528563043495341027015247541031553320902390 3159Indian scenario Bank nationalization in India marked a paradigm shift in the focus of banking as it was intended to shift the focus from class banking to mass banking. The rationale for creating Regional Rural Banks was also to take the banking services to poor people. The branches of commercial banks and the RRBs have increased from 8321 in the year 1969 to 68,282 branches as at the end of March 2005. The average population per branch office has decreased from 64,000 to 16,000 during the same period. However, there are certain under-banked states such as Bihar, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and a large number of North-Eastern states, where the average population per branch office continues to be quite high compared to the national average. As you would be aware, the new branch authorization policy of Reserve Bank encourages banks to open branches in these under banked states and the under banked areas in other states. The new policy also places a lot of emphasis on the efforts made by the Bank to achieve, inter alia, financial inclusion and other policy objectives.  One of the benchmarks employed to assess the degree of reach of financial services to the population of the country, is the quantum of deposit accounts (current and savings) held as a ratio to the adult population. In the Indian context, taking into account the Census of 2001 (ignoring the incremental growth of population thereafter), the ratio of deposit accounts (data available as on March 31, 2004) to the total adult population was only 59% (details furnished in the table). Within the country, there is a wide variation across states. For instance, the ratio for the state of Kerala is as high as 89% while Bihar is marked by a low coverage of 33%. In the North Eastern States like Nagaland and Manipur, the coverage was a meager 21% and 27%, respectively. The Northern Region, comprising the states of Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi, has a high coverage ratio of 84%. Compared to the developed world, the coverage of our financial services is quite low. For instance, as per a recent survey commissioned by British Bankers' Association, 92 to 94% of the population of UK has either current or savings bank account.  Steps towards financial inclusion In the context of initiatives taken for extending banking services to the small man, the mode of financial sector development until 1980’s was characterized by  • a hugely expanded bank branch and cooperative network and new organizational forms like RRBs; • a greater focus on credit rather than other financial services like savings and insurance, although the banks and cooperatives did provide deposit facilities; • lending targets directed at a range of ‘priority sectors’ such as agriculture, weaker sections of the population, etc; • interest rate ceilings; • significant government subsidies channeled through the banks and cooperatives, as well as through related government programmes; 4 BIS Review 83/2005 
• a dominant perspective that finance for rural and poor people was a social obligation and not a potential business opportunity. It is absolutely beyond any doubt that the financial access to masses has significantly improved in the last three and a half decades. But the basic question is, has that been good enough. As I mentioned earlier, the quantum of deposit accounts (current and savings) held as a ratio to the adult population has not been uniformly encouraging. There is a tremendous scope for financial coverage if we have to improve the standards of life of those deprived people.  With a view to enhancing the financial inclusion, as a proactive measure, the RBI in its Annual Policy Statement for the year 2005-06, while recognizing the concerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to exclude rather than attract vast sections of population, urged banks to review their existing practices to align them with the objective of financial inclusion. In the Mid Term Review of the Policy (2005-06), RBI exhorted the banks, with a view to achieving greater financial inclusion, to make available a basic banking ‘no frills’ account either with nil or very minimum balances as well as charges that would make such accounts accessible to vast sections of the population. The nature and number of transactions in such accounts would be restricted and made known to customers in advance in a transparent manner. All banks are urged to give wide publicity to the facility of such no frills account so as to ensure greater financial inclusion.  Further, in order to ensure that persons belonging to low income group both in urban and rural areas do not face difficulty in opening the bank accounts due to the procedural hassles, the KYC procedure for opening accounts has been simplified for those persons who intend to keep balances not exceeding rupees fifty thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) in all their accounts taken together and the total credit in all the accounts taken together is not expected to exceed rupees one lakh (Rs.1,00,000/-) in a year.  The way forward  The banks should come out of inhibited feeling that very aggressive competition policy and social inclusion are mutually exclusive. As demonstrated elsewhere, the mass banking with no-frills etc. can become a win-win situation for both. Basically banking services need to be “marketed” to connect with large population segments and these may be justifiable promotional costs. The opportunities are plenty. • In the context of India becoming one of the largest micro finance markets in the world especially in the growth of women’s savings and credit groups (SHGs) and the sustaining success of such institutions which has been demonstrated by the success of SEWA bank in Gujarat, low cost banking is not necessarily an unviable venture/proposition.  • The IBA may explore the possibility of a survey about the coverage in respect of financial inclusion keeping in view the geographical spread of the banks and extent of financial services available to the population so as to assess the constraints in extension of financial services to hitherto unbanked sections and for initiating appropriate policy measures. • It may be useful for banks to consider franchising with other segments of financial sector such as cooperatives, RRBs etc. so as to extend the scope of financial inclusion with minimal intermediation cost. • Since large sections of low income groups transactions are related to deposits and withdrawals, with a view to containing transaction costs, 'simple to use' cash dispensing and collecting machines akin to ATMs, with operating instructions and commands in vernacular would greatly facilitate financial inclusion of the semi urban and rural populace. In this regard, it is worthwhile to emulate the example of ‘e-Choupal’ project brought forth through private sector initiative. Conclusion  It is becoming increasingly apparent that addressing financial exclusion will require a holistic approach on the part of the banks in creating awareness about financial products, education, and advice on money management, debt counseling, savings and affordable credit. The banks would have to evolve specific strategies to expand the outreach of their services in order to promote financial inclusion. One of the ways in which this can be achieved in a cost-effective manner is through forging linkages with BIS Review 83/2005 5 
microfinance institutions and local communities. Banks should give wide publicity to the facility of no frills account. Technology can be a very valuable tool in providing access to banking products in remote areas. ATMs cash dispensing machines can be modified suitably to make them user friendly for people who are illiterate, less educated or do not know English.  To sum up, banks need to redesign their business strategies to incorporate specific plans to promote financial inclusion of low income group treating it both a business opportunity as well as a corporate social responsibility. They have to make use of all available resources including technology and expertise available with them as well as the MFIs and NGOs. It may appear in the first instance that taking banking to the sections constituting “the bottom of the pyramid”, may not be profitable but it should always be remembered that even the relatively low margins on high volumes can be a very profitable proposition. Financial inclusion can emerge as commercial profitable business. Only the banks should be prepared to think outside the box!  6 BIS Review 83/2005 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Developing a robust competency framework for the Malaysian banking industry Opening speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Industry Competency Framework Study Focus Group Discussion, Kuala Lumpur, 6 December 2005. *      *      * Saya berasa amat bangga kerana diberi peluang untuk menyampaikan sepatah dua kata dan seterusnya merasmikan Sesi Wacana Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia. Saya ingin mengucapkan terima kasih atas penyertaan anda dalam temu ramah eksekutif yang merupakan input yang amat bernilai dalam pembentukan rangka kerja kompetensi industri yang akan dibincangkan hari ini.  The banking sector will remain the pillar of our financial system, as it evolves to offer more innovative financial solutions to meet the changing needs of the economy. The industry however, needs to be well positioned in a financial landscape that is continuously being redefined. While new opportunities have emerged, there are also new challenges on the horizon. Foremost amongst these is intensified competitive pressures, spurred by financial liberalisation and technological revolution. Other challenges include the growing demands of customers for differentiated product offerings and value-added services at more competitive prices, excellent service quality, and superior level of efficiency. Strategic opportunities also arise from new growth areas and a larger marketplace as economic integration regionally and globally gather pace, driven by increasing regional and global trades and investment flows. Banking institutions must be ready for the challenges and be well equipped with distinct capabilities to take advantage of the opportunities that the new environment accords.  Banking is a knowledge-intensive, skills-based and relationship-rich industry. In an increasingly complex and a more liberalised environment, the competitiveness of banking institutions will depend critically on the quality of human intellectual capital and the extent to which the industry is able to leverage on these talents. To compete effectively, banking institutions need professionals with the requisite skills and expertise not only at the strategic and management level, but also at the technical and operational level. Successful institutions will be the ones which accord high priority to effective placements, rewards, retention and most importantly, lifelong learning and the continuous enhancement of human capital. Lifelong learning is becoming increasingly important in this knowledge-based economy where knowledge and skills need to be continuously updated and upgraded. At the macro-level, the breadth and depth of skills of the entire financial services workforce will increasingly be the defining factor in determining the success in building a more efficient, effective and dynamic financial sector. The availability of appropriately trained and competent human resources is a critical factor key to support the performance of the industry. In essence, continuous strengthening of intellectual resources and capabilities must be made to create a larger pool of talents and high calibre professionals in the banking and finance industry.  Competence and skills development have always been an area of focus, but it will be even more important as we prepare our workforce for a more challenging environment, one that is more competitive and more complex. The first step is to build the skills required at the tertiary level to ensure that the curriculum at our universities and colleges equip graduates with the relevant knowledge and skills that meet the needs of the industry. In this respect, closer cooperation between the industry's training institute and the academia will help to develop a new breed of graduates who will be much better prepared to enter the workplace. At the post-employment stage, we need incentives for continuous learning and upgrading of skills and an infrastructure that delivers the appropriate training. For the development of banking sector workforce, the International Centre for Leadership in Finance (ICLIF) was established to pave the way for the development of future leaders in the industry, while Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia (IBBM) provides the avenue for competency building among the various levels of staff.  With the onset of financial liberalisation, the traditional lines of business are likely to expand into new areas and new business models. As a consequence, the skills requirements have also evolved with the growing diversity and complexity of businesses in which banks are engaged, the increasingly sophisticated customer needs, technological innovation, and the expectations for sound risk management. In this context, there is a need to analyse the essential competencies for current job functions and to anticipate future skills requirements, with a view to building a competency framework for banking and finance that is relevant to the changing financial landscape.  BIS Review 83/2005 1 
The development of an industry competency framework seeks to elevate the level of professionalism and competence in the banking industry through appropriate training and certification programmes. For banking institutions, the competency framework will serve as a source of reference and impetus in sharpening competencies of staff and enhancing organisational capabilities to meet future challenges. The framework could also provide a benchmark for performance measurement and recognition for skills improvement. The competency framework will provide the foundation to guide IBBM in designing and offering relevant management and technical programmes to meet the current and future needs of the banking industry. In addition, the framework would assist academic institutions in aligning their curriculum to meet the industry's needs and to ensure a steady supply of graduates in new growth areas. Competency standards set for certification programmes could also serve as a basis for evaluating and accrediting training providers to ensure the provision of top quality training. For the banking workforce, the framework provides a platform for self-assessment to be aware of their competency gaps, and to engage in continuous learning so as to further their careers and keep in tandem with the new demands.  The quality of human capital will increasingly become the cutting edge of competitiveness. Having competent staff to deliver high quality products and services is critical to building customer confidence and goodwill, driving customer satisfaction, enhancing reputation, and ultimately realising your corporate vision and strategic goals. It is therefore, in the banking institutions' interests to ensure that the competence and professionalism of staff in their industry is further strengthened.  The success in developing a robust industry competency framework requires collaborative endeavours among all the parties involved, based on a common vision of an industry which embraces the values of continuous learning and development. The industry competency framework is being developed through a participatory process involving strategic insights and feedback from industry leaders in the country and the region. Detailed work is already underway, following the executive interviews which you have participated. Your continued strong support, commitment and contributions will be instrumental in ensuring the success of the industry competency framework.  With rapid changes taking place in the financial landscape, we need a new generation of professional bankers who are more customer-centric, technology-savvy, more highly qualified, flexible and agile with skill sets that are now more comprehensive than previously. As we prepare ourselves for a more challenging environment, the need to build a competent human capital base with high integrity, right attitudes and work ethics, as well as to maintain a learning environment could not be overemphasised. In realising the goals of a progressive and dynamic financial sector, greater efforts must be directed to building human intellectual capital in a continuous cycle of competency development and enhancement.  Let me conclude on this note and wish you a most productive discussion session.  Thank you.  2 BIS Review 83/2005 
Goh Chok Tong: Strengthening Singapore’s position as a leading financial centre in Asia Speech Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), at the 2005 MAS Staff Seminar, Singapore, 29 November 2005. *      *      * Let me begin by welcoming you to the 2005 MAS Staff Seminar. It has been a busy but good year for the industry and MAS. Positive global and regional outlook 2. Globally, 2005 looks set to end on a positive note. The IMF has projected world economic growth of 4.3% this year and sees the potential for further growth next year. The US economy remains resilient. It has withstood progressive interest rate hikes and the devastation caused by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. While the oil market remains tight and the US current account and budget deficits continue to be cause for caution, the Greenspan era should end positively. 3. Asia is doing well. East Asia's combined economy has been growing by an average of 3.4% per year between 2000 and 2004. Take away Japan, East Asia's annual growth rate is even more impressive - 6.4%, well above the global average of 3.8%. East Asian countries have accumulated massive foreign reserves and now account for nearly 60% of global reserves. Global investors looking for better returns have shown strong interest in Asian equities, bonds and alternative investments. 4. The blockbusters in Asia's growth story are China and India. I have spoken about them in some detail last year. China and India, fast becoming global economic powerhouses, offer immense opportunities for Asia and the world. 5. But we should not overlook Japan. It is, after all, still the second largest economy in the world. Japan is experiencing renewed vigour after more than a decade of economic stagnation and deflation. Earlier this month, I was in Tokyo for the Nomura Singapore Seminar. The political and business leaders I met exuded a strong sense of confidence that Japan has turned the corner and is firmly on the path of sustained growth. ASEAN is doing well 6. Prospects for Southeast Asia have improved. Despite the Bali bombings, regional economies remained stable. Unless there is an avian flu pandemic, we can expect ASEAN countries to grow at a steady 5% this year and next. 7. ASEAN has been deepening and quickening the pace of integration. ASEAN countries have agreed to form an economic community by 2020, with free flow of goods, services and investment. We are already seeing greater financial markets integration. The stock exchanges are exploring how to link up in terms of trading and benchmarking. The bond markets now have a regional index. The ASEAN sky will be freed up in a couple of years. Already, Low Cost Carriers have appeared on the scene. This will boost tourism. 8. ASEAN countries are crafting an ASEAN Charter. It is expected to be a visionary document that will chart the organisation's future direction. An Eminent Persons' Group (EPG) will be launched at the 11th ASEAN Summit next month. The EPG will be tasked to come up with bold and practical ideas on how to revitalise and strengthen ASEAN. Singapore's prospects are bright 9. Given the favourable external environment, the outlook for Singapore is good. In the first nine months of this year, we have generated more than 78,000 jobs, almost 7,000 more than the whole of last year. Inflation has stayed low. This year, we expect GDP growth to be around 5%. Next year, growth should be between 3% and 5%. BIS Review 83/2005 1 
10. Singapore's financial sector has grown strongly, averaging 5.4% over the first three quarters of the year, slightly higher than the overall expansion in the economy. This was supported by robust contributions from fund management and continued growth in the Asian Dollar Market. 11. Relations with our neighbours have strengthened considerably. Economic cooperation has further deepened. Singapore is the fourth largest investor in Indonesia. In February, we signed the Indonesia-Singapore Investment Guarantee Agreement (IGA), which serves to establish a framework for investors to operate in stability and confidence. 12. Political ties between Singapore and Malaysia have improved. Trade and investments across the Causeway continue to grow strongly. Malaysia is Singapore's biggest trading partner and Singapore was the second largest group of foreign investors in Malaysia last year. Temasek Holdings acquired 5% of Telekom Malaysia. In turn, Khazanah Nasional teamed up with Telekom Malaysia to take a 30% stake in M1. Such cross-border investments will further intermesh our two economies. 13. We are enhancing synergy with the Thai economy through the Singapore-Thailand Enhanced Economic Relationship (STEER) programme. Last week's second STEER meeting in Bangkok saw the signing of nine business agreements ranging from tourism to logistics. MAS and the Thai Securities Exchange Commission also signed a letter of intent for closer cooperation in capital markets. 14. Next month, Singapore and Vietnam will sign the Framework Agreement on Connectivity, which will help us leverage on each other's strengths and complementarities. Areas of cooperation include finance, ICT (Information and Communications Technologies), investments, trade and services, transport and education. Singapore is the second largest foreign investor in Vietnam, after Taiwan but ahead of Japan. The Connectivity agreement will further open up opportunities for Singapore firms in Vietnam. Seizing the opportunities 15. Governments in Asia see the benefits of economic cooperation and are building closer links, both on a multilateral as well as bilateral basis. This will enable the private sector to take full advantage of the rich array of opportunities. I strongly encourage Singapore-based companies and financial institutions to ride the growth momentum. 16. Let me highlight a few such opportunities. As capital restrictions are gradually liberalised in their countries, Chinese and Indian individuals, financial institutions and corporates will begin to invest overseas. Singapore-based financial institutions could partner them to use Singapore as a base to expand into the region. 17. The Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) is a win-win outcome for Singapore and India. Singapore can offer a platform for Indian firms to build up their global exposure and branding. India is also a promising investment destination for Singapore firms. Under CECA, our domestic banks are allowed to open up to 15 branches in India, and they are in the process of preparing for expansion into this market. To deepen the linkage, MAS will allow Indian banks that meet our prudential standards to expand their presence in Singapore. We have approved the entry of two Indian banks which do not yet have a presence in Singapore. 18. The Japan-Singapore Economic Agreement for a New Age Partnership (JSEPA) has brought a new era of closer economic cooperation. Investments by Japan and Singapore in each other(cid:31)s markets have increased. Japanese companies which are looking to diversify some of their business operations into Southeast Asia can use Singapore as the gateway. Singapore-based companies can take advantage of not just the JSEPA but bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) Singapore has signed with other countries to expand into the region and beyond. When I was in Tokyo, I suggested that the JSEPA should be reviewed to see where it could be further broadened and deepened. The Japanese leaders were receptive. 19. The Middle East is another promising region. Middle Eastern investors are looking for suitable investment destinations and products both in their own countries and outside. Singapore has a good brand name in the Middle East and awareness about us is increasing. There are many opportunities for our businesses there. 20. During my visits to the Middle East, I sensed their interest in investing in Asia. Many are keen to engage China and India but their businessmen told me that they were not so familiar with doing 2 BIS Review 83/2005 
business in China. Singapore can serve as a bridge, given our knowledge and connections. Furthermore, Indian, Chinese and Singaporean financial institutions could tap into Islamic funds from the Middle East for infrastructural and other major projects in India and China. 21. As an international financial centre, Singapore is well placed to intermediate and facilitate investment flows between Asia and the Middle East. Already, funds managed in Singapore from the Middle East have increased by over 70% to S$22 billion in 2004. But this is still a small figure, given the trillions of dollars of wealth in the Middle East. We should work with credible partners to offer a wider suite of Islamic financial services and products. The role of MAS 22. MAS will continue to support and partner the financial industry to seize the opportunities. Last year, I highlighted three strategic priorities for MAS and our financial sector. They are first, strengthen our position as a leading financial centre in Asia; second, maintain excellence in a riskier environment; and third, leverage and build on our reputation. We have made good progress on all three fronts. Strengthening our position as a leading financial centre in Asia 23. As MAS Chairman, I regularly meet CEOs of global banks and big companies. They give me a feel of how Singapore is viewed. One of the top bankers told me that he saw Singapore emerging as one of the top financial centres in Asia in the longer term. Our strong fundamentals will enable us to play a role in Asia's transformation. Another CEO told me that his bank found skill levels and costs in Singapore competitive enough for them to outsource processing work, including operations and IT development from Europe to Singapore. 24. In 2004, our treasury and capital markets grew strongly. For instance, the Singapore debt market grew by 20% to S$123 billion. Our fund management industry has continued to flourish, with assets under management (AUM) rising to almost S$600 billion. On the Singapore Exchange, the structured warrants market has seen tremendous growth. 25. A vibrant and dynamic financial centre depends on a vibrant and dynamic talent pool. In today's competitive environment, knowledge and talent are what will set businesses and even countries apart. In fact, one of the critical factors limiting the quick expansion of Singapore's financial industry is the availability of talent. 26. We seek to build up this talent pool in three broad ways. First, at the pre-employment stage, we ensure that the curriculum at our universities and polytechnics prepare their graduates well for entry into the industry. This is imperative if our graduates are to be relevant in a fast and ever-changing financial industry. MAS and the Institute of Banking and Finance have been facilitating closer interactions between various stakeholders to achieve this. 27. Second, emphasis is placed on continual skills upgrading. A key initiative is the Financial Industry Competency Standards (FICS). Launched in September, FICS will provide the national framework that benchmarks the competency level of our workforce against top international standards. This is an industry-led initiative. MAS is working on a funding scheme to support financial institutions that participate in this programme. 28. Third, we want to develop Singapore into a centre for financial sector research. Research can be a strategic enabler for financial institutions to develop innovative products, specialist skills and tap new markets. MAS announced a S$10 million "Programme on Risk Management and Financial Innovation" scheme in June to support research in risk management. Going forward, MAS is seeking consultation to develop a broader industry framework to better steer and facilitate financial sector research. 29. As Singapore's small population is a constraint, we have to continue to attract global talent to complement Singapore's own. However, the competition for global talent is also very keen. We need to identify and reach out to new sources of talent and holistically profile Singapore as a country not just good to work in, but also to live, play and see the region. BIS Review 83/2005 3 
Maintaining excellence in a riskier environment 30. We have continued to strengthen our macro-surveillance functions. MAS now publishes a Financial Stability Review report twice a year, in addition to the Macroeconomic Review. 31 Earlier this year, we sought feedback from financial sector stakeholders on MAS's performance in an External Perception Survey (EPS). Stakeholders have rated MAS favourably in most areas. For example, MAS' role in supervising financial institutions and bringing about a stable financial system in Singapore received positive feedback. I am heartened by this. More importantly, the industry also noted areas for improvement. Stakeholders, for instance, felt that MAS officers could be more attuned to commercial reality when formulating policies and decisions. MAS could improve the timeliness of its decision-making. MAS has taken note of the feedback and will work to improve its performance in these areas. 32. MAS' regular dialogue and consultation with the industry has worked well. We will now take this a step further by involving the industry at the early stages of policy formulation. This will give industry players the opportunity to shape policies. MAS will also be more open to suggestions of alternatives that achieve the same objectives. But for this new approach to produce results, both MAS and the industry must work together to build a high level of trust between them. Leveraging and building on our reputation 33. Looking ahead, we must continue to build and deepen relationships with the industry and our foreign counterparts. 34. To showcase Asia to the international community, the centrepiece for next year is the 2006 IMF and World Bank Annual Meetings. In partnership with the private sector and relevant agencies, we are organising a host of seminars and events. Collectively, they are known as Singapore 2006 or S2006. S2006 is intended to create intellectual buzz and profile the dynamism and optimism in Asia. 35. A key event is the Raffles Seminar, organised by the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy. It will gather leading thinkers to debate the issues and challenges countries face in achieving and sustaining good governance. 36. S2006 will require close collaboration between MAS, other government agencies and the private sector, in particular, our banks. Some of you are already working with the organising committee. I would like to thank you for your support. Together, we can make S2006 a success for Singapore. Conclusion 37. Let me conclude. Winston Churchill said: "The optimist sees opportunity in every danger. The pessimist sees danger in every opportunity." We should be shrewd optimists - bold but not reckless, cautious but not timid. 38. For we are living in exciting times in Asia. The economic centre of gravity is shifting from West to East. This could be Asia's Century. No doubt there are serious challenges. But I believe if we are innovative, realistic and skilful, we can overcome them. And together ride the Asian wave to prosperity. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 83/2005 
Stanley Fischer: Overcoming poverty in Israel  Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Globes Israel Business Conference, Tel Aviv, 5 December 2005. *      *      * Israel's economy is experiencing fairly rapid growth, an annual rate of 4.8 percent from the third quarter of 2003 to the third quarter of 2005. This is expressed by, among other things, improved figures of employment and unemployment, particularly in the business sector, as was shown in the data issued last week by the Central Bureau of Statistics. Against this background, and assuming that the government's macroeconomic policy will continue, the Bank of Israel published its forecasts for 2006, according to which GDP is expected to rise by 4 percent, and business-sector product by more than 5 percent. These are certainly high rates of growth. It is important to bear in mind, however, that the current favorable situation of Israel's economy did not simply occur by chance. It is the outcome of three main factors: the first is the state of the global economy; the second is Israel's macroeconomic strategy; and the third is the security situation. The first is external, and relates to the positive effects on Israel of the global economy, which is showing a clear growth trend. This is reflected inter alia by the expectation that the global growth rate in 2006 will be a relatively high 3.5 percent. The main domestic economic explanation for Israel's economic situation is the macroeconomic strategy decided upon. Thus, for the last two-and-a-half years a clear strategy has been pursued of reducing the government's share in the economy, and lowering the tax burden and the government-debt/GDP ratio. Yet despite the reduction achieved in the latter, there is still a very long way to go, as the ratio of government debt to GDP in Israel is still extremely high compared to that in other advanced countries. It is clear to me that had we not adopted the approach we did, we would eventually have had to pay the price, in the form of higher rates of interest in the financial markets and lower rates of growth and employment, among other things. At the same time the government spearheaded a series of structural reforms, such as those in the labor market, in the public sector, in the capital market, and in the ports; implemented privatization, e.g., of Bank Leumi, Discount Bank, Bezeq and El Al; and invested in infrastructures, such as in the railways. The steps already taken will continue to bear fruit in the future. But our work in these areas is far from over. The Bank of Israel is also playing its part in this strategy, mainly by carrying out an interest-rate policy that underpins price stability, according to the government's target, and supports financial stability. This strategy is essential, as it creates the conditions for sustained growth. The great importance to economic growth of the calm in the security situation - and expectations with regard to the peace process - must not go without mention; these have a positive effect on the economy, in particular via tourism and domestic and foreign investors' desire to invest in Israel's economy. Nevertheless, despite all the above we may not rest on our laurels. Various goals confront us, and I will refer to two of the most important ones: The first is in the sphere of Israel's economic strategy. We are already in an election period, and at the height of the democratic process. At such a time many questions raised in the past are raised again, and it is natural that this is accompanied by uncertainty regarding what is to follow. Since the Economic Stabilization Program of the 1980s, and especially since the 1990s, Israel's economy has followed the path to openness and exposure to the global economy and towards the adoption of economic norms based on those accepted in the advanced economies. It is of great importance that uncertainty in the political arena not be allowed to become uncertainty with regard to economic strategy in the broad meaning of the term. Clearly, Israel's economic strategy is not an end but a means to the very important objective of sustained growth. On the face of things it would seem that it is clear enough to everyone why that objective is so important, but it is worth focusing on one or two points in this regard. BIS Review 82/2005 1 
Continued growth is vital to enhance the welfare of Israel's citizens, to improve Israel's ability to attract immigration, including that from the advanced countries, to boost Israel's security, and to improve its ability to tackle its social problems, and in particular, to reduce poverty. This brings me to the second objective facing us. We must deal with social problems. This subject is important to all of us as human beings, and also as economists; after all, economics and society are two sides of the same coin. Responsible policy towards social issues is one which acts within the framework of the strategy described above, and which does not undermine it. It will be of little avail if we achieve economic growth long term and attain a European standard of living without attending to the social issues. But we cannot handle them properly without such growth, and would even quickly increase their severity. For example, one could deal with the question of social gaps by means of drastic hikes in taxes and transfer payments, but such a policy would also have a serious adverse effect on growth, and after a few years this would lead to a situation in which we would all be more equal, but also poorer. That is no way to attract immigration; on the contrary, it would boost emigration. And that is a position we do not want to be in. Before dealing with the social problems we should examine them realistically, as a sine qua non for formulating the appropriate policy. The problem of poverty is too complex to be viewed from only one aspect, and it must be analyzed from several aspects. For example, although here it is generally accepted to measure poverty in relative terms, and thus to consider the problem of poverty as a question of social gaps, we should be aware of other possibilities. To illustrate: poverty can be viewed in absolute terms, i.e., in such a way that the poverty line is determined in terms of the level of real income considered the minimum required to buy a certain basket of goods, such as food, clothing and housing. If we define the poverty line of 1997 as the level of income defining poverty in absolute terms, we would get the result that the rate of poverty, using this definition, hardly changed from 1997 to 2004, and actually went down a little. It declined until 2001, and rose somewhat thereafter. The Bank of Israel is engaged in this complex matter of measuring different aspects of poverty, and I hope that in the Bank's Annual Report for 2005, due to be published in the first quarter of 2006, we will be able to refer to the subject at greater depth, and that this will contribute to the public debate and to the formulation of policy on this issue. An aspect of poverty seen from another angle is the identification of the population that suffers most from poverty. We know that the highest incidence of poverty is in the ultra-orthodox ("haredi") and Arab sectors of the population, mainly because of the low participation rate of haredi men and Arab women in the labor force. According to an estimate we carried out, these sectors of the population account for more than 40 percent of the poverty in Israel. This is important for purposes of adapting policy instruments so that they are effective for these groups. Although specific steps for dealing with poverty are very important in the short run, there are other measures of equal importance for the medium and long terms, and these must not be forgone. One such is the attainment of continued growth as the basic solution to the problem of poverty. But that is not all. Another required step is a policy that will enable all Israel's citizens to realize their full potential. This would contribute to economic growth and help the more vulnerable to avoid falling into the poverty trap. In this context the following steps should be promoted: increasing the resources in the education budget allocated to the weaker strata in order to improve the ability of the next generation to achieve greater equality of opportunity; enhancing the government's system of professional retraining, with the focus on essential skills; encouragement of professional retraining by the business sector, for example by adapting the Encouragement of Capital Investment Law to focus on human capital; and extending the programs for providing adults with basic education. It is also important to promote policy measures to deal with the problem of poverty in the short term. Such a policy should be based on the principle of providing incentives for those capable of working, giving assistance to poor workers (in such a way that will encourage them to stay in the labor market), and providing relief for those unable to work, such as the handicapped and the elderly. The following are some examples of policy measures consistent with the above principles: the first is instituting a system of negative income tax. This is one step which the Bank of Israel supports, and which has featured in discussions held by the team headed by Yossi Bachar in which representatives of the Bank also participate. A second example is government participation in the costs connected with encouraging the weaker sections of the population to go out to work, for example, day care centers for 2 BIS Review 82/2005 
children, and transportation. A third example is establishing a legal and supervisory infrastructure that would encourage the institution of reverse mortgages, which would enable the elderly to obtain a monthly income flow from the apartment they own. The Bank of Israel has been engaged in the subject of poverty for a long time, and has published position papers, policy proposals and many research papers on it. I hope that as the government's economic advisor we will be able to contribute on this matter, in two main fields: the government's social policy, and no less important, in the public debate on social problems, which are both of the highest importance. And as they are so important, we must analyze them extremely carefully, and in particular must understand that the problem of poverty cannot be resolved in the medium and long terms without persisting on the need for continued economic growth. BIS Review 82/2005 3 
Davíð Oddsson: The Central Bank of Iceland’s commitment to price stability Speech by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a seminar organised by the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, Reykjavik, 5 December 2005. *      *      * On December 2, 2005 the Central Bank of Iceland raised its policy interest rate by 0.25 percentage points before last weekend. I do not expect that decision came as a surprise. Some people may well have read into what the Bank wrote in connection with the policy rate hike in September that the increase this time would be greater, by 0.50 or even 0.75 percentage points. No such decisions were embodied in those writings, although the Bank made a clear commitment that it takes its mandatory role seriously and would not flinch at following it with full force. Those declarations stand firm. Monetary Bulletin, which was published on the Central Bank’s website last Friday, includes a detailed account of the Bank’s assessment of economic and monetary developments and prospects, and the arguments underpinning its decision to raise the policy interest rate now. The scenario that we faced on September 27 has changed in several ways. Uncertainty about wage settlements has been dispelled, although admittedly at considerable cost. The consumer price index fell somewhat at the last measurement. House price inflation has slowed down and there are signs that a turning point has been reached. Credit institutions are now proceeding more cautiously in their lending to this sector and interest rate terms are changing. Oil prices seem to be stabilising, and in spite of mounting labour market pressures, wage drift has been contained. The Central Bank’s policy rate hike is beginning to spread through the economy; monetary policy is transmitted with an inherent lag in all cases, and this has even been exaggerated by Iceland’s unique economic conditions at present. The most important change in the wake of the September policy hike, however, was that indexed bond yields began to rise at last. It was vital for monetary policy to begin to have an effect in the parts of the economy which showed the clearest signs of overheating, i.e. soaring private consumption growth. Although all these points represent an interesting and positive development, on their own they do not justify changing the policy that the Central Bank has been pursuing. Substantial pressures still exist in the economy, demand is buoyant and there are undeniably sizeable imbalances. These factors must be seen in context. While recent information on the short-term outlook should obviously be observed, it is even more vital to look at indicators for longer-term developments.  In effect the Central Bank has no other option – like God’s mills, the Bank’s instruments grind slowly, but grind exceedingly well, if patience and foresightedness guide the way. The Central Bank has made no secret that the current strength of the króna is not sustainable in the long run. An important change this autumn and so far this winter has been large-scale issues of króna-denominated bonds in international markets. In particular, these issues are driven by the wide interest-rate differential between Iceland and other developed countries. The current Monetary Bulletin attempts to analyse the impact of these issues, including a separate article dedicated to this topic. Their impact can be positive. For example, it can lead to more efficient foreign exchange and securities markets in Iceland, thereby benefiting domestic economic developments. However, the issues can also – at least temporarily – create uncertainty about the transmission of monetary policy and even intensify its impact effect through the exchange rate channel. Such a pass-through hits export sectors hard, while doing little to subdue private consumption growth.  One standard assumption underlying the inflation forecast published in the current Monetary Bulletin is that the policy rate will remain unchanged from the day of forecast. On the basis of this scenario, the Board of Governors decided to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points. The Central Bank’s monetary policy over the medium term will need to ensure that the exchange rate adjustment which appears inevitable in the long run does not result in a higher rate of inflation than is compatible with the target. A tight monetary stance will be required to do so, for as long as capacity and labour market pressures pose inflationary threats. Furthermore, a sufficiently wide interest-rate differential with abroad must be maintained to contribute to a smooth exchange rate adjustment. The surge in house price inflation has reached a peak. If the króna remains relatively strong and stable, goods prices are also quite likely to fall. Thus the outlook is for a slowdown in the inflation rate in the coming months, not least because the depreciation of the króna this year has only been passed BIS Review 82/2005 1 
on to the domestic price level to a limited extent. If the housing market cools more quickly than the Central Bank forecasts, house price inflation is likely to slow down even more sharply than is currently expected. Foreseeable exchange rate developments, an ongoing surge in private consumption and greater-than-expected rises in unit labour costs, however, will outweigh these factors in the long run. The Central Bank has repeatedly cautioned against ideas that the inevitable difficulties accompanying a tight monetary policy can be avoided by abandoning the inflation target temporarily, or “letting inflation through”, as it has sometimes been called. This is an unrealistic option. Such a volte-face in Central Bank policy would immediately push up inflation expectations, fuel even higher wage increases and catalyse a depreciation of the króna and more inflation. Ultimately the policy rate would need to be raised by even more to bring inflation back down. Businesses and households would suffer more rather than less from such a policy. Nor should it be forgotten that a large share of household and business debt is either price-indexed or exchange rate-linked. Due to this distinctive feature of the Icelandic financial system, even the short-term benefits to households and business from a more accommodative monetary stance could prove to be minimal or even negative. However, a tight fiscal policy can contribute to a softer landing. Buoyant demand and soaring business profits have generated revenues for the Treasury this year far in excess of forecasts. A similar position could be on the cards in 2006. It is vital for both central and local government authorities to respond to this boost in revenues not by easing their restraint on the expenditure side, but rather by planning to achieve increased surpluses, which appears to be the aim behind the budget currently before Parliament. As announced recently, a change will be made to monetary policy implementation whereby interest decisions will be made on six fixed, preannounced dates next year. Three will coincide with the publication of Monetary Bulletin. On all these dates, the Board of Governors will announce its decision at a press conference, irrespective of whether the policy rate is changed or not, together with supporting arguments. This change will make monetary policy even more transparent. The Central Bank can thereby be said to have increased its formal interest rate decision dates from four to six, because the publication dates for Monetary Bulletin were already recognised as such in effect. Nonetheless, the Board of Governors can of course decide to change interest rates in between the preannounced dates if this is considered justified. The first formal interest rate decision date next year will be Thursday, January 26. Icelandic economic conditions at any given time broadly correspond to what is going on elsewhere in the world. However, occasional tasks can differ and call for specific measures. This is what we see from the Central Bank of Iceland’s policy rate at the moment. It is not reflected anywhere else. The explanation is that the picture in Iceland is unique, and maintaining a low and stable inflation rate in the current climate would widely be thought an ambitious aim.  First, the largest single investment programme in Iceland’s history is now under way, and Landsvirkjun and its foreign business partners are by no means the only investors planning major projects.  Second, we are simultaneously experiencing the largest-ever overseas expansion of the Icelandic banking system, which has accumulated foreign debt on an unprecedented scale with accompanying capital inflows.  Third, the Icelandic credit market has been sharply transformed, with an open invitation for everyone to join in.  Fourth, tax cuts have been implemented or announced for the coming months. And to add the icing to the cake, wage earners are compensated for the inflation caused by the broad rise in their house prices which has taken place at no cost to them.  This is the climate in which we aim to ensure that medium-term inflation will obey the principles set for it in the Central Bank Act and the joint declaration by the Central Bank and Government of Iceland. This must surely be considered an ambitious goal. Sizeable imbalances can be seen in the global economy. The massive US current account deficit is eating up a large share of total global saving at present. Managed exchange rates elsewhere, for example in China, delay markets in responding to this problem. Economists claim that a change is inevitable, and the later that it comes, the more upheaval it will cause when it eventually does. As far as Iceland is concerned, however, external conditions have been favourable so far. It enjoys high creditworthiness and wide open access to markets. Interest rates have been low and product prices high, making the strong position of the króna – which will not last forever – much easier than otherwise for many to weather. But we need to make 2 BIS Review 82/2005 
sure that favourable external conditions in most areas do not become a fundamental precondition for our own success.  In my opinion – after only a few weeks at the Central Bank of Iceland –one of the main reasons that its management is employed there is to pay particular attention to risks in the economy. I shall mention the following illustration. Of course it is perfectly normal for progressive and rapidly growing banks, which feel constrained by the small size of the Icelandic market, to be eager for foreign capital in their efforts to expand and reap profits. The financial system infrastructure and all the criteria assessed by supervisory authorities and ratings agencies are in excellent shape. All markets should therefore stand open to Icelandic banks for the foreseeable future. However. it is not necessarily certain that these important preconditions will be the only factors at work at any given time. They do so while market conditions are normal but markets can be volatile, especially in a climate of global economic imbalances. The US economy is very buoyant and dynamic at present. This is to be welcomed. However, other signs are less encouraging: a low level of saving, a wide fiscal deficit and a current account deficit that repeatedly hits record levels. Europe has still not recovered and the recent rise in the ECB minimum lending rate has been harshly criticised by those concerned about stagnation and growing unemployment. All these aspects of our environment call for normal caution to be exercised, not least against the background of such rapidly growing and increasingly prominent forays by Icelandic financial institutions in the international capital markets. Under such conditions we can endorse the comment by my colleague, the Governor of the Central Bank of Denmark, who said a few days ago that it was just as important to observe the speed limit in economic policy as on the roads.  Now I would like to allow myself a few words about housing issues. It is definitely easy to make a reasonable case that the Government could have considered the matter more carefully when it made radical changes to its housing policy at the onset of the upswing in 2003, and that it would have been more prudent to postpone them until the boom came to an end. (I presume people realise which Prime Minister this criticism is levelled at). But there are even stronger arguments for claiming that, in spite of the questionable timing, this represented a very positive reform to the housing system framework, which the Government can be proud of. However, the response by the banking system certainly caught the Government by surprise. As things have developed, this is now a secondary consideration. The banks’ response rendered the housing system in its old form virtually obsolete overnight, whether we like it or not. Mortgage interest rates are admittedly still high in Iceland. That is by no means the most interesting point in the current debate, however. Access to credit and finance terms for buying or building housing in Iceland have never been better. But it seems obvious that a large part of the banking system is probably subsidising its own mortgage lending at the moment. Of course this may be a deliberate risk taken in the faith that, since such lending is long-term, lenders will eventually reap handsome profits when interest rates move into line with those in other countries. Disregarding such speculation, the competitive position in the housing market is clearly untenable when one player enjoys the same credit rating as the sovereign, does not pay fees for its Treasury guarantees and is exempt from various charges levied upon its rivals. It is quite true that the credit institutions already knew this when they aggressively intensified their participation in the mortgage market. But as I said, this is a secondary consideration now and the task ahead must be to normalise these arrangements as soon as possible.  Ladies and Gentlemen: Since becoming Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I have now moved to a part of Icelandic society that attracts words of concern and caution from all directions. And I have a feeling that it is a sensible arrangement to assign such a role to a single body – but it must have the capability to assess the position and respond correctly. I hope that the Central Bank of Iceland is in such a position. It is certainly true that the Central Bank plays the same sort of role in an economic upswing as an air traffic controller, paying more attention to the landing than to the takeoff. But it is not true, as is sometimes implied, that the Bank does not care whether this landing will be a hard or a soft one.  BIS Review 82/2005 3 
Ardian Fullani: Microfinance in Albania Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Euro Mediterranean Conference on Micro Credit, Rome, 5-6 December 2005. *      *      * Distinguished participants! I’m glad to participate in the Euro Mediterranean Conference on Micro Credit, an important event associated with the announcement of the Year 2005 as the “International year of micro credit” by the United Nations.  Authorities of a country usually aim at achieving sustainable economic growth in a non-inflationary environment. Ideally, in a free market, capital will go to those opportunities that represent the most efficient and profitable investments. But, in a developing country, markets have several imperfections and issues and capital could easily be misallocated. It could go in those investment opportunities that provide high but risky quick returns and on other low efficiency ventures that are nearly safe. This behavior could however be problematic for future economic growth of the country. Many sectors of enormous long term growth potential can be left unexploited. This means that some areas of the economy will be booming, while other areas will be considerably lagging behind leading to a very unbalanced economic development. Also, various groups of population, particularly low income groups, will most probably be excluded from financing opportunities increasing the odds of becoming poorer. As a result, social problems and issues may arise such as: job losses, loose population movements and illegal establishments, etc, which will stretch public facilities to cope with this situation. Therefore, it is important to find ways, to ensure more balanced development opportunities to all sectors of the economy and groups of population. Albanian economy, by large relies, on micro-businesses. Nearly all enterprises in Albania fall into the category of small and medium enterprises SME-s. More than 90 percent of Albanian enterprises can be classified as small or medium-size according to our INSTAT data. The majority of these companies are engaged in trade and services, reflecting their micro business nature, and less in industry. As for employment, SME-s account for more than 40 % of total employment in the enterprise sector. There is a high concentration in the region of Tirana-Durres of private enterprises than other regions, while industry is concentrated mainly in Elbasan. This new private sector especially SME-s needs the financial support to grow. Until now banking sector has not been able to meet these needs. The situation is more problematic because SME-s do not have very developed financial sectors. Usually, these countries also have difficulties to access international financial markets. I don’t want you to get me wrong about the role of financial sector. Financial sector has made considerable steps in Albania. Today, our financial sector includes many banks and non-bank financial institutions, savings and loans associations and unions, insurance and reinsurance companies, pension funds. One should say though that the development of the financial sector institutions is more noticeable in the banking sector and the insurance sector. The banking system currently comprises 16 operating institutions, with total assets of around 53 per cent of the country’s GDP. The system is well capitalized and liquid. Its intermediation role is increasing. The lending activity although small (accounting for around 23 percent of total banking assets and around 12 percent of GDP), is strongly picking up.  Other financial institutions are trying hard to increase and modernize their activity. However, many problems primarily legal and property rights related which are outside financial sector are making it difficult for them to increase their credit lines. Microfinance has proved to be a more effective way to deal with these problems. With its inventive formulas it makes financial resources become accessible to small and medium businesses that account for most of aggregate production during these development stages. These resources are often used to finance small projects in areas like agriculture, livestock or services like handicraft, small food stores etc.  The first microfinance institutions in Albania, were set up in 1994 as development projects co-financed by the Albanian Government and the World Bank. 13 donors cooperate with the Albanian government in supporting the development of SME-s in Albania. From 1992 a large share of funds has been allocated in Albania as donation, but only a portion has been spent. Most of these funds has been BIS Review 88/2005 1 
given as soft loans for Albanian government. Aid represents around 30 % and only 5 % are direct commercial loans to co-finance the private investment. This sort of finance, called “Development Projects”, is mainly used to finance SME-s’ credit needs accompanied with technical assistance. The credit line funds are given from donors as soft loans and the government allocates them to banks to be used as commercial loans without harming the banking practice and the use of own bank capitals. As a consequence, a larger part of financial crediting sources is converted into commercial funds. Today, the microfinance institutions are operating as self sustained institutions with an increasing customer base. In the last 5-7 years several other institutions have been focusing on microfinance. Currently we have 133 individual savings and loans associations organized under 2 Unions, which operate in rural areas. The number of their members is around 18 thousand and the stock of their outstanding loans is around 12 million euro. In addition, we have 7 microfinance institutions with total assets amounting to 50 million euros, and loans of 43 million euros. Banks are also getting more active in microfinance despite their little interest so far. This can be explained with tightening competitive conditions in the market and the need to explore new investment opportunities. Now we see an increasing amount of credit going to small businesses, which often helps them in the initial stages. Banks are particularly active for the microfinance in the urban areas. In fact, one of the banks has initially started to operate as a microfinance institution. It still holds a respectful position in this market segment, particularly in the urban areas. Lending to microfinance sector now counts for more than 10 per cent of the whole lending portfolio of the banking system. The quality of the microfinance loans has been satisfactory. On average, the portfolio at risk is between 1.5-2 percent, according to their reports. This is not only because of their small size (usually under 1.5 thousand euros each), but also because of the diversity of the projects, ensuring diversification of the loan portfolio. One should also say that the experience gained by the microfinance institutions in this area, have also played an important role for this good quality. The legal framework on microfinance was completed in 1996, with the approval of a special law that defined the principles upon which such institutions could be found and operate. Such principles for the specialized institutions included free will, reciprocal cooperation, capitalization of the profit and reinvestment in the community etc.  Later developments made it necessary for the Law to change. Hence, a new Law “On Savings and Loans Associations and their Unions” was approved in Parliament on May of 2001. Several changes supported this new law. Besides the principles that were restated, the Law has defined the legal personality of the microfinance institutions, their permitted activities, the rights and the obligations of the members of the association, the managing structures of the associations and their functions, other important supervisory financial requirements and ratios, the role of the Unions and that of the Bank of Albania as the regulatory and the supervisory authority. Mandated with this role, the Bank of Albania has approved several regulations focusing on microfinance institutions and development. This regulatory framework, comprises the supervisory requirements to start and operate a Saving and Loan association, the indicators that enable their reporting and their financial analysis, and the principles based on which the on-site examination of such institutions occurs.   The regulation of the Bank of Albania “On licensing the Savings and Loans Associations and their Unions”, is the first document issued by the Bank of Albania in this area, representing a big step forward into the formalization of these institutions. It defines the documentation requirements for the license application, the deadlines and the authority that should grant the license. These requirements are directed to the single associations, to the Union, and to the Union member association. It has been recognized the role of representing Union proposed member associations in the licensing process, meant also as an important tool to induce single SLA to become Union members. The number of the Unions is certainly not limited. The other important regulation is that of “The Supervision of Savings and Loan Associations and their Unions”. In this regulation, the Bank of Albania has defined supervisory indicators for certain typologies of risk that are characteristic of current stage of development of the microfinance institutions in Albania. Counterparty risk is assessed through the requirements for a consistent process of loan portfolio analysis. These includes the ways the loans are classified, their provisioning requirements, their potential individual or group guarantees, the supervisory norms of the loan quality etc.. In addition, the counterparty risk is indirectly controlled by the requirements in capital adequacy of the institution. There are also other risks that are considered in the regulation, for which certain requirements have been defined. For the liquidity risk, there have been set up various norms for maintaining sufficient liquid assets and limiting the duration of the loans. For the concentration risk, the regulation requirements focus on the lending activity, and set out the norms for the net exposure in relation to the total assets of the institution. This regulatory framework is 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
meant to be actively orienting the activity of the microfinance institutions, and as such, will be revised as the developments may require. Besides these two regulations, the examinations manual of these institutions has been prepared. It is based on the CAMELS system we use for banks, and is aiming at assessing the adequacy of the internal policies and procedures, the quality of the management and the identification, assessment and monitoring of risks. The Accounting Manual is also prepared and is based on the national accounting standards, adjusted for the microfinance activity. We retain current regulatory framework, after some expected changes and approval, is adequately monitoring microfinance activity in Albania while not becoming an impediment for its development.  While acknowledging the role of the microfinance as an important tool for ensuring development opportunities to small businesses that otherwise may never access financial resources, one should keep in mind that microfinance is sound if it is provided by sound institutions. There is not much benefit if such institutions fail because of lenience of their internal rules and procedures, and/or because the supervisory authority has closed an eye on them because of their social role. This will also make other institutions become hesitant in engaging in microfinance.   The relationship between the microfinance institutions and the banking sector regarding their interaction in the economy financing, is a delicate issue. Their coexistence is certainly “peaceful” at the early development stage of at least one of these groups of institutions, but as the economy grows and competition increases, they tend to move toward each-other. At that stage, it is important to pay special attention for ensuring clear “rules of the game” for their activity and to provide adequate policies that allow for structural reforms of these institutions and of their market influence.  In conclusion, microfinance is a very important mean to achieve a balanced economic growth, by providing financial support to small and medium businesses which are vital for the medium and long term economic growth. Compared to some other countries in the region, microfinance in Albania have shown higher growth rates with good quality. However, there is ample room for enhancing it further. Maintaining a stable macroeconomic environment, and the improvement of the level for a better law and order, and land and property rights, fair competition, are very important factors that will improve business financing in Albania. As supervisory authority we will try hard for microfinance future growth to be sound. The credit bureau project that our bank is undertaking shortly is also expected to boost credit through ameliorating information problems. Thank you for your kind attention. BIS Review 88/2005 3 
Zdeněk Tůma: Monetary policy governance - comments on the institutional set-up of inflation targeting in Albania Speech by Mr Zdeněk Tůma, Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Bank of Albania Open Forum on "Preconditions for launching inflation targeting in Albania", Tirana, 1-2 December 2005. *      *      * Monetary policy is without any doubt one of the most powerful tools for macroeconomic management. While the theoretical background for target-setting is well established, the task of making practical arrangements for conducting policy in order to achieve targets in an efficient way is certainly a very difficult one. Designing a well-functioning system for decision making is thus at the very top of the agenda for any central bank striving to establish a sound monetary policy framework. It is therefore highly commendable that the Bank of Albania is addressing the related issues well in advance. Today, I would like to make several comments on the issues where I feel the Czech National Bank can pass on some observations and know-how based on its almost eight-year experience with decision making under an inflation targeting regime. The discussion about the proposed institutional set-up in Albania provokes a more general debate about the properties of the ‘ideal’ monetary policy decision-making system. Such a discussion of this general issue could reveal some practical implications for the Bank of Albania. Indeed, regardless of whether decisions are taken by a general Bank Board or a specialized Policy Committee, the ‘ideal’ system for decision-making should encompass the following basic properties: a) diversity of opinions  b) regularity c) separateness d) staff independence e) openness  f) dealing with uncertainty Diversity of opinions is a consequence of the basic lesson we have learnt from the history of monetary policy. Milton Friedman said in 1968: ‘The first and most important lesson that history teaches about what monetary policy can do – and it is a lesson of the most profound importance – is that monetary policy can prevent money itself from being a major source of economic disturbance’. This implies that relative smoothness in practical decision making seems to be desirable for any monetary policy practice. In this regard, international experience and experimental research1 have shown that decisions taken by a ‘decision-making body’ seem to be superior ex post to decisions taken by an individual, as the latter are more vulnerable to sudden changes in monetary policy stance. It is argued that a significant improvement in policy conduct can be associated with policy makers learning from each other’s decisions.  Regularity means not only that the decision-making body should meet on a regular basis, but in particular that the decision-making process should be taken in a standard framework and should be based on a standard set of policy documents. All the more, ad hoc policy meetings based on ad hoc policy documents should be minimized. This not only helps the central bank in its communication with the public, but also helps the decision-making body to maintain internal discipline. Separateness emphasizes that special attention should be paid to monetary policy in the central bank’s agenda. In order to avoid any attempt to displace the policy agenda by any other ‘extremely                                                       1  For further details see Lombardelli, Proudman and Talbot’s article ‘Committees Versus Individuals: An Experimental Analysis of Monetary Policy Decision Making’, published in International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 1, No. 1, May 2005. BIS Review 88/2005 1 
important’ issue, separate meetings should be established for policy discussions. Indeed, a policy decision is worth a special ‘policy day’, split into:  (i) a staff presentation, when staff present the outcome of their analysis (based on a standard set of policy documents)  (ii) a discussion of the analysis (iii) the policy decision  (iv) communication of the decision to the public Staff independence should protect the members of the decision-making body from the filtering of undesirable information which can occur whenever a particular decision maker directly manages the ‘Economic Department’. Although such behaviour is, with high probability, not intentional, this member can influence the interpretation of the ‘staff’ analysis in a way convenient to his own opinions. It could happen that the rest of the decision-making body members receive a biased analysis. Moving the role of ‘Chief Economist’ towards the director of the ‘Economic Department’, and letting him be more independent of any particular body member (making him responsible to the decision-making body as a whole), can help to solve this problem of information filtering. Openness is a consequence of ‘staff independence’. Allowing staff to be more independent at the same time requires the decision-making body members to take an active approach towards the analysis produced by the staff. Since a perfect understanding of the message contained in the ‘policy documents’ is a prerequisite for proper policy conduct, interaction between the decision-making body members and the staff should be assured at different levels.  And finally, a need to deal with uncertainty properly arises as a consequence of the uncertainty surrounding monetary policy practice. Therefore, it is highly desirable to discuss the implied risks at different levels: (i) First, the risks should be discussed by the staff. (ii) Second, an evaluation of the risks should be performed interactively by the decision-making body members and the staff (alternative scenarios can be produced on the basis of these discussions).  (iii) Third, the risk and the alternative scenarios should be discussed by the decision-making body members during the policy meeting. It is clear that all the above-mentioned properties can be satisfied when either a Bank Board or a Policy Committee are making the decisions. Over the years it has been proven that both systems can work well. On the one hand, a Policy Committee automatically encompasses the property of separateness and the full devotion of its members towards monetary policy. On the other hand, Bank Board members are probably identified more closely with the institution and offer a more diversified view of policy conduct. Indeed, it is really difficult to distinguish which system is superior; the prevailing solutions are determined by tradition and other local conditions.  Nevertheless, what is, in fact, of critical importance is the legal framework that is used as the background for the decision making. The decision-making body’s mandate should arise directly from the central bank law, or even the constitution, and should be sufficiently ‘clear’. Any internal agreement shifting policy responsibility towards somebody who is not explicitly referred to in the central bank law, and thus assumed to be policy responsible, could be highly vulnerable and unstable. This could become apparent as soon as a period of tough decisions arrives. The implications of all this can be split in two groups. The first group covers a rather general implication that can be summarized as: the policy decision-making role should be performed by a body that is well defined in the central bank law. In addition, regardless of whether the decision-making body is a Bank Board or a Policy Committee, it should fulfil the properties of diversity of opinions, regularity, separateness, staff independence, openness, and dealing with uncertainty. The second group of implications then offers more a practical view which can be summarized as follows: a) the ‘policy decision-making’ body should have a strong background in law, b)  the meeting devoted to monetary policy should not deal with any other issue, c)  the forecast and economic analysis should be submitted by the staff so as to constrain ‘information filtering’, d)  the decision makers should interact with the staff. 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
Y V Reddy: Corporate governance in banks in India Luncheon address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Seminar on Corporate Governance for Bank Directors organised by the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore; International Institute of Finance, Washington and the Indian Banks’ Association, Mumbai, 16 December 2005. *      *      * Friends,  I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to give a luncheon address. There are several reasons why I was compelled to accept the responsibility. First, the eminence of the presentors, namely Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, International Institute of Finance and Indian Banks’ Association. Second, the persuasive skills of Mr. Sinor who brings to bear the persona of the whole banking community on any subject. Third, growing importance being accorded to governance in banks by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in recent years. This is a program addressed to Bank Directors of Indian banks and RBI would like to be seen to be supportive of efforts to equip the Directors of banks to address the commercial-cum-governance issues in general and fulfil the fiduciary responsibilities implicit in being on the boards of banks, in particular. Since many substantive aspects of the subject are being addressed by highly qualified professionals, I will initially make a few general observations on the subject but will devote the rest to an enumeration of the Reserve Bank’s recent initiatives and some thoughts on way forward. General observations As you are aware, corporate governance, as a subject of significance for both public policy and markets, is of recent origin. It is useful to recognise that it is a dynamic concept, in terms of scope, thrust and relevance. For example, the issue is approached very differently today compared to original view of the Cadbury Committee on the subject. East-Asian crisis gave a new dimension to corporate governance in the context of financial stability. In U.S.A., the regulatory regimes, post-corporate scandals, are very different from those of the early 90’s. The OECD set out its corporate governance principles in 1999 but revised them in 2004. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (under the aegis of the BIS) published guidelines on corporate governance in banks in 1999. As an update, in July 2005, the Basel Committee has issued a Consultative Document on enhancing corporate governance for banking organisations, seeking comments by end October 2005. I would advise that this document for now and the final document when released by BIS, should be a compulsory reading for all the regulators concerned and all the directors on the boards of the banks. The point to be noted is that corporate governance should be viewed as an ongoing process subject to rapid changes based on experiences, developments and policy-setting.  There is considerable divergence in the understanding and practice of corporate governance in general, and in respect of banks, in particular, but there is also an increasing tendency towards convergence. The cultural context may be difficult to capture but the legal, institutional and attitudinal contexts do vary perceptibly across countries. Differences can be noticed even amongst the industrialised countries – say between Anglo-Saxon, European and Japanese situations. At the same time, the trend towards greater convergence is for several reasons. The corporates are getting listed in multiple stock exchanges in different countries and carry out corporate operations in several jurisdictions while the cross-border financial flows seek an assurance of some commonly understood standards of governance, which have a mutually reinforcing tendency. Banks, in particular, have been a subject of special interest for governance, especially in view of their fiduciary role. The cross-border operations of banks provide an added impetus for convergence in such standards.  Public policy framework in regard to corporate governance typically involves multiplicity of agencies in all countries. For instance, in India, these are Department of Company Affairs; Securities and Exchange Board of India in respect of listed entities apart from the banking regulator in respect of banks. Harmonising their policies in a dynamic setting is a daunting task for policy makers and adds to the complexities of the corporates or banks concerned to ensure compliance.  In regard to sectors such as banking in India where ownership of government is dominant, there are additional issues. Government, as an owner, is accountable to political institutions in terms of broader BIS Review 88/2005 1 
socio-economic objectives and hence, its goals may not necessarily be compatible with purely economic incentives. Mixed ownership, with the government as a major shareholder, brings into sharper focus the possible divergent objectives of share-ownership in a corporate or a bank and issues relating to the rights of minority shareholders. The problem gets more complex if public ownership is exercised through separate legislation and not under the Company Law, normally applicable to other competing entities. The role of directors in such divergent organisational settings, therefore, needs a nuanced appreciation.  Let me end these general observations with an anecdote. When I was working in the World Bank in late 1970s, I joined the George Washington University for getting a taste of education in a foreign university. I took a course in management services. The Professor emphasised various aspects of organisational behaviour. I found that the best interest of the organisation that one serves was missing in the analysis. When I queried, he said: “it is your boss who interprets to you, what is good for the organisation”. When I persisted, he added, “we deal with the corporate behaviour in the context of north American male in the U.S.A.” I must confess that I continue to be old-fashioned. Any institution has, and in any case, should have a character, culture and interest that are worth pursuing even if they appear to be at variance from the sum of the interests of the individual, or the minority or the majority stakeholders. I will leave this thought of viewing corporate governance in broader terms extending beyond its immediate constituent stakeholders on the few occasions when a divergence in interests might arise. With this, let me move on to what we have been doing in RBI on this subject.  Reserve Bank’s approach  The formal policy announcement in regard to corporate governance was first made by my distinguished predecessor, Dr. Bimal Jalan in the Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy on October 21, 2001. Pursuant to this announcement, a Consultative Group was constituted in November 2001 under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.S. Ganguly: basically, with a view to strengthen the internal supervisory role of the Boards. An Advisory Group on Corporate Governance under the chairmanship of Dr. R.H. Patil had earlier submitted its report in March 2001 which examined the issues relating to corporate governance in banks in India including the public sector banks and made recommendations to bring the governance standards in India on par with the best international standards.  There were also some relevant observations by the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision under the chairmanship, Shri M.S. Verma which submitted its report in January 2003. Keeping all these recommendations in view and the cross-country experience, the Reserve Bank initiated several measures to strengthen the corporate governance in the Indian banking sector.  In June 2002, the report of the Ganguly Group was transmitted to all the banks for their consideration while simultaneously transmitting it to the Government of India for appropriate consideration.  It may be noted here that there is a basic difference between the private sector banks and public sector banks as far as the Reserve Bank’s role in governance matters relevant to banking is concerned.  The current regulatory framework ensures, by and large, uniform treatment of private and public sector banks by the Reserve Bank in so far as prudential aspects are concerned. However, some of the governance aspects of public sector banks, though they have a bearing on prudential aspects, are exempt from applicability of the relevant provisions of the B.R. Act, as they are governed by the respective legislations under which various public sector banks were set up. In brief, therefore, the approach of RBI has been to ensure, to the extent possible, uniform treatment of the public sector and the private sector banks in regard to prudential regulations.  In regard to governance aspects relevant to banking, the Reserve Bank prescribes its policy framework for the private sector banks while suggesting to the Government the same framework for adoption, as appropriate, consistent with the legal and policy imperatives.  As a follow-up of the Ganguly Committee report, in Mid-Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy in November 2003, the concept of ‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of banks was formally enunciated, and it included the process of collecting information, exercising due diligence and constitution of a Nomination Committee of the board to scrutinise the declarations made by the bank directors.  In this regard, it will be useful to refer to the RBI guidelines on ownership and governance in the private sector banks released recently.  It is heartening to note that based on the guidelines issued by RBI, all the banks in the private sector have carried out, through their nomination committees, the exercise of due diligence in respect of the directors on their Boards.  In some cases, where the track record of the directors was not considered 2 BIS Review 88/2005 
satisfactory, the directors vacated their positions. In regard to some others, there is an on-going process to ensure ‘fit and proper’ status of the directors.  In this regard, it may be useful to distinguish the issue of the composition of the Board from the ‘fit and proper’ status of individual non-executive directors and chief executives.  The first relates to collective expertise on the Board available to meet the competitive challenges before the bank to ensure commercial activity while maintaining soundness. The existing legal provisions in regard to banks stipulate specific areas of background that a director should be drawn from such as accountancy, banking, economics, finance, agriculture, etc., but do not specify the extent or degree of professionalism or expertise required in regard to that area.  Hence, it is left to the good faith of the shareholders to elect directors from the various specified areas with qualifications and experience that is appropriate to the bank. In regard to public sector banks, such good faith is expected when directors are nominated by government.  However, when the issue of ‘fit and proper’ status of non-executive directors comes up, the norms only seek to ensure that the candidate should not have come to the adverse notice of the law and regulations or any professional body so that there is no objection from the RBI. In the case of non-executive directors not satisfying the ‘fit and proper’ criteria, there is a prescribed due process to be followed by the RBI to disqualify such directors, which includes opportunities to be heard. The position in regard to the CEOs of the private sector banks is on a different footing where the Reserve Bank is in a position to exercise its judgement on the suitability of the candidates proposed, in as much as the approval of the Reserve Bank is required for the appointment and the RBI may seek removal also. These provisions are broadly consistent with global best practices though there is scope for enhancing effective implementation.  There is no legal provision as of now for the Reserve Bank to insist on the ‘fit and proper’ status of the directors nominated by the government or elected by the shareholders to the Boards of the public sector banks. The appointment of the CEOs in the public sector banks, as well as their removal, is also a matter to be decided only by the Government of India. There is, however, active consultation with the Reserve Bank in regard to appointment of CEOs. Thus, by and large, there is de facto compliance with many governance requirements in public sector banks. .  Way forward  As a step towards distancing the regulator from the functioning of the Boards, the Reserve Bank has withdrawn its nominee directors from almost all the private sector banks. Observers have been appointed as a transitional measures mostly in respect of those banks which are yet to fully comply with the Reserve Bank’s guidelines of ownership of governance.  It is hoped that the need for observers also will diminish as the quality of governance improves.  Second, legislative amendments have been proposed in regard to the public sector banks to remove the provisions for mandatory nomination of RBI officers on their boards and thus, to bring them on par with the private sector banks in this regard.  Third, the Government has been requested to keep in view the policy framework for governance in private sector banks while deciding on the appointments of the directors on the Boards’ of public sector banks and constitution of various committees of the Board.  Fourth, the RBI, as far as possible, has recently been refraining from issuing circulars or instructions specifically addressed to the public sector banks.  It is expected that all the existing instructions specifically applicable to the public sector banks will be reviewed by the Reserve Bank so that uniformity in regulatory framework between different categories of banks is formally established.  Fifth, several amendments to the Banking Regulation Act have been proposed which would enhance RBI’s capacity to ensure sound governance specially relevant to the banks, consistent with global best practices.  In regard to urban co-operative banks (UCBs), there are unique problems which need to be addressed. Since all the governance aspects of urban co-operative banks fall entirely within the jurisdiction of the State Governments, while only prudential aspects are in the RBI’s domain, it has been difficult to ensure effective co-ordination owing to the problems of dual control in the matters of governance which have a bearing on prudential regulation. Further, the market discipline in terms of shareholders’ influence on governance does not exist in regard to urban co-operative banks since they do not depend on equity markets for their funds. Moreover, the governance structure in the UCBs BIS Review 88/2005 3 
seems to be tilted in favour of the borrowers from the UCBs, thus, possibly undermining the interest of the depositors. Currently, to avoid problems of dual control, a mechanism of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the State Governments, is being attempted. RBI has entered into such MoUs with Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnataka and is providing facilities for upgrading the skills of the members of the Board and the management of the UCBs, in these States.  The problem of dual control is even more acute in regard to the rural co-operative credit structure.  However, these are being currently addressed by the Government of India in the light of the recommendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee.  The RRBs are yet another category of banks which are actually owned, in a pre-determined pattern, by the State, Centre and the sponsor banks.  The sponsor banks are virtually managing the RRBs and the issues of governance of these institutions are yet to be addressed. Deposit taking NBFCs and, perhaps, NBFCs with systemic implications may also need to be considered for a careful review of their current governance practices in view of their unique role and expanding importance in our financial sector.  Conclusion  Let me conclude with a reiteration that the Reserve Bank is continuously striving to ensure compliance with international standards and best practices of corporate governance in banks as relevant to India. RBI is also interacting closely with the Government and the SEBI in this regard. Increasing regulatory comfort in regard to standards of governance in banks gives greater confidence to shift from external regulation to internal systems of controls and risk-management. Each of the directors of the banks has a role in continually enhancing the standards of governance in banks through a combination of appropriate knowledge and values. Thank you. 4 BIS Review 88/2005 
Toshihiko Fukui: Overview of the Japanese economy Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Nagoya, 8 December 2005.  *      *      * Introduction  I understand that this has been a very active and full year here in the Chubu region with the opening of Central Japan International Airport (Centrair) and the success of Expo 2005 Aichi Japan. The Japanese economy has also been recovering its vibrancy, as if absorbing the dynamism of your region. I attended the meeting of the G-7 countries in London last week. The G-7 countries shared the view that overall global economic growth remained and should continue to be solid although there were risk factors such as high crude oil prices and increasing inflationary pressures. In my remarks today, I will present the Bank's view regarding recent economic and financial developments, and explain our thinking on the conduct of monetary policy.  The current state of Japan's economy and the outlook  Japan's economy continues to recover, having emerged from the temporary pause that began in the second half of 2004. The economy is likely to experience a sustained period of expansion at a pace slightly above its potential. The Bank released the October Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report) about a month ago. This Outlook Report projects that such economic growth will continue during the rest of fiscal 2005 and through fiscal 2006.  In addition to the continued expansion of overseas economies, another major factor behind the ongoing recovery is that the corporate sector has essentially completed its adjustments of the "three excesses," namely, production capacity, employment, and debt. In relation to the financial system, it may also be noted that financial institutions have now mostly overcome the nonperforming-loan (NPL) problem and recovered their management stability.  In the corporate sector, corporate profits have increased for three consecutive years since fiscal 2002, and this trend is continuing during fiscal 2005 with the ratio of profits to sales primarily at large firms surpassing the levels recorded during the bubble era. The semiannual book closings for the first half of fiscal 2005 indicated that high profits were being maintained across a wide range of industries. As a background to the favorable corporate profits over the past three to four years, firms have reduced the "three excesses," and this has been effective in greatly lowering break-even points. Amid these developments, the global economic growth rate accelerated through 2003-04, and domestic private demand has been firmer than predicted in fiscal 2005, pushing up sales and strongly supporting the recent improvement in profits.  Domestic private demand has been firmer than expected because while business fixed investment has increased against the background of high corporate profits, strong corporate performance is positively influencing the household sector via increases in wages and employment, as well as increases in dividends and stock prices. According to the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), large and small firms believe that they are presently facing their greatest personnel shortages in 13 and eight years, respectively. Under these conditions, the number of part-time employees peaked in early fiscal 2005 and the number of full-time employees is growing. Turning to wages per worker, regular payments have been rising, mostly because of increases in wages for full-time employees, and special payments have also been increasing against the background of high corporate profits. According to surveys by private institutions, winter bonuses at large firms for 2005 will increase at a high rate, surpassing the rise in summer bonuses. Consequently, household income continues to rise gradually. Moreover, the dividend income received by households is growing year by year, with the percentage of dividend income against interest income rising from about 40 percent to about 80 percent over the past three to four years. Amid this improvement in the employment and income situation, consumer confidence is generally good and private consumption has been steady.  In this manner, a virtuous cycle has begun whereby favorable corporate profits are leading to stronger business fixed investment and spreading to the household sector in various ways, increasing household expenditures and feeding back to the corporate sector via the growth in private BIS Review 87/2005 1 
consumption. The economy is thus unlikely to fall into a recession due to domestic factors for the time being.  Also, as I have mentioned, the financial system has been improving significantly. The percentages of NPLs at financial institutions have declined greatly since they peaked at the end of fiscal 2001, and banks posted record-high profits in their semiannual book closings at the end of September 2005, surpassing those achieved during the bubble era. Bank lending (amount outstanding, after adjusting for the liquidation of loans and loan write-offs), which had long maintained negative growth, began to rise year on year from August 2005. While the corporate sector as a whole continues to repay debt, repayment pressures are gradually easing, and amid the continuing recovery in business conditions some firms are moving ahead with their external funding activities, taking advantage of the accommodative financial environment. Additionally, land price adjustments have advanced, especially in major cities, and the increase in housing-related investment, among others, is another factor contributing to the rise in bank lending.  Future risk factors  Of course, there are certain risk factors for the economic outlook. The Bank is paying particular attention to the rise in crude oil prices and the developments in overseas economies. Crude oil prices marked a record high around the end of August 2005 (about 70 U.S. dollars/barrel for WTI crude oil) following the hurricane damage in the United States, and have softened somewhat recently, but remain at a rather high level. The rises in crude oil prices in recent years are largely attributable to increased global demand, reflecting developments such as high growth in emerging economies. Therefore, high crude oil prices may be compatible with the expansion of the global economy if both oil-producing countries and oil-consuming countries take adequate actions to deal with increased demand. Nevertheless, as demonstrated by the rapid increase in crude oil prices with the U.S. hurricane damage through the end of August, there is some risk that crude oil prices may shoot up to a level that is not compatible with the demand increase accompanying the expansion of the global economy when there is a keen awareness that refining capacity and other supply constraints are intensifying. If that risk manifests in the future, it may influence the global economy and the economy of Japan by further decreasing the real purchasing power of the non-oil-producing countries and by the full-scale emergence of global inflationary concerns.  As for overseas economies, price stability is being maintained in the United States as the Federal Reserve has raised interest rates to prevent the emergence of inflationary pressures while crude oil prices remain at a high level. In Europe and Asia, concern is shifting toward the risks on the inflationary side. The European Central Bank raised interest rates at the beginning of December 2005. The maintenance of an accommodative financial environment under price stability forms part of the background to the expansion of overseas economies in recent years, and a future loss of price stability could change this structure and exert a negative influence on the growth of the global economy. While I mentioned before that the Japanese economy is unlikely to fall into a recession due to domestic factors, we must note that an unexpected slowdown in overseas economies or other large external shocks could decelerate economic growth in Japan.  Price conditions and the outlook  Turning to price conditions, domestic corporate goods prices are currently rising at a pace slightly below 2 percent year on year, reflecting the increase in crude oil and other international commodity prices and the depreciation of the yen. While the rate of increase is likely to ease, corporate goods prices are projected to continue rising with strong upward pressure.  The consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) had been moving slightly below the previous year's levels, but posted a zero percent rise from 2004 in the recently released figures for October 2005. The CPI figures for January through March 2006 are expected to show relatively clear positive year-on-year increases. This is affected by the factors that the negative contribution from lower rice prices has dissipated and the influence from electricity and telephone charge reductions is weakening. In addition, it is affected by the factors that the decline in unit labor costs is shrinking under rising wages, and the gap between supply and demand is narrowing in the Japanese economy as a whole, as indicated by the perceptions of a labor shortage in the Tankan. The year-on-year changes are expected to remain positive thereafter as Japan's economic growth is 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
projected to exceed the potential growth rate. Surveys on price developments also indicated that expectations of prices were being revised upward.  Financial market developments  Against this background of a positive turn in the outlook for economic activity and prices, net purchases of Japanese stocks by foreign investors have been posting record highs, stock prices have risen substantially, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average recovered the 15,000 yen level at the beginning of December 2005, the highest level in about five years. Meanwhile, the yen has depreciated further in the foreign exchange market, falling to 121 yen to the U.S. dollar in early December and continuing its declining trend against the euro and Asian currencies. It is said that the recent depreciation of the yen reflects market participants' view on differentials between Japanese and foreign interest rates, given the greater awareness of inflation risk abroad and heightened expectations of higher interest rates. The influence on the economic activity and prices from these financial market developments including the rise in stock prices continues to warrant careful monitoring.  The Bank's conduct of monetary policy  The Bank has been maintaining the quantitative easing policy since March 2001. The two pillars of the quantitative easing policy are: the Bank's provision of ample liquidity to the money market so that the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank substantially exceeds the amount of required reserves of about 6 trillion yen; and the Bank's commitment to continue with this provision of ample liquidity until the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. This commitment is unprecedented as central bank monetary policy, but stipulating the conditions beforehand has made it possible for market participants to act based on the commitment and that has contributed to boosting the transparency and effectiveness of monetary policy.  Reviewing the subsequent policy effects, when there were strong concerns about financial system stability, the provision of ample liquidity by the Bank, which met financial institutions' liquidity demand, stabilized financial markets and maintained accommodative financial conditions, and contributed to averting a contraction in economic activity. In financial markets, the Bank's provision of ample liquidity pushed short-term interest rates down to practically zero percent. Longer-term interest rates have remained stably at low levels, because the commitment by the Bank has led the market to expect that the short-term interest rates will remain at zero percent when prices continue to decline.  Now that concerns about financial system stability have subsided substantially and prices are beginning to rise, the commitment is losing its influence on the formation of longer-term interest rates. Thus, the effects of the quantitative easing policy are coinciding with the effects of short-term interest rates being at practically zero percent.  After the quantitative easing policy is maintained in accordance with the commitment, future monetary policy will follow the path of the processes of "reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts toward a level in line with required reserves," "maintaining very low interest rates," and "gradually adjusting interest rates to a level consistent with economic activity and price developments."  In explicating these processes in somewhat greater detail, with respect to the timing for changing the quantitative easing policy framework, the Bank will judge whether the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis in accordance with the commitment. Assuming that developments follow the projection described in the Outlook Report, the possibility of meeting the conditions of the commitment and of departing from the present monetary policy framework is likely to increase over the course of fiscal 2006.  In reducing the outstanding balance of current accounts, the Bank will need to monitor financial market conditions carefully, because the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank has been exceeding substantially the amount of required reserves for a long period of time.  Up to this point, the outstanding balance of current accounts, substantially above the level of required reserves, has kept very short-term interest rates practically at zero percent, with some minor fluctuations if any. Considering that the effects of the quantitative easing policy are coinciding with the effects of short-term interest rates being at practically zero percent, a change of the policy framework itself does not imply any major change in the policy effect. If the trend toward positive year-on-year BIS Review 87/2005 3 
growth in the CPI becomes firmly established, real short-term interest rates will effectively decline, providing powerful stimulus to economic activity and prices.  The level and the time-path of interest rates under the subsequent two processes will certainly depend on economic activity and price developments. If it is judged that upward pressure on prices continues to be contained and the economy follows a sustainable and balanced growth path, this is likely to give the Bank latitude in conducting monetary policy.  The Bank conducts monetary policy to realize the sustainable growth of the Japanese economy under price stability. At present, the economic recovery is continuing and the environment influencing prices is beginning to change. If the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis, that will mark a sort of milestone toward realizing such a goal. The Bank will continue to conduct monetary policy appropriately in accordance with the changes in economic and price conditions to provide support from the financial side for the good performance of the Japanese economy over the long term.  Appropriate monetary policy is also important from the perspective of financial market stability. For example, long-term interest rates have remained stable in the United States in part because of market confidence that the appropriate conduct of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve will maintain price stability into the future. In Japan as well, as noted in the Outlook Report, together with the maintenance of appropriate monetary policy, the Bank's explanation of its thinking on the conduct of monetary policy in detail will contribute to smooth formation of prices in financial markets.  Closing remarks  Chubu is a region that has taken advantage of its manufacturing strengths, vigorously developed private-sector business activities, and pulled the Japanese economy forward. Such originality and inventiveness based on private-sector initiatives will be of the utmost importance for the Japanese economy to realize sustainable growth. In that sense, I look forward to the further remarkable development of the Chubu region. 4 BIS Review 87/2005 
Wu Xiaoling: Speeding up financial innovation and promoting development of the small and medium-sized enterprises Speech by Ms Wu Xiaoling, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High Level Seminar on Development and Investment of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) in East Asia, Beijing, 27 October 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen: I am very pleased to attend the first High Level Seminar on Development and Investment of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) in East Asia. The rise of SMEs has not only become an important force behind the rapid, sustainable and sound development of the economy, but also played an active role in structural adjustment and job creation. Hence, governments have attached increasing importance to the development of SMEs. In recent years, the financial sector of China has taken concrete measures in accordance with the Act on Promoting Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and other policies of the state. Progress has been made in providing quality financial services for SMEs. According to the survey launched by the PBC, loans to SMEs have accounted for more than 50% in total credit assets in the past few years, roughly equivalent to the contribution of SMEs to GDP. Nevertheless, it remains hard for many SMEs to obtain financing and many entities expect to improve the management of loans to SMEs. I would like to touch upon three issues on this occasion: I. Strengthen credit management and foster growth of customers Most SMEs have incomplete corporate governance, loose management, and lack of transparency in accounting information, resulting in difficulty in obtaining financing. It is not difficult to discover that SMEs at various stages differ in financing needs and channels. SMEs at starting stage face high uncertainties in production and operation. They have little capacity to provide collateral, nor do they have credit record and transparent information. Hence, it is difficult for commercial banks to accurately judge the yield and risk of the potential loans, thus impeding the lending. As a result, these SMEs mainly rely on internal financing, limited direct financing and private borrowing to raise funds. Some high-tech SMEs also get money from venture capital. SMEs at growing period gradually foster some capacity to provide collateral and accumulate credit records as they expand their business over time. Their internal information and relationship with commercial banks become increasingly transparent. Usually these SMEs are eager to expand and strongly need credit. However, given their incomplete internal management and financial operation, it remains hard for them to meet the credit examination criteria and obtain credit. Mature SMEs face declined uncertainty in their operations. With sufficient credit records and relatively transparent information, creditors and investors are in a better position to grasp internal information of these SMEs, and the SMEs have the capacity to provide sufficient collateral. In this context, these enterprises usually are quality customers that financial institutions compete for. Their loans would grow rapidly. The most successful SMEs may become large enterprises, thus being able to access direct financing. These enterprises may raise funds by issuing bonds or stock shares, thus facing little constraints in obtaining financing. SMEs are a big group of customers. To differentiate among SMEs and corresponding financing channels could actually enhance the allocation of social resources. The central bank shall provide credit guidance for commercial banks from a more macro perspective. In this process, commercial banks shall strengthen loan management, enhance its efficiency, and discover and foster potential customers. With the rapid development of the financial market, the direct financing channel of large enterprises would be further explored, and its share increased. Commercial banks will face challenge in terms of their customer structure. Hence, it is urgent for commercial banks to discover and foster stable customers from the bunch of SMEs. BIS Review 87/2005 1 
Credit market and capital market mainly differ in the fact that there is a one-to-one negotiation between commercial banks and their customers. Hence, commercial banks are in a better position to get management information, make judgment on risks and price the loans. Therefore, commercial banks can tailor their products for SMEs according to their financing needs at various stages. Meanwhile, commercial banks shall have a long vision to explore the potential of customers and help SMEs quickly transit from starting stage towards mature stage. II. Appropriately price lending risks with SMEs Lending rate is actually the price of credit products. The pricing of credit products mainly includes cost of capital and risk premium. The pricing capacity of Chinese financial institutions is generally weak. One reason is that there have been many administrative restrictions where many prices were determined by the government. Financial institutions had no pricing power and no experience to autonomously determine the price. Moreover, financial institutions had no incentive to make autonomous pricing duce to the institutional weaknesses. Chronically, there has been a perception that we shall provide preferential interest rate for the industries and areas we would support. In general, banks’ lending to large customers is like wholesale business and that to SMEs is retail. Loans to SMEs are usually featured by small amount, many batches and sophisticated procedures. According to a survey, the administrative cost of SME loans is on average 5 times that of large enterprises. If there is too strict restriction on lending rate, banks may have little incentive to conduct feasibility assessment for SME projects. As a result SMEs will have limited access to bank loans and thus face more severe situation. Hence, we shall change the traditional way of thinking and encourage commercial banks to price the risk associated with SME loans so that they can explore new source of profits. Of course, it might to some extent increase interest expense of SMEs. Nevertheless, it is less important compared with the increased access of SMEs to loans. In particular, some high-tech and high-risk enterprises and private enterprises will benefit. Since the People’s Bank of China removed the ceiling on lending rates on October 28, 2004, we have observed that some banks began to utilize the new policy to foster their risk pricing capacity. Of course, the government and social intermediaries can help SMEs reduce risk and financing cost through risk sharing and compensating measures. On the one hand, guarantee institutions shall be supported through such market operations as recapitalization and improved risk control mechanism. On the other hand, local governments can diversify the systemic risks associated with guarantee for SME loans through direct guarantee or re-guarantee. With risk of SME loans shared, they will be subject to less risk premium and lower lending rate. III.  Reform of credit system management with respect to SMEs Credit system management involves banks’ credit management, risk control, asset disposal and supervisory mechanism. In recent years, with the deepening of China’s financial reform, banking sector has been increasingly aware of credit risk, leading to centralization of credit approval power and opposition of SMEs. On the one hand, local branches of commercial banks have less power to approve credit and most loan requests had to be reported to branches of provincial level or even the headquarter. As a result, it takes a long time and sophisticated procedure to process loan application, making it hard to meet the financing needs of local SMEs. On the other hand, local branches of commercial banks in the lagged areas have become ‘savings bank’, which transfer the savings to developed areas that need large amount of money. The savings bank thus could earn spreads, while the local enterprises could not obtain credit. Frankly speaking, the centralized management pattern is in line with the development trend of international banking industry. However, it needs to be adjusted to meet the needs of SMEs. The current credit management has two problems. First, a large commercial bank is a single legal entity, making it hard to provide frequent short-term loans to SMEs in a swift manner. Second, credit rating method for SMEs is significantly different from that of large ones. The current credit risk rating system adopted by commercial banks does not accommodate the operations and accounting information disclosure patterns of SMEs. Given the long processing procedures of large banks, the People’s Bank of China has been actively promoting the institutional innovation of joint-stock banks and the establishment of community banks so that they can build up close relationship with local SMEs and provide sound financial services for 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
them by simplifying processing procedures. Meanwhile, commercial banks are encouraged to improve credit management and develop new products oriented towards SMEs including loan approval, credit rating, collateral, guarantee, pricing and loan management. The China Banking Regulatory Commission has promulgated the Guidance on Bank Loans to SMEs and commercial banks are making efforts to probe the way. To support SMEs is not only in line with the needs of the macroeconomic development, but also an important channel for financial sector to explore new source of profits, adjust credit structure and diversify credit risk. In the period ahead, we will further use monetary and credit policy to help develop the channel of financial services for SMEs and enhance efficiency of financial institutions in this regard. The development of SMEs is a long and sophisticated process, involving joint efforts of government agencies, banks and enterprises as well as the introduction of advanced experiences abroad. I believe that to establish a broad and multi-layer financing system for SMEs will give rise to more rapid development of these enterprises. Thank you. BIS Review 87/2005 3 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Paris Match Interview of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted by Ms Elisabeth Chavelet (Paris Match) on 7 December 2005 and published in the edition of Paris Match dated 15-21 December 2005. The publication of the translation was authorised by Paris Match. *      *      * Paris Match. After two uneventful years at the head of the ECB, in December you became embroiled in your first political storm. Political leaders, economists, bosses and trade union representatives lined up to condemn the 0.25% increase in your headline rate on 1 December. They accuse you of threatening Europe’s fragile recovery. Has this manning of the barricades made you think again?  Jean-Claude Trichet. I would not say that the last two years have been uneventful. It has been necessary to safeguard price stability in a period made very difficult by the increase in oil prices. Moreover, it is only to be expected in large and exemplary democracies that different opinions should be voiced. It is up to us to speak out tirelessly and marshal the most convincing arguments. That said, I believe that the public debate did not reflect the true feelings of the 311 million European and 60 million French citizens. All the indications are that that our fellow European citizens require us to be vigilant with regard to price stability and that they are not overly content with the situation as it stands. I would have preferred at least part of the public debate in Europe and France to have focused on what our fellow citizens want. We believe that, by remaining faithful to our mandate – which is to safeguard price stability and preserve the euro’s purchasing power – we are doing what 311 million Europeans require of us while, at the same time, by doing so we are supporting growth and job creation.  P.M. Many Europeans label the euro a factor of inflation after seeing the price of a loaf of bread rise from five French francs to €1, an espresso from five French francs to €1.20, or a scratchcard from ten French francs to €2. What do you think of this?  J.-C. T. You are exaggerating the increase in the cost of a loaf or an espresso on 1 January 2002! In some economies, the idea that the euro is inflationary remains rooted in the collective consciousness because, at the time of the changeover to the single currency, a very few prices increased disproportionately. But all our analyses show that this effect was minimal and has now disappeared. That said, we must remain vigilant. P.M. Nevertheless, well-respected figures were highly critical of you on the eve of your decision to increase rates. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the Euro Group, and Thierry Breton, the French finance minister, said “inflation is under control” and “there is no risk of a resurgence in the euro area”. Are you speaking a different language?  J.-C. T. The ECB, together with the whole of the Eurosystem, including the national central banks and, in France, the Banque de France, is responsible for price stability. There is an essential difference between the ECB’s Governing Council, which must demonstrate to our fellow citizens that price stability is safeguarded effectively, and the leaders you mention, who have different, albeit very important responsibilities. Furthermore, we must not wait until inflation has become established before we tackle it. Prevention is always better than cure. Finally, if you compare what was said before and after our decision, you will see that the tone alters substantially. P.M. So your critics were won over by your arguments?  J.-C. T. That you might ask them. P.M. While not disputing the threat of inflation, no less an institution than the OECD sent you an SOS pleading “OK, increase rates, but give the economies a breathing space. The recovery recorded in the euro area in the third quarter of the year is fragile. So why not wait until Autumn 2006?” Why is the ECB in such a hurry?  J.-C. T. After two and a half years of interest rates below the lowest rates ever achieved by the most credible currencies of Europe in the past fifty years, to accuse us of haste is at the very least paradoxical. The Governing Council decided unanimously to increase rates because this move was warranted by an increase in the inflation risks.  BIS Review 87/2005 1 
P.M. What criteria served to justify this rate rise? There has of course been a rise in prices due to the leap in oil prices. Did you also take account of the boom in property prices and the surge in consumer credit?  J.-C. T. We increased rates as a preventative measure, thereby strengthening saver confidence, because we identified these inflation risks. This allows us to continue to profit today from the lowest medium and long-term market interest rates for fifty years. It’s a remarkable contribution to growth and job creation, thanks to our credibility in delivering price stability. P.M. By anticipating a resurgence of inflation in the medium term, don’t you, as Jean-Claude Juncker fears, run the risk of triggering a round of wage rises that would work counter to your desire to fight inflation?  J.-C. T. No, not at all. By being credible in our task of safeguarding price stability, we protect the purchasing power of Europe’s citizens and therefore move in the direction that everyone desires. P.M. So, you would say that everything is “under control”?  J.-C. T. We will do at all times what is necessary. P.M. If you are so certain that the ECB is safeguarding purchasing power, growth and employment, why are these three areas doing so poorly throughout most of the euro area?  J.-C. T. The ECB does well to satisfy one of the necessary conditions for growth and employment. But this does not suffice in itself. Monetary policy cannot do all on its own! There are many other factors that contribute to growth, in particular, economic reforms, budgetary policies and also, very importantly, the confidence of households and entrepreneurs. For our part, we do everything possible to give people this confidence by safeguarding their purchasing power, giving them a sound currency and, in the case of companies, by bringing them historically low medium and long-term market interest rates. P.M. What you are saying is that the ECB is doing its job, but others are not.  J.-C. T. We are not singling out anyone. The European and global situation is very complex, and there are huge challenges to be overcome. P.M. But growth hasn't materialised. Why is that?  J.-C. T. There is consensus in Europe, and certainly the ECB, the European Commission and all of the governments agree that the implementation of the structural reforms which form part of the well-known Lisbon Programme would lead to higher levels of growth and create more jobs. P.M. Is it the case that there are good and bad students within Europe?  J.-C. T. Within the euro area, we have some shining examples of success achieved through various means. Take Ireland, for example. This country has a higher standard of living than the European average, overtaking the standard of living in France and England. It constitutes an outstanding example of growth and full employment, thanks to the courageous reforms which were implemented with broad-based popular support. Another success is Denmark, which is de facto in the euro area, with its combination of high but very well managed social protection and a very flexible labour market. It has achieved both growth and full employment under remarkable conditions. P.M. If the Maastricht Treaty could be rewritten, would you be among those who would prefer the ECB, like its American counterpart, the Federal Reserve System, to act as a doctor at the bedside of growth and employment, in addition to carrying out its task of policing inflation?  J.-C. T. First, the Maastricht Treaty is not to be rewritten. Second, in this respect, it rigorously incorporates the features of French and German law and the laws of the various nations which decided to merge their currencies to create the euro. It was not, therefore, something new. By the way, almost all countries worldwide have adopted a principle of monetary policy whereby the central bank is assigned the task of guaranteeing price stability. P.M. The Federal Reserve System being, therefore, an exception?  J.-C. T. The Federal Reserve System is not in itself a real exception. Whenever my colleague, Alan Greenspan, speaks, he always says, as we do, that price stability is a necessary condition for sustainable growth and job creation. You will see that he makes this point in most of his speeches. 2 BIS Review 87/2005 
P.M. Following the interest rate hike of 1 December 2005, you said, “we are not engaging, ex ante, in a series of interest rate increases.” Does this mean that you are promising that there will be no further increase in interest rates in the coming months?  J.-C. T. As regards future monetary policy, I reiterate what I said on behalf of the Governing Council following our most recent decision: “We did not decide “ex ante” to engage in a series of interest rate increases. We will in the future take the decisions that will be necessary to deliver price stability, to be credible in delivering price stability over time and to preserve the solid anchoring of inflationary expectations at levels consistent with price stability”. I would not say anything else. This is the Governing Council’s position. P.M. Since France voted “no” to the referendum on the Constitutional Treaty, Europe seems to be totally paralysed. Does that worry you?  J.-C. T. Europe has experienced and is experiencing a complex historical episode in a rapidly changing world. I remain very optimistic. I believe that the progress of Europe, which is a colossal historical undertaking, has temporarily hit a difficult patch that probably in itself results from its truly phenomenal success. Who could have predicted the fall of the Soviet Union, and that the whole of Communist Central and Eastern Europe would join Western Europe very quickly? I think that in Europe we are in a maturing phase. As far as we are concerned, Europe has not come to a standstill. Rather, it is very dynamic. We work with the twelve countries of the euro area, and the other eight countries whose currencies are directly pegged to the euro by means of the European exchange rate mechanism. In order to prepare well for the success of the European Union and enlargement, 27 nations are working together in the European System of Central Banks, including Romania and Bulgaria as observers. We are proud that we have given Europe a credible currency and a historically unparalleled financial environment with medium and long-term interest rates at levels that hundreds of millions of Europeans could only have dreamed of prior to the euro. P.M. You still have six years left of your mandate as President with a very hectic life. Don't you sometimes wish that you could go fishing in your beloved city of Saint-Malo?  J.-C. T. Along with my colleagues on the Executive Board, the Governing Council, the entire ECB staff and the Eurosystem, I am very privileged to take part in such an immense historical endeavour that is of great benefit to Europe. It is inspiring. This justifies all of the hard work that we do. That said, I love going to Saint-Malo. For me, the Rance estuary is one of the most beautiful places on earth. BIS Review 87/2005 3 
Jean-Pierre Roth: Economic recovery is continuing in Switzerland  Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen As we have just announced in our press release, the Swiss National Bank is raising its target range for the three-month Libor by 0.25 percentage points to 0.50–1.50%. This change will take effect immediately. The SNB intends to hold the rate in the middle of the target range for the time being. Economic recovery is continuing as expected. It has grown stronger and is more broad-based. The SNB has raised its forecast for economic growth in 2005 and now expects the increase in GDP to reach just over 1.5%. For 2006, it projects growth of a little more than 2%. The National Bank anticipates average inflation for 2005 to remain at 1.2%. On the assumption that the three-month Libor remains unchanged at 1.0%, it forecasts annual inflation of 0.8% in 2006 and 1.2% in 2007. By raising its target range, the Swiss National Bank is adjusting its monetary policy to economic developments, which are proceeding as expected. The SNB thus ensures that the inflation outlook remains favourable. Despite the increase in the interest rate, the monetary policy of the SNB remains expansionary and supports the upswing. As economic recovery progresses, the SNB will continue to gradually adjust its monetary policy. If the Swiss franc were to appreciate rapidly, the National Bank would react appropriately. Today’s increase in the three-month Libor was generally expected. Why did financial markets anticipate this move? The answer is simple. The moderate increase in the interest rate is compatible with our strategy of making gradual corrections to a very expansionary monetary policy, while taking into account economic recovery. Let me clarify this statement. Economic activity At our monetary policy assessment in mid-September, we addressed the factors indicating an economic improvement in the second quarter. We expected that this trend would strengthen in the second half of the year. The movements in economic indicators over the last three months confirm this scenario. According to estimates by the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (seco), real GDP in the third quarter exceeded the previous quarter by an annualised figure of 4.3%. With respect to the year-back level, it was up by 2.3%. Together with the GDP figures for the third quarter, seco also presented revised figures for the first two quarters. The new figures are substantially higher than before, even after the considerable increase in the figure for the first quarter that was presented in September. Most observers were surprised by the size of the growth estimate for the third quarter. What is more, the retrospective revisions have considerably modified the perception of the economic situation in the first half of the year. Nevertheless, interpretation of the quarterly estimates is difficult in view of the sizable fluctuations in final demand and the fact that the main factor impacting on GDP momentum are changes in inventories. Other indicators, such as the consumer confidence index, company expectations, labour demand and the continued low level of inflation expectations, appear to indicate a more modest level of economic momentum. Despite the uncertainty with respect to the GDP estimates, the information currently available to us indicates that economic recovery has accelerated over the past few months. Fourth-quarter indicators point to a continuation in the economic upswing. Although export growth is slowing, international demand remains robust. This momentum is increasingly shifting into the domestic sector, where it is acting as a stimulus. Gradually, the utilisation of industrial production capacities is improving. Meanwhile, companies expect demand to pick up over the next few months. There were signs of a recovery in corporate investment in the third quarter. Over the next few quarters, a high utilisation rate of technical capacity in industry and a more favourable sales outlook BIS Review 86/2005 1 
are likely to provide greater support for investments in equipment and a gradual increase in labour demand. As a result, the disequilibrium in the labour market is likely to diminish. In the last quarter, private consumption remained strong. Since employment can be expected to increase over the course of 2006, consumer confidence should strengthen. By contrast, the stimulus provided by construction investment is likely to subside next year. In particular, we may expect that, after three years of robust growth, investments in residential construction will stagnate at a high level. Overall, we project GDP growth of just over 1.5% this year. Previously, we had expected growth to reach about 1%. To a large extent, this correction to our growth forecast is due to seco’s revision of the figures for the first two quarters. For 2006, we forecast economic growth of a little more than 2%. This would take GDP growth to a level above the potential growth path for the Swiss economy. The output gap – i.e. the gap between normal and actual utilisation of resources – will diminish. Monetary development Alongside the figures for the real economy, movements in monetary and credit aggregates also indicate that economic recovery is underway. Since adopting a resolutely expansionary monetary policy three years ago, mortgage lending has grown at an annual rate of over 5%. We continue to monitor developments in the real estate market closely. Since September, other loans have also recorded positive rates of growth with respect to year-back figures. In the past, a development of this kind usually indicated a strengthening in economic recovery. The economy is well supplied with liquidity as a result of the expansionary monetary policy. Although the growth of the broadly-defined monetary aggregate, M3, had fallen to 1% in October 2004, it has since climbed back to over 6%. However, excess liquidity will be gradually reduced as a result of the interest rate increase announced today. In this way, we aim to ensure that price stability is not endangered in future. The monetary policy decision The economic and monetary situation has developed in the way we anticipated. The inflation outlook prior to today’s decision was largely in line with the figures presented at the last monetary policy assessment. For 2006, however, we forecast a slightly higher level of inflation to that presented in the last assessment. This is due to revisions made to certain figures that point to a higher rate of utilisation in the economy. In view of this inflation outlook, what is the justification for our decision to increase the target range for three-month Libor by 25 basis points? While we anticipate falling rates of inflation next year, this decline is not relevant in terms of monetary policy. Recent inflation levels of over 1% are probably largely due to the rise in oil prices which began in the first half of 2004. At the time, we decided not to take this increased inflation into account in our monetary policy decisions, due to the fact that its consequences could not be neutralised through monetary policy measures. It seems logical, therefore, not to take account of a decline in inflation attributable to subsiding oil prices, particularly since this drop also results from a statistical effect. A number of inflation components are likely to persist at a low level, even in 2006. We are working on the assumption that the prices of imported products will continue to fall, due especially to the continued pressure exerted by international competition. This will have a dampening effect on the domestic price level. All of these factors mean that some of the gains in productivity will be passed on to consumers in the form of price reductions. Since there is a considerable lag between the adoption of monetary policy measures and their impact on prices, monetary policy does not affect price developments in the near term. Consequently, the National Bank is guided by the medium-term inflation outlook rather than the short-term forecast. The inflation forecasts published since 2003 show high rates of inflation at the end of each forecast horizon. This makes it clear that we cannot continue our expansionary monetary policy for an unlimited period of time. The three-month Libor was already lifted in June and September 2004, each time by 25 basis points. Because the economy weakened in the fourth quarter of 2004, there was an improvement in the inflation outlook at the monetary policy assessments of December 2004, and March and June 2005. Consequently, a decision not to undertake further increases in the rate of interest was appropriate. However, the forecast of mid-September 2005 indicated that there would be no further improvement in the inflation outlook. Nevertheless, we decided not to increase interest rates at that time. We determined not to take any action because of the fact that oil prices had attained 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
record heights just before our monetary policy assessment. It was not possible at the time to fully assess the impact on the economy and on inflation. If monetary policy had remained the same at this assessment, the medium-term inflation outlook would once again have been unchanged. In the meantime, however, the room for manoeuvre available to monetary policy has declined. Our inevitable concerns with respect to the high price of oil in September have been dissipated by the favourable developments in the economy. As a result, we have decided to increase the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.25 percentage points. Consequently, this decision is in line with the statements we made at the last monetary policy assessment. Inflation forecast graph I now turn to the current inflation forecast, which is based on the assumption of a change in the three-month Libor, to 1.0%. The graph depicts the current and the previous forecasts. The dashed red curve represents the new forecast, which covers the period from the fourth quarter of 2005 to the third quarter of 2008. It summarises the inflation outlook, following today’s increase in the rate of interest. The dash-dotted green curve shows the inflation forecast at the time of the last monetary policy assessment and is based on a three-month Libor of 0.75%. The two forecasts are very similar for 2006, and show receding rates of inflation due to the fact that oil prices are not increasing any further. As of 2007, the new inflation forecast lies below the previous one. This reflects the dampening effect of today’s interest rate decision on future inflation. The forecast shows that there is no immediate inflation risk. At 0.8% and 1.2% in the coming two years, the expected rates of inflation remain low. However, it is evident from the inflation dynamics that, even with a three-month Libor of 1.0%, monetary policy has an expansionary effect. With today’s decision to increase the three-month Libor by 25 basis points, we are adhering to our previous monetary policy course. We continue to support the economy, using the leeway available to us. This should guarantee price stability in the longer term. If the Swiss franc appreciates rapidly, the National Bank will respond appropriately, and is keeping all its options open for such an eventuality, as it has in the past.  Observed inflation December 2005  BIS Review 86/2005 3 
Inflation forecast of September 2005 with Libor at 0.75% and of December 2005 with Libor at 1.00%  Inflation forecast of December 2005 (57 kb) 4 BIS Review 86/2005 
Philipp Hildebrand: SNB’s performance against the background of financial market developments Introductory remarks by Dr Philipp Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Zurich, 15 December 2005. *      *      * Developments in the financial markets The international financial markets have been dominated in recent months by four key developments. Long-term capital market yields have improved; the equity markets have, on the whole, exhibited very positive developments; the US dollar has continued the uptrend which set in at the beginning of this year; and the gold price has climbed sharply. The movements of the past few months in the international capital markets are largely attributable to economic developments and US monetary policy. Long-term dollar interest rates climbed significantly in the second half of the year thanks to the robust economic climate, the positive outlook in the US and the continued normalisation of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. A rise in yields was also observed outside the US. The spread between US and European capital market rates, however, remained considerable. This is not least reflected in the differing business cycle phases of the US and European economies. Despite the improved economic outlook and higher oil prices, inflation expectations have, on the whole, remained moderate on both sides of the Atlantic. The three major economic areas – US, Japan and Europe – exhibited divergent equity market developments. While the US equity market largely maintained its sideways trend, the European indices firmed substantially. Having recovered from its low in early 2003, Japan’s equity market also made a marked recovery. The increase in optimism with regard to the economy and the highly favourable earnings situation of companies were major contributing factors to the rise in equity prices in Europe and Japan. The Swiss equity market – as measured by the SPI – is now trading once again at its peak level of September 2000. Looking at the developments since 1995, it becomes apparent that the Swiss equity market has strengthened far more significantly than equivalent foreign markets (cf. graph 1). In the forex market, the dollar’s recovery continued, with the greenback benefiting from the cyclical interest rate lead in the US, which has made dollar investments in all maturities rather more attractive. A number of market analysts believe that the Homeland Investment Act, which offers tax breaks to US corporations if they repatriate their foreign earnings held abroad before the end of this fiscal year, has boosted the dollar. Despite the fact that in the second half of the year the US current account deficit climbed higher still – to over 6% of GDP – and thus reaching an all-time high, the global imbalances did not appear to destabilise the greenback. On the whole, however, the real exchange rates are trending very close to their long-term averages (cf. graph 2). Against the background of a robust global economy, commodity prices rose yet further, with oil and gold being in particularly strong demand. However, if energy resources and gold are excluded from the equation, raw material prices in dollar terms are at a similar level to the beginning of 2004. While the price of oil receded from its high-water mark in the wake of Hurricane Katrina to back within the region of USD 60 a barrel, the gold price is trading at a 24-year high of over USD 500 an ounce. A number of factors have contributed to this increase in price. The physical demand for gold has intensified significantly, rising by about 40% this year alone in India, which is the largest market. Increased demand at the central banks of emerging countries and in oil-producing countries is also being reported. Moreover, the currently low real interest rates push down the opportunity costs of interest-free investments, such as gold. Given, too, that the gold market is largely illiquid, even small shifts in demand can trigger serious price effects. In view of the fact that implicit inflation expectations are still firmly anchored – according to inflation-protected bonds and surveys – inflation fears can hardly be considered to be the main driver behind this gold price increase. SNB’s performance Taking into consideration the development of the gold price, the SNB yielded an average annual return of just below 1% on its assets between 1980 and 2005 (end of September). While interest-BIS Review 86/2005 1 
bearing assets posted a higher average yield during this period, the SNB had to settle for overall losses in gold. The annual yield – including the gold price movements – fluctuated very strongly between minus 25% and plus 20%. For the assessment of future developments in earnings, these figures are only of limited significance, however. The level and spread of our earnings are determined by the balance sheet total, the structure of the assets and the achievable financial market yields. Since these measures change over time, it is rather difficult to estimate the long-term earnings potential of the SNB. At the end of 2004, the National Bank’s assets amounted to CHF 118 billion. After distribution of the proceeds from the gold sales in spring 2005, the invested funds contracted by CHF 21 billion. Furthermore, higher profit distributions to the Swiss Confederation and the cantons should deplete the existing distribution reserve by 2012, thus decreasing our assets by a further CHF 10 billion as compared with the end of 2004. From today’s perspective, this leaves the SNB with assets in the region of CHF 85 billion. At present, the National Bank’s assets comprise 25% Swiss franc investments, 45% foreign exchange reserves and 30% gold. Foreign currency investments generate interest and dividend income. Given the globally low inflation rates, the nominal interest income is currently substantially lower than in the 1980s and 1990s. In addition, the valuation of bond and equity portfolios, foreign exchange positions and gold holdings at market prices result in valuation gains and losses. Meanwhile, the interest income on Swiss franc assets – primarily repos – is marginal. In 95% of cases, the massive fluctuations in our income can be attributed to the fluctuating values in gold and foreign exchange positions. Experience has shown that valuation gains and losses on financial investments tend to level out again in the long term. Based on these conditions, we thus estimate the earnings potential of our assets to be between 2% and 3%, which translates into an income of between CHF 1.7 and CHF 2.5 billion per annum on the total assets of CHF 85 billion. Given the fluctuations in the exchange rate and gold price, however, the earnings generated can deviate greatly from this amount. For instance, the marked increase in the gold price this year has resulted in valuation gains of roughly CHF 8 billion to date. Should the gold price drop back next year to its end-2003 level, however, this would lead to a valuation loss of over CHF 7 billion. Long-term income estimates should not be based on such unusual gains and losses. Some of the income is allocated to provisions, thereby ensuring the growth of the currency reserves necessary for monetary policy. This allocation (currently approximately CHF 1 billion per annum) should be made in proportion to nominal GDP growth. After deduction of the SNB’s operating expenses of currently CHF 250 million, roughly CHF 1 billion remains for distribution to the Confederation and cantons. Based on the assumptions regarding the earnings potential of our assets, we can expect a distributable annual profit to be somewhere in this region in the foreseeable future. Once the existing distribution reserve has been depleted, we will most likely have to reduce our profit distributions significantly.  Cosa initiative The people’s initiative “National Bank profits for the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance Fund (AHV/AVS)” – better known as the Cosa initiative – proposes allocating the SNB’s profits which remain after deducting the CHF 1 billion for the cantons to the Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance Fund (AHV/AVS). An obligation of this kind would impact on the National Bank’s independence, putting it under political pressure to distribute higher profits, which in turn would only be possible were the SNB to expand the money supply, reduce the currency reserves or take greater risks. This would undermine the SNB’s credibility and freedom of action as well as compromise the stability of the Swiss franc. The National Bank’s most important task is to conduct monetary policy geared towards price stability. In order to do this, we have to be able to take monetary policy decisions – even in difficult situations – without political pressure or the obligation to generate a return. 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
 BIS Review 86/2005 3 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Empowering consumers for a progressive and sustainable financial system Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Third International Forum on Financial Consumer Protection and Education "Fostering Greater Consumer Protection and Education", Kuala Lumpur, 14 December 2005. *      *      * Let me first of all extend a warm welcome to all of you to this Third International Forum on Financial Consumer Protection and Education. Malaysia is most honoured to host this conference. I understand that we have participants from across the globe, including for the first time, delegates from the Middle East and Africa. A forum such as this not only allows for greater engagement among regulators and brings about a better understanding on the issues confronting us but also contributes towards advancing forward the development agenda. Promoting a sound and progressive financial system is a vital and key pre-requisite to achieving sustainable economic growth and development. This recent decade has seen a significant transformation of the financial landscape shaped by the forces of globalisation, advances in technology, the trend towards greater market orientation and financial innovation. In this more dynamic environment, the maintenance of financial stability has become increasingly more complex and challenging. The requirements and expectations of consumers are also changing rapidly in tandem with the increased education levels, growing wealth and greater affluence. Following these developments, consumers have become more discerning and demand for better product choices, more efficient delivery channels and more customer centric practices from financial institutions. These trends have also become important in reinforcing an increasingly more competitive environment in the financial services sector. A comprehensive approach thus needs to be adopted to address all the key elements of the financial system so as to form a solid foundation on which the soundness and stability of the system can be achieved. A major strategy that has been adopted has been the strengthening of the prudential regulatory and supervisory framework. The safety and soundness of the banking system however has to extend beyond prudential regulation and supervision. Maintaining financial stability of the financial system also requires the development of the financial infrastructure, in particular, the financial markets; building the capacity of financial institutions and finally to have in place an adequate consumer protection framework. My remarks this morning will focus on the consumer protection and education from the perspective of maintaining financial stability and the development of a progressive and sustainable financial system. Consumer protection and education initiatives empower consumers to be better positioned to take responsibility for their own well-being. It allows consumers to assume a more important role in exerting market discipline on service providers to drive greater efficiency, competition and innovation in the market place. In the design of a consumer protection framework, it needs to be recognised that financial products and services differ significantly from most other goods and services. Specifically there is asymmetry in the access to information and bargaining power between the consumers and financial service providers. These imbalances can be addressed by three mutually reinforcing strategies. Firstly, promoting stronger transparency and disclosure standards in financial institutions; secondly strengthening the mechanisms for consumer protection; and thirdly enhancing consumer education. An increasing number of countries have undertaken this more comprehensive approach in order to give greater focus to consumer protection issues for ensuring the soundness of financial service providers and ultimately to the stability of the financial system. This will also in turn promote more effective consumer participation in the economy, thus contributing more significantly to the economic growth and development process. The approach and mechanisms adopted to protect consumers in individual jurisdictions will vary from one country to another, given the unique characteristics prevailing in the different respective economies and financial systems. Consideration of country-specific circumstances and contextualisation is important to evolve relevant and effective consumer protection and education infrastructures. Individual countries need to customise the consumer protection and education framework to their environment, taking into account factors such as the stage of economic and regulatory development, the structure of the financial system and the level of consumer sophistication.  BIS Review 86/2005 1 
Prudential safety and soundness, competition and consumer protection need to co-exist to effectively serve the various stakeholders' interests. Hence, implementing an effective consumer protection and education framework involves achieving an appropriate balance between providing adequate safety for consumers while promoting competition and financial innovation. In formulating policies to safeguard consumers' interests, adequate consideration needs to be given to ensure the appropriate level of consumer regulation without imposing excessive regulatory costs and burden on both financial institutions and consumers, and thus avoid compromising the benefits that the policies are designed to achieve. In this process, ethics and integrity cannot be legislated. Regulators, therefore, need to consider other approaches in preventing market abuses or misconduct and in promoting consumer confidence. Of importance is to evolve an appropriate incentive structure for financial institutions so that they recognise that it is in their best interests to foster fair and equitable business practices as part of good governance, corporate social responsibility and brand building. Good business practices need to be instilled and embedded in all aspects of the operations and at all levels within the institutions. On consumer education, it is recognised that with more well-informed and financially astute consumers making better financial decisions, competition is promoted among the financial service providers. Moreover, market efficiency would improve with the creation of new products and services that are more responsive to the requirements of consumers. In relation to this, financial literacy has become a vital skill in this increasingly more complex financial world, characterised by increasingly sophisticated financial products and services and growing diversity in financial service providers and distribution channels. While the overarching objective of consumer education is to impart knowledge that will improve consumers' financial decisions, it cannot be assumed that equipping consumers with more information will automatically lead to improved financial behaviour. Research has shown that consumer decisions may not always be made based on sound advice and knowledge, but are at times made on impulsive intuition. The key challenge lies in determining how behavioural factors and other factors such as socio-economic and cultural backgrounds, life events and skill levels influence rational decision-making. The wide variation in information needs that arise from differences in prior experience, language and cultural background, current financial situation, and competing demands for consumers' time all pose challenges in the development and delivery of relevant information to consumers. In particular, the most effective means of engaging consumers that have a low level of interest in financial planning needs to be determined.  In relation to this, financial service providers need to provide consumers with information that accurately represents the features, risks and returns associated with their products and services and demonstrate integrity and good faith by offering products and services that are appropriate to the customers' financial needs and circumstances. The issue is how a consistent and comprehensive disclosure regime could be established, with the flexibility to apply differentiated rules in response to different situations and circumstances. Finally, disclosure as a consumer protection tool will only serve its purpose if consumers are able to understand the information provided. The challenge is to get the right balance between providing sufficient information to consumers to make informed choices, with the information being clear, concise and effective.  The increase in the number of delivery channels has not resulted in an equitable expansion in the access to financial services. Even in developed countries, there remains minorities that have limited access to basic financial services. For instance, a study conducted in the United Kingdom for the period 2002-2003 found that 2.8 million adults in households had no access to a bank account. In relation to this, regulators have to balance between the need for financial institutions to operate efficiently and the need to ensure access to basic financial services for both individuals and small businesses. In addition, rural communities have also tended to be underserved. The challenge confronting regulators is to ensure that all communities have access to financial services. This greater inclusion is vital to bring the lower income groups into the economic mainstream. An important aspect in the development of a consumer protection framework is to ensure that the framework remains relevant despite changes in economic and financial environment. Changes in the profile of consumers following changes in the demographic structure for example needs to be taken into account. In most communities, the ratio of retired population relative to working adults is expected to rise more steeply in the next decade. In countries with growing ageing populations, there is an increasing demand for financial planning, life insurance, wealth management and mutual fund investment services. Consumers' interests in these areas would need to be adequately safeguarded while financial literacy among the various target groups need to be actively promoted.  While regulators have an important role in promoting consumer protection and education, it is equally important to galvanise support and collaboration from all market participants - financial service 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
providers, government agencies, educators and consumer associations and community-based organisations, toward effective implementation of the initiatives. Let me take this opportunity to share with you the experience of Malaysia in promoting consumer protection and education. The Malaysian economy has transitioned from a production-based economy towards a knowledge-driven economy, with small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) assuming an increasingly significant role in the economy. The financial sector has also evolved accordingly to facilitate this economic transformation process, with a growing trend towards greater deregulation and market orientation. To achieve a more efficient, competitive and resilient financial system, Malaysia has formulated a blueprint that outlines the roadmap for the development of the financial sector. The Financial Sector Master Plan which was issued in 2001 outlines the key strategies for the development of the financial sector. Amongst the important strategies implemented has been the development of the consumer protection framework and the enabling infrastructure to protect consumers' interests while at the same time to enhance their financial capability to participate effectively in the financial system.  Bank Negara Malaysia has adopted a multi-pronged approach in empowering consumers. As a central bank in an emerging market economy, our mandate is broader than our counterparts in the more advanced and mature economies. We have the important role of developing the financial sectors. In the area of strengthening the consumer protection infrastructure, the agenda covers a wide spectrum of initiatives involving infrastructure and institutional capacity development that includes financial education, advisory services, distress management, rehabilitation and putting in place avenues for redress.  Recent initiatives include evolving a more effective Financial Mediation Bureau (FMB) to ensure that consumers of all financial service providers under the purview of the Central Bank have recourse to an independent, fair and impartial dispute resolution mechanism. Earlier this year a deposit insurance scheme was introduced to further strengthen incentives for financial institutions to adopt sound financial and business practices and enhance public confidence in the financial system by providing explicit protection on deposits. Bank Negara Malaysia is also currently finalising the details for the establishment of a credit counselling and debt management agency to be introduced early next year, with the aim of providing individuals with credit counselling and assistance in restructuring of their debts. To promote financial education at an early age, Bank Negara Malaysia embarked on an education programme in schools on basic financial knowledge in partnership with the Education Ministry since 1997. Further, in collaboration with the financial industry's associations, Bank Negara Malaysia launched a ten year Consumer Education Programme (CEP) for the banking and insurance sectors. We are now in the fifth year of this programme. Extensive information is being disseminated via the spectrum of distribution channels including newspapers, radio, websites, branches of financial institutions and outreach programmes.  The consumer education efforts are also complemented by initiatives to promote a higher level of disclosure and transparency so as to ensure that consumers have access to relevant, comparable and timely information on products and services. A significant focus has been on the insurance sector, given that a significant segment of the Malaysian consumers do not have good understanding of insurance products. In particular, guidelines on medical and health insurance and the requirements for marketing of life insurance policies, have been strengthened while rules for independent financial advisers have been introduced.  In meeting socio-economic objectives, there is also a need to ensure that the welfare and interests of all segments of society are protected and that no target group is excluded or marginalised. Indeed, an important component of our consumer protection framework is to ensure that all consumers continue to have access to basic banking services at reasonable costs. In this connection, a more interventionist approach has been pursued to require banking institutions to offer a list of basic banking services to all Malaysians and to set guiding principles for the imposition of fees and charges for these retail products and services for individuals and small and medium sized enterprises.  Efforts have also been taken by the Central Bank in collaboration with the financial services industry to enhance the integrity of the payments systems and instruments, aimed at promoting confidence and ensuring that consumers' interests are safeguarded. Specific measures include upgrading the funds transfer systems, migrating all magnetic stripe for ATM card and credit card infrastructure to a chip-enabled environment, and introducing payment platforms that leverages on the Internet to promote users' confidence and safeguard consumers' interests. Malaysia is the first country in the Asia Pacific BIS Review 86/2005 3 
region that has mandated the migration of ATM cards to chip based cards and has also been the first to complete the implementation of a national migration to EMV chip based credit cards. This is essentially to combat fraud in payment instruments. A number of other initiatives have also been put in place to create greater awareness among the public regarding counterfeit banknotes and to promote increased consumer understanding on credit card usage and protection. As we advance forward, changes in the financial landscape will continue to be dynamic and the level of complexity and sophistication in the financial markets will further intensify. While considerable efforts have been undertaken to empower consumers through financial education and enhance protection for consumers, much remains to be done in fostering the commitment of financial service providers to sound business practices and promoting fair and equitable treatment of consumers. Given the global dimension of financial services and the increasing interdependence of financial markets, efforts by individual countries to strengthen consumer protection need to be matched by efforts to enhance safeguards at the international level. Forums like this one provide a good opportunity for regulators to share information and insights, to discuss the issues and challenges at hand, explore potential areas for cooperation and lay the groundwork for future partnerships. Drawing on the experience and expertise of various countries, this forum provide a platform for participants to work together towards developing global best practice standards on consumer protection and education issues. I look forward to the outcome of your deliberations in fostering greater consumer protection and education. 4 BIS Review 86/2005 
Lucas Papademos: Remarks on the ECB’s December 2005 Financial Stability Review Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the December 2005 Financial Stability Review, Frankfurt, 8 December 2005. The slides can be found on the website of the European Central Bank www.ecb.int. *      *      * Ladies and Gentlemen, I.  Introduction  Welcome to this press briefing on the occasion of the presentation of the December 2005 edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review, which is published semi-annually, in June and in December each year.  My presentation today will have three parts (see slide 2): I will start with some introductory remarks, outlining the purpose, the scope, the method of analysis and the structure of the Review. Thereafter, I will highlight the main sources of risk and vulnerability which we have assessed as emanating from four areas: (i) the global macro-financial environment; (ii) financial markets; (iii) the balance sheets of euro area households and corporations; and (iv) financial institutions, including banks and insurance companies. Finally, I will provide an overall assessment of the outlook for financial stability in the euro area. By publishing a Financial Stability Review, the ECB pursues three objectives: first, promoting awareness of issues relevant to safeguarding the stability of the euro area financial system and encouraging an informed debate on these; second, providing an overview of sources of risk and vulnerabilities with regard to financial stability; in this way, the review seeks to play a role in preventing crises; and, third, analysing ways of promoting and maintaining a stable financial system. The scope of the Review is wide, covering the euro area financial system, notably banks, other financial institutions (e.g. insurance companies), capital and money markets and financial infrastructure (payment and settlement systems). As such, it is the only Report of this kind for the euro area.  The analysis underpinning the assessment of the financial stability outlook comprises three elements:  • an evaluation of the robustness of the financial system; • an identification of plausible and systemically important risks to euro area financial stability;  • an assessment of the ability of the financial system to cope with shocks in the event that some combination of the identified risks and vulnerabilities were to materialise. It should be stressed that calling attention to such sources of risk and vulnerability does not mean seeking to identify the most probable outcome. Rather, it entails highlighting potential and plausible downside risks, even if these are unlikely to materialise.  The Review has been prepared with the close involvement of the Banking Supervision Committee of the European System of Central Banks, which is a forum of cooperation among the national central banks and supervisory authorities of the 25 European Union Member States and the ECB. The combination of the micro perspectives of supervisors with the macro perspectives of central bankers contributes to making this assessment as wide-ranging as possible. The Review also serves as the basis of semi-annual financial stability discussions at the ECB Governing Council and therefore represents the common view of the Governing Council.  The Review is organised in four main chapters: first, an overview, setting the scene with a self-contained analysis and assessment; second, an analysis of the macro-financial environment which assesses the financial balances of non-financial sectors of the economy; third, an inspection of the financial system which forms the core of the Review; and, fourth, a section with six special features, i.e. short articles aimed at providing analytical and contextual underpinnings. The first article deals with BIS Review 86/2005 1 
measurement challenges related to financial stability analysis. The second analyses financial market contagion. The third assesses the financial vulnerability of mortgage-indebted euro area households. The fourth study looks at determinants of euro area banks’ profitability. The fifth article looks at the effects of the new accounting framework on banks. The final study looks at the financial stability issues related to central counterparty clearing houses. In addition to the special features, the Review contains 20 boxes as well as a statistical annex.  II. Main areas of vulnerability of the euro area financial system Let me now turn to the substance of the Review and present the main findings of the analysis and assessment. I start by looking at the main developments in the global macro-financial environment (see slide 4).  II.1. Global macro finance Global imbalances continued to widen in 2005. The chart on the left of slide 4 shows that among the main economic areas, the United States remains the largest borrower country. However, there have been changes in the composition of the global creditor countries, with the shares of Japan and the euro area diminishing, while China and, in particular, the oil producing countries, have grown in importance in financing the US deficit in 2005.  The chart on the right of slide 4 focuses on the evolution of the US deficit. The total net lending of the US economy reached new post-Bretton-Woods records of 6.5% of GDP in the first quarter of 2005, and narrowed slightly to 6.3% of GDP in the second quarter. For much of the time since 2000, the main domestic sources of the US current account deficit have been growing fiscal imbalances and heavy household sector borrowing. On the other hand, rather atypically, the corporate sector enjoyed a financial surplus. This may not last, however, as the corporate sector begins to leverage again. Overall, while the sustainability of current account positions seems rather unproblematic in the short term, the expansion of imbalances exposes the global financial system to the risk of sharp correction in the medium term, in particular if confidence were to suddenly deteriorate in financial markets.  An additional significant risk to euro area financial stability during the current year has been the surge in oil prices. Slide 5 highlights some of the implications for the global financial system of the rise in oil prices to levels that, in real terms, have remained close to the peaks reached in the late 1970s. While the impact of elevated oil prices on the financial system has thus far been less substantial than previously feared, risk premia in some segments of the global equity markets could nevertheless have been adversely affected. The chart on the left plots the real oil price against the US equity market earnings yield premium. The relatively close co-movement between these two variables seems to have carried over to the more recent episode of increasing oil prices, possibly explaining part of the relatively subdued developments in US equity markets in the current year.  Regarding the corporate credit markets, in 2005 problems in the US automobile and airline sectors – both of which are sensitive to the level of oil prices – have created periods of short-lived turbulence in credit markets, including the markets for more complex structured credit instruments. Looking ahead, a key question in credit markets is the likely timing of the turn of the current very benign credit cycle. The chart on the right in slide 5 shows that the decline in global corporate default rates stabilised at a low level in the first three quarters of 2005 after a very marked decline in 2002-2004. Partially reflecting the effect of high oil prices, Moody’s rating agency currently forecasts that global default rates will pick up somewhat in early 2006, heralding less favourable credit conditions to come. It should, however, be noted that similar forecasts made at the beginning of 2005 proved to be inaccurate.  II.2  Financial markets In the global fixed income markets (see slide 6), the flattening of yield curves throughout the second and the third quarters of 2005 has been something of a puzzle. More recently, worries about global inflation, mainly driven by high oil prices, seem to have reversed the decline in long-term bond yields, at least temporarily. The low level of US ten-year bond yields in particular remains a conundrum that is difficult to reconcile with underlying macroeconomic fundamentals. At the same time, and as a corollary, concerns about the risk of an unexpected and abrupt upturn in these yields have remained. The chart on the top left of slide 6 illustrates the puzzle by plotting the evolution of the US 10-year 2 BIS Review 86/2005 
bond yield against the consensus expectations on US nominal GDP growth ten years ahead, a proxy for the level of bond yields consistent with expected future fundamentals. In “normal” circumstances, the two would be expected to remain rather close to each other. The chart shows, however, that for the US, since early 2002 the bond yield has been persistently lower than the expected future growth rate of nominal GDP. In the euro area, as shown in the chart on the bottom left on slide 6, although the 10-year bond yield has also declined below the 10-year nominal GDP growth expectations, the margin is substantially narrower.  The low levels of bond yields can be partly explained by increasing demand by institutional investors, such as insurance companies and pension funds, for long-term bonds. Ageing populations and increasing private provisioning of pensions in many euro area countries, as well as accounting changes and balance sheet repair, have forced financial institutions to resort to longer-term bonds in order to correct maturity mismatches in their balance sheets. The chart on the right of slide 6 illustrates how net purchases of long-term bonds relative to quoted shares has sharply diverged since 2002. Insofar as the declining bond yields reflect such structural factors, the potential for a reversal of the trend, should it happen, could take place more gradually than previously feared. However, it should be noted that other factors have also affected the patterns of global portfolio behaviour, which led to an unusual increase in the net demand for long-term bonds and drove down risk premia and therefore bond yields. II.3.  The balance sheets of euro area corporations and households Let me now briefly discuss developments in the euro area economic environment (see slide 7), focusing on developments in the corporate and household sectors that are particularly relevant from the point of view of the outlook for financial intermediaries’ credit portfolios.  Starting with the corporate sector, there are signs that earlier weaknesses in demand for external funding by the non-financial corporate sector is coming to an end. This is reflected by the increase in lending. At the same time, reflecting the better financial condition of firms, credit standards by banks to firms have been relaxed somewhat, as shown in the chart on the left on slide 7 (where the vertical axis measures changes). Encouragingly, these developments also extended to small and medium-sized enterprises, which in many euro area countries had faced difficult circumstances over the past few years. Overall, euro area corporate sector balance sheets show signs of improvement, after several years of de-leveraging and extensive cost-controlling.  Turning to the household sector, the most important development continued to be further rises in house prices in many euro area countries and in the euro area as a whole, as shown in the chart on the right on slide 7. However, prices continued to fall in some countries, while in others, where house prices increased rapidly in the past, prices have shown signs of moderation. Given the relative robustness of household sector balance sheets in the euro area and the still, on average, conservative loan-to-value ratios applied to mortgage lending, more substantial credit risks to financial institutions would materialize only in the currently rather unlikely event of a simultaneous increase in unemployment and a fall in house prices. Nevertheless, against the backdrop of signs of further relaxation of credit standards and the possibility of a substantial negative impact of a potential fall in house prices in some euro area countries on their financial systems, the housing market warrants further close monitoring.  II. 4.  Financial institutions Consolidated data on the euro area banking sector’s financial results are available for the full year of 2004. The figures, further supported by non-consolidated data for the first half of 2005, paint a picture of strong profit growth and comfortable solvency ratios (see slide 8).  In 2004, the average return on equity (ROE) for euro area domestic banks, the main indicator signalling increased profitability, increased by almost three percentage points from 2003, reaching 10.5%. The chart on the left on slide 8 illustrates that in addition to the increase in average profitability, the distribution of ROE for euro area banks shifted in the direction of higher profits. The chart shows the proportion of euro area banks’ return on equity – weighted by each country’s total banking assets – in 5% intervals. For example, banks with a ROE falling within the 5-10% interval represented approximately 28% of total euro area banking assets in 2004. The shift in the distribution of ROE shows that both the best and worst performing banks had become more profitable in 2004 compared to 2003. BIS Review 86/2005 3 
Against the background of a rather benign credit environment in the euro area, the aggregate flow of provisions as a share of total assets declined further between 2003 and 2004. The stock of provisions in euro terms also fell in 2004 from the previous year. Beyond the short-term horizon, the overall low levels of provisioning flows could be questioned as a less benign credit environment could make the situation more difficult for banks. Possible triggers for a deterioration include an unanticipated sharp rise in short and long-term interest rates, or an unexpected worsening in the macroeconomic environment. In contrast to the observed changes in provisioning flows as a share of total assets, however, the ratio of provisioning stocks to non-performing loans increased as shown by the chart on the right on slide 8. This mainly reflects an improvement in banks’ asset quality in the euro area as a whole. It should be kept in mind, however, that the quality of banks’ assets is sensitive to changes in the phase of the credit cycle. Looking ahead, the low level of provisioning flows could become a problem if the current rather benign credit conditions were to deteriorate and the number of non-performing loans to increase. Given that lending to the household sector, has, for several years, been the most rapidly growing line of business for banks, the continuing growth of exposures to the household sector is a potential source of increasing credit risk. However, the quality of credit granted to households tends to be generally higher than that extended to the corporate sector.  In 2004, the last full year for which figures are available, profitability in the euro area insurance industry improved further, with the exception of the re-insurance sector (see slide 9). The strengthening of financial positions was mainly driven by strong underwriting results. Capital bases improved in both the non-life and reinsurance industries in 2004, whereas solvency ratios in the life insurance industry remained broadly unchanged. The chart on the left on slide 9 shows that there continue to be divergent developments among the various sectors of the industry. In the life insurance sector, the average ROE increased between 2003 and 2004. Non-life insurers enjoyed an even more significant improvement in profitability. By contrast, the reinsurance industry saw a marked decline in profits in 2004. Profits in the non-life sector were driven by strong underwriting performances. In the life insurance sector, lower guaranteed rates of return and cost-cutting supported the results. Re-insurers suffered mainly from falling net investment income and a reduction in risk transfer from the non-life sector to the re-insurance sector.  The solvency positions of insurers may be broadly measured by the ratio of surplus to net premiums written. As shown in the right-hand chart on slide 9, in the non-life and re-insurance industries, this ratio rose in 2004 from the previous year. Despite rather subdued profits, the capital base of the reinsurance industry grew as companies limited the amount of dividends distributed to their shareholders. In the life insurance industry, there was a slight decline in the solvency ratio in 2004.  Regarding unregulated financial institutions, the risks associated with hedge funds have remained a topical issue in 2005 (see slide 10). The ECB, in collaboration with the BSC (national central banks and supervisors), carried out a survey of EU banks’ exposures to hedge funds, which has been published and is now available on the ECB’s website. The December 2005 Financial Stability Review contains a box summarising the key findings of the survey. The chart on the left on slide 10 shows that according to publicly available data, inflows to the hedge funds sector continued in the first half of 2005, albeit at a decelerating pace. The chart on the right on slide 10 illustrates that at least certain hedge fund strategies suffered losses in March-April 2005 owing to the turbulence in the corporate credit markets that was generated by the widely expected downgrades of two large US automakers which subsequently materialised in May. This weaker performance in hedge fund returns may, at least in part, explain why inflows tapered off somewhat.  III.  Overall assessment Having reviewed developments in the key parts of the financial system, the overall assessment of risks to euro area financial stability can be formulated as follows (see slide 11).  A number of recent positive developments support the judgement that the euro area financial markets, institutions and infrastructures are robust and capable of withstanding shocks: First, the pace of global economic activity has remained rather strong. Second, balance sheets of large corporations have improved further, with signs of recovery also extending to the small and medium-sized enterprise sector. Third, the balance sheets of euro area banks and insurance companies have also continued to strengthen.  4 BIS Review 86/2005 
At the same time, these positive developments are clouded by the fact that risks and vulnerabilities are also growing (see slide 12). Global imbalances have continued to widen. In addition, it cannot be excluded that the global hunt for yield could have extended to riskier segments of financial markets, further accentuating the risk of disorderly market corrections as global liquidity is gradually reduced. High oil prices and rising house prices add to the sectoral risks, creating vulnerabilities to financial institutions’ future performance. Finally, if the credit environment turns worse than currently anticipated, the present level of loan-loss provisioning by euro area banks may prove to be insufficient.  Overall, with shock-absorption capacities improving, but risks and vulnerabilities rising, the financial stability outlook continues to rest upon a delicate balance. While the probable outcomes could, at this stage, best be described as bi-modal, a positive outcome remains the most likely prospect in the period ahead.  Thank you very much for your attention. BIS Review 86/2005 5 
Glenn Stevens: Financial challenges and opportunities in the Asia-Pacific region for the 21st century Opening remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to The 18th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference 2005, Sydney, 14 December 2005. *      *      * It is a pleasure to be here to open the 18th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference.  Our national and international financial markets play an increasingly prominent role in day-to-day life. They are certainly in the news. Not a single television or radio news bulletin passes without us being informed of the latest daily, or even intra-daily, movement in the US stock market, the exchange rate, the price of gold and – probably of more interest to the average person – the price of crude oil.  I suspect that, to no small extent, this almost obsessive focus on short-term price movements reflects the need for a high-capacity media to have a large amount of apparent 'news' to convey, even when the quantity of genuine information is small. The high-frequency nature of financial market trading – a new piece of 'news' every minute – is a natural source of grist for this particular mill. How useful this actually is, on the other hand, one could debate.  Likewise, the short-term reporting schedule of corporate and fund management results is perhaps understandable, viewed from the perspective of accountability in an era in which trust in management has been weakened. But, at the same time, it probably exacerbates the natural human tendency toward myopia and impulsive decision-making by investors, while the attendant pressure on managers to deliver steadily improving results period by period hardly seems conducive to far-sighted decisions. It remains to be seen, moreover, what will be the effect on behaviour of changes to accounting standards which will almost certainly increase the apparent short-term volatility of corporate results. Some have argued, I think persuasively, that an undue focus by investors and managers on the short term is a significant impediment to long-run performance. This seems an issue worthy of further study. Hopefully, you might spare some time for that at this conference.  In any event, there is no doubt that the functioning of our financial systems is very important. Once upon a time, when asked what was the role of a financial system, we might have answered: to match the resources of savers and the needs of entrepreneurial types, so as to enable the deployment of capital in some prospectively profitable venture. That (rather 19th-Century-sounding) definition, with an emphasis on intermediation, is still correct as far as it goes. But these days, with an increasing proportion of society's capital – even our infrastructure – held in marketable form, the role of markets in pricing assets is key. We would add, as well, that the role of a financial system is to price risk, in ever more finely defined bundles, and to allow people to adjust their portfolios so as to be exposed to just those risks, and opportunities, that they desire – no more and no less.  The system's efforts to provide just that set of possibilities has led to a plethora of sophisticated and increasingly complex products. This development, in turn, has raised questions by various observers and regulators as to whether those who have ended up holding certain risks are fully aware of them. Questions have also been asked of late about the back-office infrastructure supporting the most complex transactions, and there is a degree of concentration in some of these markets which could conceivably be problematic under less benign market conditions.  Nonetheless, these functions beyond pure intermediation seem only likely to grow further in importance for various reasons, not least among them demographic trends. As people confront longevity risk, in addition to the usual battery of market risks, the search will be on for new instruments and practices which enable this risk to be priced and managed. While it is highly doubtful, in my view, that ageing can be addressed simply by financial engineering, the financial system will have a role to play. Its effectiveness and efficiency in that role will be a focus of discussion in years to come. It's appropriate, therefore, that some parts of the conference program will be devoted to topics in the retirement income area.  It is also fitting that the conference has adopted the title 'Financial Challenges and Opportunities in the Asia Pacific Region for the 21st Century'. The Asia-Pacific has been, and remains, a source of economic dynamism – that's the 'opportunity' part. But it has also been a scene of considerable financial turmoil over the past decade – that is the 'challenge' part.  BIS Review 85/2005 1 
You have had some thoughtful presentations this morning on some of the issues. I could not do justice to all of them in brief remarks. Allow me to touch briefly on just a couple of themes. The first is the potential, and need, for financial development in Asia. It has been apparent for some time that east Asia's weight in global production of goods and services is increasing (Japan aside). Non-Japan east Asia, including China, has seen its share of global GDP almost double, to about 20 per cent, since 1990. It is likely to rise further in the period ahead. The extent of merchandise trade within the region has also grown rapidly, as trade barriers have declined and cross-border component sourcing has increased. So Asia is, these days, a powerful force in international trade.  Yet, according to many east Asian people themselves, the development of Asia's financial system has not kept pace. It is not so much the size of the banking systems which is in mind here – in a number of cases, these are actually quite large (though there are some important exceptions like Indonesia, or the Philippines). Rather, it is the depth, resilience to shocks and capacity to intermediate the region's savings within the region that is at issue.  With the onset of the financial crisis of 1997–98, it was apparent that Asia was not resilient to disturbances in international capital markets. Foreign capital had flowed into east Asia – something which made sense then, and still makes sense now. The exchange rate risk associated with these flows, however, was being borne mostly in the recipient countries: they had borrowed foreign currency unhedged. The result of these exposures was that, when exchange rates moved, the pain was concentrated in banks and/or their customers in Asia, something which exacerbated the crisis and put policy-makers in an impossible position. Because of heavy reliance on bank funding, with somewhat under-developed general capital markets, this was very damaging for a number of regional economies.  Post crisis, still keen on a fair degree of exchange rate stability, but unsure of the extent of likely support from the international community in the event of another crisis, the countries of east Asia have opted for greater self insurance against volatility of international capital flows. This takes the form of vastly increased holdings of official reserve assets, mainly the US dollar. While this response has been understandable, some even in Asia have questioned whether it makes sense for Asia to operate, in effect, as an extension of the US dollar zone.  Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, laments the situation in the following terms:  Whether we like it or not, we now find ourselves in the unenviable position of holding a substantial part of our savings in the financial liabilities of an economy that does not save, fearing that a diversification of a small part of such holdings might lead to a sharp fall in the value of the rest, thus shooting ourselves in the foot. We also find ourselves somewhat stuck with recycling a large part of our savings through the developed markets back into the region in a much more volatile form, occasionally creating havoc in our monetary and financial systems.1  The challenge for Asia then, according to its own financial leaders, is to develop a financial system which can allocate local savings to local needs more directly, can be resilient to the risks associated with international capital flows, and be somewhat less dependent on banks as a funding channel.  This is no small task. Thus far, apart from managing the fall-out from the crisis, efforts have been made to strengthen banking systems. A good deal of work has also occurred to improve capital markets, particularly bond markets. One of the key breakthroughs will be when Asian governments and corporates can borrow as needed in open markets, in their own currency and at an acceptable price, leaving any currency risk to others willing to bear it – like foreign investors. Australian borrowers have been in this happy position for a long time now, like their counterparts in other advanced economies. For emerging market countries to enjoy the same opportunity would be a major improvement on the past.  For this to occur, there needs to be a confluence of high-quality issuers, informed investors, and well-functioning markets to allow hedging and swaps. As Asian authorities seek to facilitate the                                                       1  Remarks made at the recent Global Bond Summit, Hong Kong. Available at http://www.info.gov.hk/hkma/eng/speeches/speechs/joseph/20051115e1.htm2 BIS Review 85/2005 
development of these markets by removing impediments, and the occasional modest official transaction, opportunities will presumably exist for capable market players in Australasia to play a role.  Opportunities might also lie, perhaps over a longer horizon, in the area of household finance, since the number of middle-income Asian households is rising quickly, and their income growth is rapid. It could be anticipated that their demand for more sophisticated asset and liability products will correspondingly grow. One would think that Australasian institutions would be well placed, given the skills acquired in their home markets, to take part in any such development.  A second, not unrelated, theme is the so-called 'global imbalances' issue. There is no time to rehearse all the arguments here, but one simple point can be made. As the size of capital flows from Asia to the US increased over the past decade or so, the price – the interest rate – declined. Hence, it would appear that developments on the supply side of this market were very important in driving the phenomenon. That is a reminder that if the capital is to flow more slowly to the US, adjustments to Asian behaviour will be part of the process.  The increased net supply of saving from Asia reflected a sharp decline in corporate investment in the Asian region (outside of China) after the crisis. At some point, Asian corporate investment will presumably recover. One would also imagine that, in some cases, there is a need for upgrades to public infrastructure, and a case for higher-quality private housing. Hence, in due course, the net supply of Asian saving to international markets, other things equal, will decline. Just when that will be, of course, and what other changes might accompany such developments, no-one can say. But no discussion of the challenges in the Asia-Pacific region would be complete without some coverage of such issues.  Let me conclude by saying how fitting it is that the conference takes place in Sydney, one of the Asia-Pacific's major financial centres. As the first largish market to open in the world trading day and as the financial centre of a medium-sized, developed economy, Sydney plays a prominent role in the region's financial trading, even though some other markets are somewhat larger. It is the leading market for the world's sixth most actively traded currency. Australia's share of global foreign currency trading, at about 3½ per cent, is higher than in a number of comparably sized economies, and is about three times Australia's weight in world GDP. Markets here are sophisticated and liquid, and the participants innovative. Sydney, and Australia more generally, has much to offer the region in financial services expertise. That said, participants here would be only too aware that financial market operations are highly competitive and the local players need to remain on their toes. So it is good to see some local market participants thinking about how to contribute to the development of vibrant markets in the region.  These and other interesting issues will no doubt be covered in the conference, if they have not already been. I wish you well in your deliberations.  BIS Review 85/2005 3 
Ian J Macfarlane: Some observations on recent economic developments Talk by Mr Ian J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Australian Business Economists, Annual Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 13 December 2005. *      *      * I see from my records that this is the sixth time that I have addressed the Australian Business Economists, but the last time was four years ago. At that time most of the G7 countries were in recession and interest rates were still heading down. The world looks a lot better now as it adjusts to stronger growth and a new set of challenges.  I confess that I had difficulty in deciding on a topic for tonight's talk. There were, in my view, no burning issues that I wanted to address, or messages that I wanted to leave my listeners with. In the event, I have decided to talk about three topics: how the world has coped with a tripling of oil prices, how the world is emerging from a period of exceptionally low interest rates, and, quite separately, is there an Australian model of macro-economic policy?  Oil prices  I will start with oil prices. At the beginning of 2002, when oil prices averaged about $US20 per barrel, most observers would have been very apprehensive if they had known that over the following three years prices would more than treble to a recent peak of $US70 per barrel. I think it would have been assumed that this event would lead to a significant rise in inflation and a major slowing, if not contraction, in the world economy. Memories of OPEC I in 1973 and OPEC II in 1979 when oil prices rose by a factor of three or four were still being seen as a guide to possible outcomes.  Certainly, over the past couple of years, the media has been full of stories about rises in oil prices and the dislocations and hardships they have caused. But looking back from our current vantage point, the thing that stands out is how comfortably the world economy has handled developments. Virtually all of the rise in oil prices has by now been reflected in statistics on inflation and GDP growth, and the results have been surprisingly small.  Global GDP growth was 4 per cent per annum or higher in 2003 and 2004 and is expected to remain so in 2005 and 2006. Of course, a lot of this growth has come from outside the OECD area, with the figures for OECD area growth being more than 1 per cent lower than for global growth. On inflation, the pick-up has been quite modest, with most OECD countries still recording headline inflation below 3 per cent per annum in the 12 months to September 2005. Interestingly, the United States where headline inflation was 4.7 per cent, stands out on the upside and lifts the OECD average inflation rate to 3.3 per cent. In Australia, as you are aware, headline CPI rose by 3.0 per cent in the year to the September quarter, up from a recent low point of 2.0 per cent eighteen months earlier.  There have been a number of reasons for these favourable outcomes around the world, including the developed world's lower oil dependency compared with earlier years, but I will concentrate on a few that I think are important. The main reason that economic growth was so little affected was that the rise in oil prices was caused by strong world growth, particularly from developing countries such as China and India. For the world as a whole, the rise in oil prices was not a negative supply shock, as it was in the seventies, but was the result of a positive demand shock. Of course, global growth could well have been stronger in the absence of the oil price rise, but even with its constraining effect, there was still plenty of growth to go around and current forecasts are still looking good.  On why the rise in inflation was so modest, the story is very interesting. We should start by reviewing a bit of history; this shows that even before OPEC I and II came along, OECD area inflation was rising year by year. Immediately before OPEC I, it had already risen to nearly 9 per cent, with Australia being one of the highest at 10.1 per cent. Inflationary expectations were also on the rise. In the business community the assumption was that any increase in costs could be easily passed on into prices, and the unions assumed that all wages would be indexed to rising inflation.  The situation is very different now. After more than a decade of low and stable inflation, inflationary expectations are better anchored. Discipline in goods markets from domestic and foreign competitors means the old 'cost plus' mentality no longer prevails. While pass-through at the first round still occurs, as the rise in retail petrol prices demonstrates, subsequent price pressures are often absorbed. With BIS Review 85/2005 1 
only limited and manageable increases in overall inflation throughout the world, monetary tightenings specifically directed at oil-price-instigated inflation have not been needed.  That is all I wish to say about oil prices, other than to add the caveat that I am only talking about the increases to date. Obviously, if we enter a new round of similar increases, the situation would have to be reassessed.  World interest rates  It is well known that the world has recently gone through a phase of exceptionally low interest rates, but I am not sure that people appreciate how low they were by historical standards. In fact it is not much of an exaggeration to say that interest rates in mid 2003 were at their lowest level for a century. This was the time when official overnight rates – the ones set by central banks – were 1 per cent in the United States, 2 per cent in the euro area, and zero in Japan. The only qualifications I have to make to my earlier generalisation is to concede that rates may have been slightly lower during the second world war in some countries such as the United States and United Kingdom when quantity rationing was the norm, but they have not been lower in peace time. We can construct an indicator of world interest rates for a century or more using a weighted average of the rates for the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and Japan. Graph 1 shows the results for official overnight interest rates or their nearest equivalent since 1860. Although the graph is dominated by the high interest rates during the great inflation of the 1970s, the readings for 2002 and 2003 are lower than any other time in this long span of years.1 Part of the explanation is that inflation was low, but it was only low compared to the post-war standard – it was not low compared to most of the period covered by the graph. In fact if we construct simple measures of real interest rates (based on realised inflation rates), they were also low by the standards of earlier low inflation periods.2 In Table 1, real interest rates in the first five years of this decade are lower than in any previous decade apart from those containing the two world wars and the 1970s.  Graph 1                                                         1  The observation for 1923, the year of the Weimar inflation in Germany, had to be deleted because it did not fit on the scale. 2  The problem with most measures of real interest rates is that they become negative during periods of unanticipated rises in inflation such as the 1970s. For this reason, meaningful comparisons of real interest rates (using realised inflation rates) should only be made for periods of low and stable inflation such as the present. 2 BIS Review 85/2005 
 We could ask the question of why such low interest rates were put in place in this decade when it had not been seen to be necessary to do so on earlier occasions. This is a very big question and I do not propose to answer it tonight.3 Nor do I wish to maintain that a different global monetary policy should have been put in place. Defenders of the monetary policy that was pursued would argue that it resulted in continuing low inflation and reasonable economic growth for the world economy, apart from the mildest post-war recession in 2001. They would say that in light of this outcome, it would be hard to argue for a higher level of interest rates during the period.  Usually when interest rates are kept very low for an extended period the main risk is that there will be a pronounced pick-up in inflation. As we know, there has been little of that on a global scale, or indeed in individual countries, even though commodity prices have risen sharply. Where the risks have mainly arisen has been in the financial sphere, where there has been a 'search for yield' and a driving up of many asset prices. So far this decade, the most obvious sign of the latter phenomenon has been the surge in house prices, particularly in those anglo countries with very competitive financial sectors such as the United States, United Kingdom and Australia.  What I have been describing so far is a global development, and although we in Australia have shared it in some aspects, in others we have differed. The main aspect in which we differed was that we did not reduce interest rates to anywhere near the extent they were reduced in the three biggest monetary areas – the United States, Japan and the euro area. The low point in our short-term interest rates of 4¼ per cent this decade was not very different to the low point in the 1990s of 4¾ per cent. We were also the only country of any significance to resist the general trend to lower interest rates during 2003. Nevertheless, we still have shown many of the same symptoms in our asset markets that others have shown.  What we are seeing now around the world is a gradual return to normality in interest rates. We in Australia can make some claim to being the first in this process because we began in mid 2002. Over the past two years the predominant tendency among countries has been to raise interest rates. Virtually every developed country except Japan has now participated, with the move by the ECB earlier this month being an important step.  The point I want to make that links the first two parts of this talk together is that the major reason for the rises in interest rates is, I think, the need for a return to normality, not a specific fear about oil prices. Of course the two are related in that the low level of interest rates has accommodated the growth in demand that lay behind the rise in oil prices. But the most important factor behind the recent                                                       3  For a partial answer see I.J. Macfarlane, “What are the Global Imbalances?”, Reserve Bank Bulletin, October 2005. BIS Review 85/2005 3 
moves is the realisation that the world could not have safely continued with the sort of interest rates that prevailed in 2002 and 2003.  Is there an Australian model?  I was recently visited by the Chilean Minister of Finance who, like many in the same position in Latin America, is a very good professional economist. Our discussions were very interesting, and at one stage he answered one of my questions by saying that Chile 'was following the Australian model'. He meant this in a very specific way, and it is worth examining exactly what he meant by the term.  First, he was talking about a macro-economic policy model that had the following structural features: • a floating exchange rate with a currency viewed as a commodity currency;  • a monetary policy regime based on central bank independence and an inflation target;  • a disciplined fiscal policy which aims at balance or surplus in the medium term.  These were important, but the most important characteristic he wished to focus on was the internationalisation of the currency, i.e. the ability for Australian entities to borrow abroad in Australian dollars, or to borrow abroad in foreign currency and hedge back into Australian dollars. This allows Australian corporations and banks to participate fully in international financial markets without incurring foreign currency risk (or to only incur it where they have a 'natural hedge' such as foreign currency export earnings or to finance a foreign acquisition).  We, of course, have been very aware of the importance of this characteristic and regard it as a virtual necessity if a country is to be able to run a floating exchange rate regime successfully. But many, if not most, countries do not reach this stage. It was foreign currency exposure which led to the collapse of many Asian banks and corporations when their currencies fell during the Asian crisis. In Latin America, traditionally all foreign borrowing was in US dollars, which made their countries extremely vulnerable to falls in their exchange rates. It also gave rise to what is known as 'fear of floating' which means the tendency for their central banks to quickly resort to raising interest rates whenever the exchange rate is in danger of falling.  What the Chilean Finance Minister called the Australian model, of course, is not unique to Australia,4 but it is associated with Australia in Latin American and Asian economic circles because of Australia's success in withstanding the Asian crisis. While some countries such as Chile see it as a sort of role model, many Asian countries have chosen a different path by running current account surpluses, building up large holdings of international reserves and resisting changes in their exchange rates. As you know, we think this is a major reason for the growing global payments imbalances, and would be happier if they followed a model closer to our own. But that is another story.  The interesting issue for other economies, particularly emerging market economies, is how do you reach the situation where you can borrow abroad in your own currency, or, to put it differently, where investors in other countries will willingly hold assets denominated in your own currency. When we look back and see how Australia reached this position, it is a very interesting (and reasonably recent) story.  The major step occurred when the Government decided that it would borrow honestly from its own citizens. That is, it would stop using captive arrangements that force financial institutions to take government paper, and stop setting the interest rate on its own paper. In our case this occurred when we introduced the tender system for selling Treasury notes in 1979 and bonds in 1982, and soon after made clear that the Government would no longer borrow from the Reserve Bank, but instead borrow from the public to finance the budget deficit dollar for dollar. At first we had to accept very high interest rates, but in time demand for government paper expanded, and most importantly overseas investors began to find Australian government bonds denominated in Australian dollars an attractive investment. It was not necessary to ask them to invest, nor to do 'road shows' on Wall Street to entice them. At the                                                       4  Canada and New Zealand also have the characteristics listed when describing the Australian model. For a discussion of the difference between Australia and some other commodity exporters, see: Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, New Challenges for Monetary Policy, pp329–368; and Ricardo J. Caballero, Kevin Cowan and Jonathan Kearns (2005), “Fear of Sudden Stops: Lessons from Australia and Chile,” Journal of Policy Reform, Vol.8 (4), pp313–354. 4 BIS Review 85/2005 
same time, old habits died hard so that as recently as March 1987 the Australian Government made its last overseas borrowing in the US market in US dollars.  In time, overseas investors became comfortable with holding Australian government paper, semi and local paper, and eventually corporate bonds and asset-backed securities. Turnover in the Australian dollar is sixth amongst the world currencies and there is ample liquidity in both currency and asset markets. The relevant derivative contracts have grown, and so provided hedging opportunities. As we point out in a forthcoming Bulletin article, Australia as a whole has for some time had a long foreign currency position. That is, we have more foreign-currency-denominated assets than foreign-currency-denominated liabilities, a far cry from our position in the early post-float period.  I want to conclude now by briefly revisiting the subject of why economies, including our own, have exhibited more stability than in earlier periods. Is it because policymakers have become better forecasters and more adept at timely adjustment to the levers of economic policy? It would be tempting to answer yes to this, but I suspect it is only a small part of the answer. A more plausible explanation is that our economy has become more resilient. That is, we have systematically modified our institutional framework so that it is more flexible and more able to adjust to economic shocks than formerly. What I have described above is a good example of this process at work.  BIS Review 85/2005 5 
Jaime Caruana: The future of banking supervision in Europe Address by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the conference “Supervision of International Banks: Is a Bank Crisis still Possible in Europe?” – European Banking Federation (FBE), Brussels, 28 October 2005.  *      *      * Introduction First of all, I would like to thank Michel Pébereau and the European Banking Federation for inviting me here today to participate in this conference on important issues relating to the future of banking supervision in Europe.   Usually I speak from the perspective of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Today, however, I will mainly take the viewpoint of one of the central banks of the Eurosystem with banking supervisory responsibilities. The subject of this debate is particularly timely, given the European Commission’s current initiative to define financial services policy for the EU over the next five years, to which I understand the FBE has been an active contributor.   I would like to use my time this morning to suggest a number of principles that I believe could help in addressing the key challenges for European banking supervision structures in the coming years, and also to reflect on some concrete steps to build a European framework fit to meet these challenges.   What is the main issue we face? There is no need for me to explain the dichotomy that arises when we have, on one hand, an industry that is becoming increasingly internationalised in nature and, on the other, a supervisory framework that remains predominantly based on national responsibilities and accountabilities.   In a context where banking groups increasingly take decisions and manage risks on a global basis, inconsistencies or differences in the regulation and supervision across the countries in which they are active may create compliance costs and inefficiencies.  Furthermore, adverse developments in one bank are more likely to have financial stability implications for several countries. These issues are certainly not exclusive to the EU.  But the existence of the EU project adds an extra dimension, which brings challenges, responsibilities and also opportunities. Progress has been made in building the single market in financial services, but we are not there yet.  In some segments of the financial markets, such as retail banking, there is a long way to go to achieve a fully integrated market.  And recent experiences in relation to some cross-border acquisitions seem hardly compatible with the spirit of the single market. We face, therefore, several challenges: to safeguard the efficiency, effectiveness and consistency of supervisory action in more global and integrated financial markets; and to reduce the remaining obstacles to cross-border finance, both in terms of cross-border consolidation and in the provision of products and services. Some of these national differences have developed over a long period of time and go beyond the prudential or supervisory sphere. Political initiatives to reduce regulatory inconsistencies would substantially support the supervisory convergence efforts. At the same time, there is a political objective to enhance the dynamism and competitiveness of the EU economy – the so-called “Lisbon” objective – and an efficient, integrated financial market is an important part of achieving it. The fact is that if we are to reap the full benefits of European integration, and meet the political objectives set in Lisbon, we need to find ways to ensure that the banking industry can operate with maximum efficiency and also that supervision is not unduly burdensome and promotes a level EU playing field.  But we need to do this while also ensuring that depositors are adequately protected and that financial stability is preserved.  In summary, the challenge is how to ensure both minimum gaps and minimum overlaps in supervision.  Much progress has already been made in the banking context, but it is necessary to go further. BIS Review 84/2005 1 
What should be the guiding principles for a European approach to dealing with these challenges? There are a range of views on how EU banking regulation and supervisory structures should face up to the challenges of the 21st century.  What’s more, these opinions are not static, which makes for a complex situation.   Among the most ambitious perspectives are those which advocate a single EU banking or financial services supervisory authority.  Others – including the European Banking Federation – promote the idea of a “lead supervisor” approach, providing banking groups with a single interlocutor which has powers relating to the group as a whole.   Both proposals raise significant political, legal and practical issues.  Yet it is clear that the status quo will not be sufficient in the future. We need to move forward. And we need arrangements that reduce compliance costs for banks and streamline their interaction with supervisory authorities if we are really to make progress in integration.   I think the key to success will be pragmatism, both on the part of the supervisory authorities and on the part of the industry.   Let me highlight the principles that I believe should guide us in finding a way forward.  I will begin with four principles which could be classified as being on the prudent side of the debate. Firstly, I believe that we need an approach which ensures legal clarity for all concerned.  Banks need to know what requirements they should meet, on what basis and in which countries; supervisors need to know what activities they are responsible for and who they are accountable to; and depositors need to know where they can turn and on what basis if things go wrong. Informal arrangements between supervisory authorities can be extremely useful.  But they do need to be grounded on firm and clear legal settings and accountability mechanisms.   Secondly, we must recognise the diversity of situations within the EU.  The European banking industry is far from homogenous.  Just focusing on the international aspects, let me mention two points: first, only a handful of the thousands of banking institutions in the EU can be considered as truly pan-European, even though these institutions make up a significant part of the banking market.  In the same vein, a significant proportion of banks in a number of the new EU member states are foreign-owned.  Clearly, pan-European institutions are key to the EU’s position in the global system, and we must do everything we can to ensure they can play their role.   But we also need to be careful that any measures we take in the interests of promoting greater efficiency for international institutions do not impose undue expense on smaller institutions, and we must take a perspective that is acceptable for both home and host supervisors.   My third point is linked to this, and concerns the need to observe the principle of subsidiarity, a key tenet of the EU which says that action should only be taken at EU level where national or local action cannot have the desired effect.  This principle is particularly relevant given the continued diversity of the EU banking industry and consumers.  Supervision is best conducted close to the markets and institutions. Last but not least, I believe we need an approach which is realistic in the short to medium term.   It is essential that the industry keeps considering the issues and expressing its ideas, but I am afraid that unrealistic expectations can only lead us to an agonised debate which could polarise views and even hinder the progress that we need to make now in the crucial and urgent work of implementing Basel II, and international accounting standards. As I mentioned earlier, these were the more prudent principles that I wanted to mention.  But, as the 19th century English writer Charles Caleb Colton said, “there is nothing more imprudent than excessive prudence”.  Therefore, let me add a further four principles that go more in a more progressive direction. Firstly, I think that the EU needs to be ambitious, and set an example.  I am convinced, and have said in many of my recent interventions, that the EU can and should go further, deeper and faster than the wider international community in finding greater consistency, convergence and efficiency in banking supervision. We should especially take advantage of the opportunities presented by Basel II and the fact that we already have a body of single market legislation and a long history of supervisory co-operation on which to build.  And if we can demonstrate that progress is possible among 25 countries that are still rather diverse, others will have more confidence to push ahead also. Secondly, we should recognise the legitimate concerns of the industry.  More efficient supervision is a necessary - although not sufficient - condition for a more integrated market.  We undoubtedly need a 2 BIS Review 84/2005 
greater degree of co-ordination between supervisors than hitherto, and we need greater consistency in supervisory practices.  As I said, we need a framework that rationalises the compliance burden and streamlines the interaction between supervisory authorities. We need banks that manage risks, not unnecessary supervisory requirements.  Thirdly, we need an approach that uses the full range of tools at our disposal.  In other words, we should not just look for legislative solutions to the challenges that face us.  What we need is effective and timely implementation of the laws and regulations that exist, and convergence in their application.  This comes through co-operation and information-sharing between supervisors.  And let me also mention here the potential offered by supervisory transparency.  We have heard much about market discipline in the context of the disclosure requirements that will apply to banks under pillar 3 of the revised Basel capital framework.  But I think that increased disclosure by supervisors, especially on a comparable basis, also has an important role to play, not only in helping us to monitor consistency of approaches across countries, but also in driving greater convergence through exerting a kind of market discipline for supervisors.  Finally, allow me to put my Basel hat on for a moment. I think Basel II certainly offers its fair share of implementation challenges, but also provides us with by far the biggest opportunity to make progress in building a more consistent and efficient co-operative approach to supervision.   I have mentioned four prudent principles, plus another four more forward-looking ones. Some may emphasise the former, while others may prefer to move faster. My own view is that there is some urgency in moving forward significantly. Building the European framework So let us now focus on the concrete steps that move in this direction.  I would like to separate these into two categories: those that relate to the regulatory framework and those that pertain to the supervisory framework. The regulatory framework Let me begin with some reflections on the regulatory framework. Going back to the principles I highlighted earlier, I believe we should build upon the regulatory framework that already exists in the EU.  Any improvement to the EU framework for financial supervision should first seek to fully exploit the potential of the existing framework. In this respect, the concepts and responsibilities of home and host supervisors and the framework for consolidated supervision are well-embedded in the existing banking directives, and it makes a lot of sense for them to form the basis of the future approaches.   Indeed, the directive to implement Basel II in the EU – the so-called capital requirements directive – contains key provisions which will reinforce the role of the consolidated supervisor in relation to applications to use the advanced approaches of the new capital framework.   As I am sure you are all aware, these provisions will allow banking groups to make one application for approval in relation to the group as a whole, and will require the relevant supervisors to co-operate in trying to reach a common agreement on the application.  Should it prove not possible to reach agreement within six months, the consolidated supervisor will have the power and responsibility to take the decision.   This is a significant development in the regulatory framework, giving the consolidated supervisor the possibility to take decisions with an impact that reaches outside the national jurisdiction.  I am aware that the European Banking Federation believes that full consolidated supervision should be determined now as the ultimate objective for the EU regulatory and supervisory framework, but I believe that we have to approach this carefully, and see how the new provisions work in practice in this more restricted area.   I also think that it is important to recognise and respect the legitimate concerns of host supervisors.  As I have already mentioned, the banking systems of some of the new EU member states are predominantly made up of incoming institutions.  We should ensure that host supervisors are able to access sufficient information on the institutions operating locally and, where necessary, in relation to BIS Review 84/2005 3 
the wider group.  The capital requirements directive also includes provisions in this respect and notes the need to take account of the significance of the institution in local markets.   Looking at the wider prudential framework let me mention two specific areas where the European Commission is currently reviewing the existing EU regulation. The first area relates to deposit guarantee schemes.  Although the deposit guarantee directive of 1994 was useful in setting common minimum requirements for national schemes, the current level of harmonisation is low, with different levels of protection and different structures in place across the EU.  This is not only inefficient but may hinder further integration.  As many of you will already be aware, the European Commission is currently undertaking a wide-ranging review of Deposit insurance arrangements, and I would encourage it to be ambitious in this respect. The second relates to the work being carried out by the Commission with the aim of ensuring that EU financial services legislation and supervisory practices do not pose barriers to cross-border mergers and acquisitions.  Consolidation processes should be market-driven phenomena that respond to market needs, such as economies of scale, IT synergies, the benefits of diversification, access to a larger client base, etc. I think that supervisors do have a crucial but limited role to play in fulfilling their responsibility to ensure that banks are not taken over by shareholders that are not suitable on prudential grounds.  But this is as far as we should go.  The Supervisory framework Let me now turn to the supervisory framework.    I believe that we need to think in terms of a European system of banking supervision.  I am not talking about a single European supervisory authority.  I don’t think the time has come for this, either at a conceptual or practical level.  But rather, I think that we need to develop the existing institutional system for European banking supervision in order to ensure that all of the possibilities for co-operation and convergence are fully taken advantage of.  The main policy objective at this stage should be to enhance cross-border supervisory co-operation in order for supervisory action to be perceived as unified.  This system should be built on four levels. At the first level, we have the competent supervisor of each banking institution (whether this is the home or host supervisor in the context of the group), which will have to fulfil its responsibilities and accountabilities, on the basis of the powers and obligations it has been given by the national parliament and legislators. The second level consists of bilateral co-operation between the supervisors of internationally active institutions.  This has long been the bedrock of effective supervision in the context of increasing internationalisation, and will continue to be essential in the future. Multilateral co-operation forms the basis of the third level.  This is an aspect that has become progressively more significant in recent times, and which will grow in importance in the coming years.  Both bilateral and multilateral arrangements will be increasingly necessary in the context of Basel II, where, as we have already discussed, the consolidated supervisor will be responsible for co-ordinating the supervisory process in relation to assessing applications to use the advanced approaches.   So far, I have been talking about what I refer to as “vertical” co-operation, in the sense it addresses the relationship between home and host supervisors in relation to specific institutions and groups.     But there is also a horizontal aspect that will be crucial for the future.  This is supervisory convergence - the fourth level.  Greater consistency in supervision is essential in promoting consistent approaches across borders, and thereby a level playing field.  My view is that without convergence of supervisory practices across the EU, the consolidated or lead supervision model seems likely only to lead to fragmentation, with different groups being supervised in potentially inconsistent ways.   This is why the work of the new Committee of European Banking Supervisors, or CEBS, is so important.  This is the first time that the EU has had a committee that is formally charged with promoting co-operation between supervisors and convergence in supervisory practices.  Danièle Nouy, who will speak shortly from her perspective as Vice-Chair of CEBS, is, of course, much better placed than me to talk about the work of this committee.  But I think that CEBS has already made excellent headway, and will undoubtedly be the driver of progress in the future.  And I’m sure that the industry will keep up the pressure to ensure that this is the case. 4 BIS Review 84/2005 
I believe that we need to combine these four vertical and horizontal aspects – together with enhanced supervisory transparency at all levels – in order to have the most effective and efficient system.   Conclusion In concluding my intervention today, I would be the first to admit that the ideas I have mentioned today are not revolutionary, but I believe that an evolutionary and balanced approach is the best way forward and provides the greatest chances of success. The flip-side of the coin in this evolutionary approach is that the responsibility to deliver is greater. But if we do not succeed in meeting our objectives, we should not be afraid to explore other, more radical solutions. The costs of non integration is too high. I would also like to re-emphasise that we have the possibility to make rapid and real progress in promoting an effective and efficient framework for European banking supervision. This should not only help us to achieve our goals within the EU, but could also promote greater convergence beyond the EU. Allow me to put my Basel hat on for a couple of final comments on related challenges of the Basel Committee.  At a more global level, we face the same consistency issue in the implementation of Basel II, and as I said, in this case, Europe can lead this process, we in Europe have more instruments to do it, and the example can be very helpful for the Basel process.  This is the first and most important challenge of the Basel Committee in the next few years. As part of this process we will adhere to the published schedule for our fifth quantitative impact study. And I believe that we already have the tools at our disposal to deal with any issues that arise from the QIS5 exercise, or that arise during this period of implementation.   To be sure, a key element is not to add further details to Basel II, but rather to focus on achieving a quality implementation of the new Framework. Therefore, I do not anticipate any significant change to the Framework during the period bankers and regulators are tackling initial implementation challenges.  But the main challenge is the cross border home host cooperation. On this point I would not underestimate the work and efforts that supervisors are devoting to this issue. One final related point. The staggered implementation, specially the timetable differences with EEUU raises transitional cross-border issues that will need to be managed through greater collaboration between the EU and US supervisors, but I can assure you that both sides are even more committed to this than before, and that our efforts will be redoubled in this respect.  Ultimately, I hope that this commitment and effort will promote even more effective implementation. A second related challenge is to enhance the cooperation with non-G10 supervisors. This has been one of the Committee’s priorities and  many significant steps have been taken and will be taken to improve the ownership of the standards and inclusiveness of the processes. For example, the Committee has a long-standing working group that includes representatives from sixteen non-member countries, and we have increased our interaction with this working group. This past July, the Committee met in joint session with this working group in Krakow, Poland to discuss, among other things, Basel II implementation issues.  In addition, we encouraged non-G10 supervisory participation on working groups that are addressing issues related to validation and operational risk. I believe that this dialogue will, over time, foster greater consistency among Committee and non-Committee members. The Committee is therefore committed to heightening this dialogue and will consider further ways to promote consistency. I noticed a quote on the cover page of the FBE’s response to the European Commission’s Green Paper on Financial Services Policy: “time passes quickly, we can not save it or buy it, but we can make it work and be fruitful”.  In the context of this speech I hope that you feel the past 20 minutes have passed quickly, have worked and been fruitful, and I wish you successful discussions for the rest of the day. Thank you for your attention. BIS Review 84/2005 5 
Michael C Bonello: Pursuing faster growth in a stable macroeconomic environment Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, St. Julians, 10 November 2005. *      *      * Prime Minister, Parliamentary Secretary, Excellencies, Ladies & Gentlemen, I should first of all like to thank the President and Council of the Institute of Financial Services for inviting me once again to their annual dinner. Over the past six years I have been able to observe with satisfaction how the Institute has successfully adapted itself to the steady expansion of Malta’s financial services industry, and to the demand this growth has generated for a diversified range of professional expertise. One planned innovation which I consider most appropriate is the Certificate in Mortgage Advice and Practice that is partly based on Maltese law. This annual occasion also affords me a welcome opportunity to share with a distinguished audience of bankers and their corporate guests the Bank’s thinking on a subject of topical interest. In today’s complex global environment several issues spontaneously present themselves as likely candidates for further analysis. For us in Malta, the major policy challenge at this time is to return the economy to a path of higher and sustained growth. The facts speak for themselves. In the five years to 2004, the annual growth rate averaged only 1.2 per cent in real terms, well below that of many of our EU partners; and while this year’s growth rate up to September, at 1.7 per cent, may be encouraging, it is too early to know whether the implied acceleration will be sustained. And yet the need to achieve a faster pace of economic growth has probably never been as urgent as at the present time. Growth is not only necessary in order to satisfy society’s legitimate aspirations for higher living standards. Beyond that, an expansion in the economy’s supply capacity and an enhanced degree of international competitiveness are essential to overcome the daunting challenges the country is currently facing. A threefold challenge: globalization and its implications  The first challenge derives from the pervasive process of globalization, which, powered by rapid advances in technology and trade liberalization, has given rise to an unprecedented mobility of resources between countries in pursuit of the best cost-quality combinations. Suffice it to say that over the past two decades exports and foreign direct investment have been growing twice and three times faster than global output, respectively. Globalization is undoubtedly creating numerous profitable business opportunities. At the same time, however, it represents a potential threat for open economies like Malta’s because of the concurrent intensification of competition. Behind recent trends, in fact, lies the emergence of countries like China and India, who have doubled their share of global output over the past twenty years and are now also competing in markets for high technology products. China alone manufactures half of the world’s cameras and its share of world exports of computers increased tenfold, to almost 20 per cent, in the ten years to 2003! We, too, must find a way to participate actively in globalization and gain from it. ... compounded by a sharply higher oil price ...  The second challenge derives from the sharp increase in oil prices. There is a silver lining to this dark cloud in the sense that the price rise is not expected to have a significant effect on world output. The IMF, for example, anticipates global growth to average 4.3 per cent both in 2005 and 2006. This is mainly because it is due to an expansion in demand that is underpinned by economic growth, particularly in Asia. It is still the case, however, that a massive redistribution of wealth is underway from countries which consume oil to those which produce it. Malta is inevitably on the losing side of this process. The estimated increase in the fuel bill for 2006 arising from the production of electricity and the consumption of liquid fuels is not far from the expansion in nominal GDP forecast for 2005. It would seem, therefore, that no significant growth could BIS Review 84/2005 1 
be expected next year if the underlying pace of economic activity does not accelerate from this year’s level. The increase in Malta’s fuel bill is also roughly equivalent to the narrowing of the fiscal deficit achieved over the past seven years. In the circumstances, it would be foolish to allow the progress made at considerable cost to be blown away by this external shock. An attempt to cushion the increase in the oil price through borrowing may be economically justifiable in terms of sustaining the incipient recovery suggested by recent GDP data. On the other hand, any borrowing would have to be serviced; and, because it would constitute interference with market signals, it could also retard the process of economic adjustment. The only long-term remedy to counteract the effects of higher fuel prices is to expand productivity and output, and therefore incomes. Indeed, the oil price shock is another compelling reason, if one were needed, for redoubling our efforts to energize the economy. … and by a higher dependency ratio due to population ageing.  The third challenge is the demographic shift caused by population ageing, such that the ratio of the working age to the dependent population is expected to shrink from almost four- to just over two-to-one by the late 2020s. Some effects of this trend are already being felt this year as the first cohorts of the baby-boom generation reach retirement age. This has produced a significant acceleration, by some Lm7 million or 10 per cent of the budget deficit, in the rate of increase in pension expenditures. Pension reform clearly cannot be delayed any longer. Population ageing also represents a broader threat to the sustainability of living standards and to social cohesion because the burden of supporting a growing number of dependent persons will, at some point, become unbearable for the productive sectors of the economy. This burden consists not only of pension and other welfare payments, but also of services provided in kind, most notably by the public health system. This is another reason why reducing government recurrent commitments should be a priority objective. A better understanding of the magnitude of these challenges can be obtained by synthesising their effects in terms of the growth rate necessary for the economy to deal with them effectively. For example, in order just to compensate for the increase in the dependency ratio associated with population ageing, the economy would have to grow by around 1 per cent per annum over the next twenty years. At this rate of growth, which is more or less what Malta averaged over the past five years, there would not be any improvement in per capita GDP, that is in living standards. As for hopes of raising the activity rate by ten percentage points to around 70 per cent over twenty years, the economy would have to grow by an average annual rate of at least 3 per cent. This growth rate, in turn, would still not be sufficient to ensure convergence with the average per capita GDP of the EU twenty years from now. For this latter objective to be achieved, a real growth rate of some 4 per cent would be required. The way forward: a concerted push for faster growth These scenarios underline the urgency of achieving more rapid, sustainable growth. The longer it takes to expand the productive base of the economy, the more onerous the challenge will be. The prospects for a significant recovery in the short term, moreover, are doubtful since oil prices are expected to remain at their current high level, and the dynamic benefits of fiscal consolidation and EU membership are unlikely to exercise a marked impact on growth in the coming months. Growth forecasts for 2006 vary between 1% and 2%. The current economic situation, therefore, requires decisive action designed to produce early results. I, therefore, feel obliged once again to make a strong appeal to all the social partners not to underestimate the threat which today’s realities represent for the wellbeing of their own members, and to cooperate in the search for real, long-term solutions in the national interest. The alternative is a slow, but depressing process of stagnation. The way forward towards faster growth lies in the first instance in striving to maintain the competitive advantage of traditional sectors – which typically rely heavily on cost advantage and where market share is being lost -, while promoting the development of new activities that exploit the potential offered by Malta’s strategic assets. These include EU membership, a modern technological 2 BIS Review 84/2005 
infrastructure and a skilled and flexible labour force. The current, encouraging expansion in new activities such as financial services, software development and pharmaceuticals attests to the competitive edge which our economy indeed enjoys in these areas. This advantage must, however, also be supported by a stable operating environment that is responsive to changing market conditions. Elements of a coherent policy framework Such an environment requires a coherent policy framework on three levels: the first is the macroeconomic level, where a sound financial system and prudent fiscal and monetary policies should combine to provide favourable conditions for the restructuring of the productive base. At the microeconomic level, resources must be more efficiently allocated and managed by enterprises so as to obtain the maximum possible degree of cost-effectiveness and market penetration. The third involves what may be termed as meso-level policies, involving specific sectors. Policy at this level should primarily avoid distorting the mechanisms that facilitate economic activity. Supportive macroeconomic policies are already in place … At the macroeconomic level, the recent track record has been largely positive. Fiscal consolidation is progressing in line with the projections of the convergence programme. Despite weak growth, the fiscal balance improved significantly in 2004 and again this year. This has not escaped the attention of international observers. The recent assessment of the Maltese economy by the IMF, for example, commends the progress achieved in strengthening macroeconomic management, including the substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit. Looking ahead, I am pleased to note that the Budget for 2006 bears the hallmark of continuity. Operating within the constraints represented by the natural upward creep in spending on health, pensions and welfare programmes, on the one hand, and the need to avoid increasing the burden of taxation on a slow moving economy, on the other, the Government has charted a course which envisages a continuation of the process of fiscal consolidation, leading to a further reduction in the deficit to GDP ratio to below 3 per cent. This is an ambitious target whose attainment will depend crucially on a rigorous implementation of all the Budget measures, together with an intensification of efforts aimed at cutting costs and collecting taxes. On the monetary front, the financial markets have so far considered the level of domestic interest rates as appropriate and inflation remains moderate. Monetary stability is also being promoted by participation in ERM II, which is proceeding smoothly. Allow me at this point, Mr. President, to reiterate the reasons behind the Bank’s advice to the Government to maintain the value of the Maltese lira constant against the euro within ERM II at the rate prevailing prior to entry in the Mechanism. First, it is generally acknowledged that Malta’s pegged exchange rate regime has in the past served the economy well, in that it kept inflation and inflationary expectations at bay. As for the level of the central parity rate of the lira in ERM II, studies conducted by the Central Bank of Malta found no evidence of a significant exchange rate misalignment, a conclusion which was not contested by the competent EU institutions. There being no compelling reasons for change, therefore, the exchange rate level prevailing prior to entering the Mechanism was retained in the interests of continuity and stability. As for the unilateral commitment to maintain the currency at its central parity rate during the ERM II phase, I would remind the proponents of a flexible exchange rate regime of Malta’s high dependence on foreign trade. For such an open economy, the resultant volatility and consequent uncertainty would entail additional costs associated with insuring against exchange risk, thereby inflating both retail and export prices. Changes in the nominal exchange rate, moreover, are not likely to have a significant impact on competitiveness via adjustments in the real exchange rate. This is because a weakening of the currency is typically followed by a rapid pass-through in the shape of higher prices of imports and wages, as the 1992 experience proved. On the other hand, due to downward rigidities, a strengthening of the Maltese lira cannot be expected to be followed by commensurate reductions in price and wage levels. BIS Review 84/2005 3 
Finally, advocates of flexibility should note that if the Maltese lira were allowed to fluctuate within the ERM II bands, the exchange rate would reflect developments in the balance of payments as a whole, including those in the capital account, and would not, therefore, necessarily adjust in response to export trends. Indeed, had the Bank opted for the bands, market forces would have exerted upward pressure on the exchange rate. This is because since ERM II entry in May there has been a steady market demand for the lira, such that the Bank has been a net buyer of foreign exchange and the external reserves have increased substantially. It is very important that these basic facts be well understood before public pronouncements are made that might affect the credibility of monetary and exchange rate policy. You will recall that when negative perceptions about the exchange rate took hold towards the end of 2004, they eventually led the Bank to defend the currency by raising interest rates. This is a responsibility that the Bank cannot, and will not, abdicate. … as are progressive policies at the enterprise level … At the microeconomic level, a measure of progress is being registered in spite of the failure to adopt a social pact. There are indications that productivity-enhancing measures are being introduced at the enterprise level under the pressure of competitive forces. These range from more flexible working practices and wage restraint to improved management techniques and more focussed marketing efforts. Some areas, however, remain susceptible to further efficiency gains, particularly the services sector. … but the public sector still lags behind.  At the meso or sectoral level, some important measures were announced in the Budget for 2006, including the decision to intensify efforts to improve efficiency in the public service. Hopefully this will also involve the adoption of output-, rather than input-oriented management practices. The recently-signed collective agreement for the public service, moreover, is an example of what a responsible social dialogue aimed at balancing competing interests can achieve. There remains, nevertheless, ample room for further progress. The country needs to undergo a culture change so as to realise the fallacy inherent in the perception of unlimited government power to levy taxes, which leads to the assumption of jobs for life regardless of performance or need, and of universal and free welfare services irrespective of their sustainability and of equity considerations. Such thinking is incompatible with an ethic based on efficiency and accountability, and with the need to reduce the burden of taxation, foster initiative and encourage investment. Social dialogue can, and should play a crucial role in promoting acceptance of the policies necessary to bring about this change. The attainment of greater efficiency in the public sector is a key objective because it provides vital support services to the productive sectors of the economy. It must, therefore, become better geared to ensure that the intentions of policy-makers are implemented rapidly and effectively. Determined efforts must be made to streamline bureaucratic procedures, eliminate outdated regulations and generally reduce the cost of engaging in any economic activity. The Better Regulation Unit in the Office of the Prime Minister must meet the expectations its creation has raised. Failure to do so risks compromising all the efforts being undertaken at both the macro and microeconomic levels to create a modern, dynamic economy. At the national level, moreover, we need to understand that the simultaneous pursuit of economic growth and a high degree of social protection can only be achieved by making our product and labour markets more flexible; by investing more in people, refining their skills and helping them into work, while introducing an obligation to take up jobs; and by giving more importance to developing our scientific and technological base. We do not need to look far to see how this can be done. Faced with high labour costs in the late 1990s, German companies started restructuring and downsizing. The government meanwhile introduced social security reforms aimed at making the welfare state less expensive, as well as labour market reforms that created incentives for the jobless to work. An awareness developed that the solution to chronic deficits and unemployment could no longer be to cut public investments. As a result, Germany’s unit labour costs have fallen by 12 per cent since 1999 against those of France. The 4 BIS Review 84/2005 
payoff was significant: the volume of German exports rose by 47 per cent over the same period, compared with 25 per cent in France. The French were not unaware that they, too, had a competitiveness problem. A commission of independent experts led by the former Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, was set up in 2003. Reporting earlier this year, the experts concluded that without a change of direction, decline was a real threat for France. They identified two obstacles to growth: first, not enough people worked, and those who did failed to work long enough; second, the heavy State had become a costly drag on the economy. Our own country faces a similar predicament. Malta’s labour participation rate is among the lowest in the EU at 58 per cent; as for hours worked, during 2004 the Maltese worked 72 fewer hours than the hardest working people in the EU, the Estonians, Lithuanians, Poles and Slovenes, mainly because we enjoyed 13 public holidays, the most in the EU, whereas the countries just mentioned had only 8; as for the cost of the State, the public sector in Malta absorbs just over half of the GDP, the fourth highest percentage in the EU. Conclusion Mr. President, we are indeed facing an unprecedented challenge. The consequences of our inherent vulnerability to external events, and of a large State apparatus which subsidizes inefficient public corporations and offers its citizens notionally free services irrespective of income levels as well as generous welfare benefits are catching up with us very rapidly. In the meantime, the world has changed beyond any expectation. For those of us who remember the days when famines and inefficient state-controlled economies were endemic in Asia, today’s realities are not easy to comprehend or to accept. The former EU Internal Market Commissioner, Fritz Bolkenstein, captured the momentous nature of this change most strikingly when he observed recently that “The true heirs of the capitalist revolution now live in Asia.” We in Malta, too, need to change if, like them, we want to turn globalization from a threat into an opportunity. We must shake off our ambivalent attitude to reform: we know that the status quo is unsustainable, but it is also comfortable, and so we are reluctant to bear the cost of change. Hence the slow pace of reform, characterized by the commissioning of reports followed by long drawn-out consultations in search of a consensus, which frequently proves elusive. But time is running out faster than many appreciate. For a start, let us stop blaming others for our woes and, as Brutus was enjoined to do, let us accept that “The fault …… lies not in our stars but in ourselves.” We should then work together to build on our past achievements, which are not negligible, in order to secure the objectives of greater material wellbeing and social cohesion which, after all, we all profess to share. BIS Review 84/2005 5 
Villy Bergström: The labour market and wage formation Speech by Mr Villy Bergström, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at the Association of Swedish Engineering Industries' HR director conference, Rimbo, 22 November 2005. *      *      * Introduction Thank you for your invitation to come and speak here. Today, I will not be touching upon current economic policy in Sweden or the weakening of the krona exchange rate. I will return to those issues in a couple of days in a different speech. The shift in economic policy at the start of the 1990s has entailed better conditions for wage formation in Sweden. Among other things, the adoption of the inflation target has reduced uncertainty over future price developments. Wage-earners do not have to worry that their wage increases will be eroded by excessively fast price rises, while it is easier for employers to determine their scope for wage costs. The lower uncertainty over inflation is reflected in the fact that inflation expectations since the mid-1990s have been firmly anchored around 2 per cent. It is important to remember that the current conditions for wage formation in Sweden – a floating exchange rate and inflation target – are considerably different from our previous regime with a fixed exchange rate. A fixed exchange rate was the norm in Sweden for some 130 years, even though the systems for maintaining it changed. Background to the current system During the post-war era the exchange rate norm was supervised by international agreements through Sweden’s membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Bretton Woods system. That meant that devaluations were only allowed in the event of fundamental structural problems or imbalances. So the Bretton Woods system limited the opportunities for individual countries to devalue their way out of a cost crisis. Instead, the countries were offered loans from the IMF on tough terms. For Swedish wage formation, this was a successful period. The Swedish Trade Union Confederation and other employee organisations/trade unions, as well as the Swedish parliament and government, were aware that the strict regulations did not permit devaluation, which had a disciplinary effect on Swedish wage formation. The Bretton Woods system was based on an arrangement whereby the US dollar had a fixed value in terms of gold and the currencies of the other countries in turn were pegged to gold via a fixed exchange rate with the dollar. When the US was forced to abandon its dollar peg to gold in the early 1970s after having borrowed large amounts to finance the Vietnam War, the Bretton Woods system collapsed. Thereafter, Sweden independently adopted other exchange rate regimes, all of which gave greater freedom than the Bretton Woods system. That resulted in less discipline in wage formation. What then does it mean to have a fixed exchange rate? A fixed exchange rate means that the central bank, with the aid of currency market interventions or its policy rate, stabilises the exchange rate around a target, e.g. a price for the dollar, gold or an average of currencies, whereas under a floating exchange rate regime the exchange rate is determined by supply and demand in the currency market. With a fixed exchange rate, you avoid some of the uncertainty in world trade when countries exchange currencies with each other. There is a limit to how much a currency’s exchange rate can vary, which is good for importers and exporters when they are forecasting income and expenditure. The fixed exchange rate can also be seen as a way to achieve price stability. With a fixed exchange rate, inflation in the long term cannot be higher or lower than the inflation rates in the countries with which you have tied your exchange rate. For example, a fixed exchange rate against the dollar would ”force” us to maintain the same inflation rate in the long run as the US and the other countries whose currencies are pegged to the dollar. Were that to fail, our current account balance would deteriorate and we would have to devalue. BIS Review 84/2005 1 
Sweden devalued five times between 1976 and 1982 under a fixed exchange rate (1976, twice in 1977, 1981 and 1982). That was because Sweden in the 1970s and 1980s had higher inflation than the other countries. Between 1975 and 1995, Swedish inflation averaged 8 per cent a year. Real wages rose by only 0.5 per cent a year. Swedish companies’ competitiveness deteriorated and industrial production dropped. Sweden slipped from 4th place in the OECD’s standard-of-living league to 18th place – below the average for OECD countries. We became a relatively poor country in Europe and the industrialised world. Meanwhile, deregulation in the credit market during the 1980s resulted in a sharp expansion in credit, with an accumulation of debt among the general public as a consequence. Demand increased but supply was weak and productivity growth low. The economy overheated, inflation picked up and competitiveness was eroded. In 1990, the international economy began to weaken and prices of assets and property fell. The economic climate deteriorated dramatically and eventually the banking crisis hit the country, with large loan losses as a result. The Riksbank defended the fixed krona exchange rate to the very last, but after large currency flows and extreme rises in interest rates the fixed exchange rate was abandoned on 19 November 1992. The outcome of the performance during the 1970s and 1980s was that we slipped down the standard-of-living league, suffered mass unemployment and saw a drop in GDP of 4-5 per cent. It was at this juncture that an explicit inflation target was introduced. The depreciation of the krona in 1992-93 of almost thirty per cent gave the manufacturing industry a powerful boost. Since all other demand components were falling, the manufacturing sector was able to attract resources and expand. We have not had a current account deficit since 1993. Why 2 per cent inflation and a floating exchange rate? That two per cent is the optimal inflation target has no scientific basis. However, this level gives a reasonable trade-off between the negative consequences of high inflation and the problems entailed by deflation. Furthermore, two per cent is a common target internationally. It is necessary, you see, to have a certain margin from zero inflation if price and wage formation are to work well. Separate prices and wages have to be able to grow at different rates if it is to be possible to allocate resources such as labour to their correct use. Since it is difficult to cut nominal wages, some inflation creates the possibility for relative changes in wages without having to reduce the nominal level for any group. The scope for wage increases given the inflation target is around 4 per cent. (2 per cent + 2 per cent: Inflation plus productivity growth, at a given profit share.)1 This holds if we, like the National Institute of Economic Research, assume that average productivity growth is around 2 per cent for the whole economy in the long term. If one occupational group gets 5 per cent in order to attract labour, another group has to get less than the average increase. If the inflation target were lower, a relative increase for some might necessitate lower nominal wages for others. So, two per cent inflation serves as an anchor for the economy. The inflation target should be the basis for wage negotiations, rent agreements, tax increases, etc. Thus, it is necessary that the target is credible, that people trust that it will be met. Before, the idea instead was that the fixed exchange rate would imply an inflation target in line with the inflation rates of our competitor countries. But this approach never worked in the same way as the inflation target. Does monetary policy affect economic growth? It is fairly obvious that when inflation is around 10 per cent the economy becomes unhealthy. Economic agents seek to profit from the inflation. Much depends on how the tax system is designed. In Sweden, it encouraged borrowing and speculation in real property and shares. Investment                                                       1  Strictly speaking it should be the price developments for output, i.e. the GDP deflator, but since the GDP deflator can be estimated to increase by around 2 per cent a year if consumer prices rise in line with the inflation target (2 per cent), this approximation works. 2 BIS Review 84/2005 
decisions take on a different focus than when macroeconomic conditions are stable. In Sweden, we saw a property boom in the 1980s and an overheated economy that had to be dampened. Monetary policy is unable to affect the economy’s long-term output capacity, which we judge to grow at somewhere around 2-2.5 per cent a year. But stability in the government finances and credibility for the inflation target give low interest rates and a safe investment climate, which in turn lays the foundations for a good economic performance in the long term. What monetary policy in fact can do is to stabilise demand growth in the short run and avoid a stop-go situation like in the 1980s. Let me describe this in somewhat simplified terms. One of the variables with which the Riksbank works is the output gap, which is the difference between the economy’s actual output and potential output. The output gap reflects cyclical variations in the economy. • A negative output gap means that demand for goods, services and the factors of production is low and there are plenty of spare resources in the economy. Increases in prices and wages are small and inflation is usually below target. • A positive gap means that actual output – demand-driven – exceeds potential output, the resource situation is tight, demand for labour exceeds supply, wages are being pushed up and inflation is normally above target. So the output gap gives a picture of demand pressures in the economy, and demand pressures in turn influence inflation. Monetary policy is essentially about choosing an interest rate level that affects demand in such a way that the size of the gap becomes as small as possible. If actual output equals potential output so that the output gap is closed, inflation is often in line with the Riksbank’s target, provided that monetary policy and the inflation target are credible. The Riksbank and employment That there is no negative long-term relationship between inflation and unemployment is fairly uncontroversial today, not least shown by the developments since the introduction of the inflation target – unemployment and inflation dropped in parallel during the 1990s. Since 1995, when the inflation target came into effect, CPI inflation has averaged 1.4 per cent, while real wages have grown by around 2.6 per cent. The Riksbank’s formulation of monetary policy has its critics, of course – for example, at the Social Democratic Party’s latest congress the inflation target’s superordinate status over other targets was called into question. Attempts to get the economy to grow at a faster pace than is sustainable in the long term through more expansionary and inflation-tolerant monetary policy would, in the long run, only result in higher inflation without any rise in output or employment. In the short term, though, monetary policy can, as I mentioned, through interest rate changes designed to stimulate or cool down economic activity, affect output and thereby also employment. In the highly simplified output-gap world that I just described, there is a straightforward relationship between monetary policy, the output gap and employment – if the Riksbank does not hit the inflation target then employment will be affected. But reality is more complicated than that. Firstly, monetary policy is not able to precisely fine-tune the output gap or employment. As I said earlier, it takes times for monetary policy to have an impact on inflation, which is why the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions are based on a forecast of expected price developments in the future. Furthermore, our knowledge of the output gap even now is not exact, and even less so for the coming years. In reality, shocks to supply and demand are occurring all the time, which influence both actual and potential output. As a result, the output gap is almost never zero. In addition, each forecasting period has its events and political decisions that not only are difficult, but impossible, to foresee, a good example being the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001. For that reason all forecasts will be more or less inaccurate, and the output gap will be positive or negative for long periods. The important thing is that the Riksbank, in attempting to stabilise inflation, strives to achieve as small and as short-term deviations from the inflation target as possible. With a symmetric inflation target like the Riksbank’s, the incentives and our efforts to avoid missing the target on the upside and the downside are equally strong. Short-term deviations from the inflation target thus will even themselves out over time and will not result in any permanent gains or losses in terms of growth or jobs. The BIS Review 84/2005 3 
average inflation rate over the ten years since the inflation target was introduced does not indicate any systematic deviation. The second factor that complicates the picture of a simple relationship between monetary policy and employment is that inflation is not influenced by the output gap only but also by inflation expectations, which in turn depend on the credibility of monetary policy. If there is confidence in the Riksbank’s monetary policy it is often enough to make small changes in interest rates to signal that the Riksbank is keeping a close eye on inflation tendencies. If inflation expectations instead deviate sharply from the Riksbank’s target, more potent measures may be required. Thirdly, inflation and employment are not always affected by the same factors. Many short-term factors have a strong impact on inflation but only a marginal effect on the output gap and employment (e.g. the impact of mad cow disease on meat prices or the rapid rise and fall of electricity prices due to how the weather had affected reservoir levels). Likewise, certain factors and policy decisions affect registered open unemployment more than they influence the output gap (e.g. the National Labour Market Board’s decision to scale back labour market policy measures in 2003). In addition, the relationship between monetary policy and unemployment sometimes deviates fairly sharply from previous historical patterns. The most recent episodes when inflation has been below target – at the end of the 1990s and the start of this decade – have been characterised by unexpectedly high productivity, unexpectedly low imported inflation and other more temporary supply shocks. The low inflation has not been because we have actively tightened monetary policy and dampened demand. In reality, monetary policy has been very expansionary. With the aid of the repo rate the Riksbank can influence demand. How companies then meet this demand by varying the number of employed depends on how productivity develops, and that is nothing that monetary policy can control. Nor have we any possibility to govern how many people enter or leave labour market policy measures. Is Swedish wage formation competitive? When an economy is in balance, with wage and profit shares constant, companies’ real wage costs increase in parallel with productivity growth. But the relationship between wage increases and competitiveness is different under a fixed and floating exchange rate. With a fixed exchange rate, competitiveness is determined first and foremost by how big wage increments in Sweden are compared with other countries. If wage costs increase too rapidly, costs crises arise that can result in higher unemployment or that force the country into devaluations with a view to restoring competitiveness, as was the case in Sweden during the 1980s. The problem with the repeated devaluations was that they eroded the fixed exchange rate’s credibility. Wage-earners and employers expected to be bailed out when competitiveness was weakened by the excessively fast wage rises. Under a floating exchange rate, however, relatively higher increases in nominal wages do not have as much significance for competitiveness, if the exchange rate adjusts. We can have higher price and cost growth than our trading partners without seeing our competitiveness deteriorate, if the krona functions as a shock absorber. So, companies do not bear the direct burden of excessive wage increases, since the exchange rate adjusts over time so that profits are maintained in the sectors exposed to competition. Also, a floating exchange rate often dampens cyclical fluctuations. In 2001, the Swedish IT sector – including Ericsson and Telia – was hit by a deep decline. But the decline was partly compensated for by the weaker krona exchange rate, so that profits were sustained in the paper and pulp industry, the iron and steel industry, and in other parts of the manufacturing sector. Under a floating exchange rate, the inflation target is the nominal anchor for price and wage formation, rather than the rate of wage increases abroad. Wage-earners and employers know that the Riksbank has to immediately intervene with interest rate adjustments if inflation deviates clearly from target. So, excessively high wage increments can lead to tighter monetary policy. For an individual company or industry, developments in wage costs in other countries nonetheless have great significance, since the exchange rate in these cases can be taken as given. A Swedish company that raises wages sharply risks being driven out of business. As globalisation continues, new markets are being opened in which wage costs differ from the level in Sweden. Companies get increased opportunities to outsource their activities to countries with lower wage costs. The question is if wage growth in Sweden is competitive in relation to other countries? 4 BIS Review 84/2005 
The large surplus on the current account, SEK 48.1 billion during the second quarter this year, equals around 7.7 per cent of GDP and can be seen as an indication that Swedish wages and costs in general are competitive. Otherwise, Swedish goods and services would not be in such demand in other countries. At the same time, Swedish companies have outsourced a considerable proportion of their production from Sweden to reduce costs. The stiffer competition from low-wage countries is found mainly in the manufacturing industry. However, the pace of this production outsourcing has decreased rather than increased since the end of the 1990s. One possible explanation for that is the global economic slowdown at the start of the current decade. Swedish companies give outsourcing as the reason for a lower number of employees to a lesser extent now compared with a few years ago.2 That could also be interpreted to mean that the cost of Swedish labour has fared relatively well after all in the increasing international competition that has resulted from globalisation. When the new regime with a floating exchange rate and inflation target was introduced in the beginning of the 1990s, it entailed new macroeconomic conditions for collective bargaining agreements. During the 1970 and 1980s, inflation averaged around 8 per cent and real wage growth was almost non-existent. The slowdown in inflation coupled with a relatively stable rate of increase in nominal wages meant that real wages rose sharply between 1995 and 2004, see Table 1.3 Not since the 1960s has there been such a long period of regular real wage increases. In 2004, around 450 collective bargaining agreements were concluded for some 2 million employees, most of them spanning three years. This year, approximately 70 collective bargaining agreements will be signed for just over 1.3 million employees. Municipalities and county councils account for 1.1 million of these, and an agreement covering just over two years has already been concluded for them. Recently, agreements have been signed for some 75 000 workers in the construction sector and about 60 000 employees in banking and insurance. The latter group received more than what has become the norm in the current agreement period. Worth noting is that almost the entire economy has an agreement period that runs up to some time in the middle of 2007. Given that no agreements are cancelled prematurely, 2007 will be a very busy agreement year, since the majority of the collective bargaining agreements concluded in the business sector and the central government sector in 2004, as well as the municipal sector from 2005, will be due for renegotiation.4 The social partners and individual companies have gradually adjusted to the low inflation rate. Wage setting also has become more decentralised, entailing increased opportunities to change relative wages within the scope of a given rate of wage increases. But despite this, we have a compressed wage structure in Sweden in comparison with many other countries. Wage structures differ between blue-collar and white-collar workers. Blue-collar employees’ wage structure is considerably more compressed and constant across age groups.5 The wage spread for white-collar workers is larger and increases up to 45 years of age, after which it gradually decreases. It is mainly in the higher income groups that the wage differences between blue-collar workers and white-collar employees are large. In the lower-income groups the differences are very small.6 But on average white-collar employees have long been pulling away from blue-collar workers, which risks building up tensions in the labour market ahead of future negotiations. Wages can also vary across different regions. But this wage spread is not especially large in Sweden either. It is mainly Stockholm, Jämtland and Gotland that have a clearly different wage situation. Stockholm has the country’s highest wage level, while Jämtland’s and Gotland’s wage level is below the national average.                                                       2  See Wage Formation in Sweden 2005, National Institute of Economic Research. 3 For 2004, some data in Table 1 might be changed since all agreements have not yet been concluded. 4 See Wage Formation in Sweden 2005, National Institute of Economic Research. 5  The quotient between the10th and the 90th percentile is considerably higher for white-collar employees' wages, see "Lönespridning i näringslivet 2004" (Wage spread in the business sector in 2004), Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. 6  It is primarily in the quotient between the 90th percentile and the median wage that blue-collar workers and white-collars workers' wages differ, unlike the quotient between the 10th percentile and the median wage, see "Lönespridning i näringslivet 2004" (Wage spread in the business sector in 2004), Confederation of Swedish Enterprise. BIS Review 84/2005 5 
On the whole, though, the wage spread has widened in Sweden over the past 25 years, at the same time as wage formation has been decentralised. But despite the increase in the wage spread, it is still low by international standards. It is still smaller than it was in 1970 and in a comparison of 17 OECD countries the wage spread in Sweden is lowest. High minimum wages likely mean that many jobs never get created. The services sector is also affected by this, and many low-productive work duties are not performed since nobody is willing to pay what they cost, with our high minimum wages. Table 1. Nominal and real wage growth, 1995-2004  1995199619971998199920002001 2002 2003 2004BUSINESS SECTOR           Blue-collar workers  4.7  5.4  4.7  3.4  2.6  3.3  3.8  3.6  3.1  2.6 White-collar workers  3.5  6.4  4.2  4.7  3.7  4.1  4.5  4.1  3.3  3.2             WHOLE ECONOMY           Blue-collar and white-collar workers  3.3  6.0  4.5  3.7  3.4  3.7  4.4  4.1  3.5  3.3             CPI  2.5  0.5  0.7 -0.3  0.5  0.9  2.4  2.2  1.9  0.4             REAL WAGE GROWTH                       BUSINESS SECTOR           Blue-collar workers  2.2  4.9  4.1  3.7  2.1  2.4  1.4  1.4  1.2  2.3 White-collar workers  1.0  5.8  3.5  5.0  3.3  3.2  2.0  1.9  1.4  2.8             WHOLE ECONOMY           Blue-collar and white-collar workers  0.9  5.4  3.9  4.0  2.9  2.8  1.9  1.9  1.5  2.9  Sources: National Mediation Office, Statistics Sweden and Sveriges Riksbank. Structural unemployment Developments in the labour market have been weak despite several years’ firm economic growth, historically low interest rates and strong public finances. So far, the growing economy has not managed to create enough jobs. Moreover, our current account surplus essentially means that we are exporting capital on a large scale; in somewhat more extreme terms, you could say that the jobs being created by our growth are largely ending up outside Sweden's borders. So the low employment growth does not appear primarily to be a result of weak demand. Instead, the explanation must be sought among longer-term structural factors. This is reflected in particular by the fact that the employment rate, in spite of historically high economic growth, has not completely recovered since its sharp fall in connection with the crisis in the early 1990s. Moreover, the fact that open unemployment did not drop more during the economic upswing in the 1990s suggests that the labour market is not functioning satisfactorily. One example of rigidities in the labour market is that unemployment has remained around 8 per cent in the construction sector, 6 BIS Review 84/2005 
even though it is one of the few sectors where activity has risen and labour shortages have begun to appear. Another sign that the unemployment problems are structural in nature is the large differences across regions and occupational categories. In spite of a single monetary policy for the whole of the Swedish economy, unemployment figures in some regions are twice as high as in others, while the proportion of people receiving benefit from their unemployment fund is twice as high in some occupational categories as in others. These differences seem to last over long periods, indicating that the problems are partly due to low mobility in the labour market. In addition, the need for labour market mobility is growing as a result of structural change. The previously typical cyclical pattern, where jobs are shed during a slump and then are recreated when the economy turns around, no longer generally holds true in all industries. Jobs that are lost in a slowdown are being replaced, especially in manufacturing, by increased productivity and information technology. Growth is leading to new jobs but in different places than before. That means that more people have to change workplace or sector, and results in the need for considerable adaptability. More jobs have to be created in, for example, the services sector, perhaps in completely new companies. The structural change that occurred when farmers and forestry workers went into manufacturing was relatively easy. Now the change often entails manufacturing workers having to go into the services sector, a transition that may be more difficult. To the extent that the weak growth in employment is due to structural change in the Swedish economy, from manufacturing jobs to services, there is reason to discuss how the functioning of the labour market can be improved and how the driving forces for new business creation can be strengthened. Several proposals have been put forward in the public debate – among other things, there have been calls for a tax deduction to subsidise certain domestic services, as well as calls for a reduction in compensation levels to increase people’s willingness to take lower-paid jobs. Other solutions being discussed are lower income taxes for low-income and middle-income employees, a reduction in employers’ contributions and a cut in payroll taxes. These are important political issues, but issues that we at the Riksbank do not have any obvious reason to take a stance on. The way the whole economy functions has of necessity changed since the post-war period and it is unlikely that the current economic policy regime with a floating exchange rate and inflation target can deliver both 2 per cent inflation and an unemployment rate equivalent to the levels we had then. During the post-war period we had a unique expansion in public sector employment and very high demand pressures, something that was not sustainable in the long run and that is not possible with free movement of capital, an inflation target and an independent Riksbank. BIS Review 84/2005 7 
Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Malaysia’s fast-changing financial landscape  Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 26th Annual Dinner 2005 of The Association of Merchant Banks, Kuala Lumpur, 3 December 2005. *      *      * I am pleased to be here tonight on this special occasion of the 26th Annual Dinner of the Association of Merchant Banks in Malaysia. The year 2005 is a particularly significant year for the merchant banking industry in particular and for the financial sector more generally. While this decade has seen significant changes taking place in our financial landscape that followed from the restructuring, consolidation, greater investment in technology, deregulation, liberalisation and changes in the regulatory environment, the year 2005 has seen an intensification of the pace of change in the financial sector. Let me take this opportunity to discuss the macroeconomic environment which these changes are occurring, and discuss further some of the more recent changes that are taking place in the financial system. Our economy has been able to continue to benefit from the favourable external environment as the global economy demonstrates its robustness in an environment of high oil prices and rising global interest rates. On the domestic front, our overall performance was further reinforced with the expanding domestic demand. Latest indicators suggest that the growth momentum remains firmly on track, with an improved growth of 5.3% in the third quarter. The outturn for the year as a whole is now expected to be in the range of 5 - 6%. There is also greater optimism now that the prospects for this growth momentum will be sustained in 2006. Of significance is the continued strength of private sector activity. Household consumption increased by 10.4%, while real gross fixed capital formation increased by 9.6% in the third quarter. Reflecting Malaysia's structural transformation toward a skilled- and knowledge-based economy, the services sector has become increasingly important, now accounting for 58% of GDP, compared to only 47% in 1990. Indeed, more than 50% of the growth in the third quarter emanated from the services sector. Growth has remained strong in both the traditional services sub-sectors as well as in new growth areas such as shared services and the information and communication technology industry. This structural transformation of the economy has also been reflected in the pattern and the quality of foreign direct investment, with a shift away from capital- and labour-intensive projects towards the higher value added, skills and knowledge-intensive services industries.  In the manufacturing sector, the electronics industry is expected to benefit from the uptrend in the global electronics cycle, while commodity prices are forecast to remain high, supporting export growth as well as private consumption. Sustained demand for new uses for palm oil, in particular for bio-diesel production is a positive development. Private investment is expected to also increase substantially in 2006, driven by high levels of capacity utilization and strong revenue and earnings growth.  The year 2006 will witness the release of two important policy documents: the Ninth Malaysia Plan and the Third Industrial Masterplan. The Plans will outline the key policy directions over the next several years to enhance Malaysia's long-term growth prospects, including: (i) the role of agriculture and the nascent biotechnology industry; (ii) moving up the value chain in the manufacturing sector; (iii) the increasing importance of services, especially business and shared services, including outsourcing; and (iv) the importance of education in developing the human resources needed to achieve the development objectives. An important strength of our economy for several decades now, is its flexibility, that is the ability for resources to shift to new areas of comparative advantage in response to changing conditions and new opportunities in the global economy. In particular, there is a high degree of labour and capital mobility. Significant investments in training and education have allowed labour to adjust and become more mobile. This has played a large part in enabling rapid industrialisation and in shifting to higher value added activities. Capital has also shown greater mobility, expanding the potential for the economy to adjust. Malaysia has also actively identified and develop new sources of growth, leveraging on its resource advantages and new technologies to move up the value chain. There have also been greater moves toward removing rigidities and transitioning toward greater market orientation and competition.  Turning now to monetary policy, Bank Negara Malaysia's determination of interest rate policy is based on the requirements of the domestic economy. Specifically, monetary policy seeks to balance the risks BIS Review 83/2005 1 
between economic growth and inflation over the medium-term. As the risk of slower growth has now diminished, while the rate of inflation is expected to remain at current levels for some time, this has prompted a monetary policy response. The Overnight Policy Rate was increased by 30 basis points to 3% on 30 November. In our monetary policy statement, it was indicated that at the new level, the Overnight Policy Rate is still below its neutral level, meaning that monetary policy is still supportive of economic activity. It is not indicative of any plans for further increases in the interest rates. Any further changes in the Policy Rate would be determined by our assessment on the balance of risks between growth and inflation, going forward. Let me now turn to the financial sector. The financial sector in general, and the banking industry in particular, have an important role to play to ensure that our economy continues to have this flexibility by providing the enabling environment and facilitating the process. This requires a financial sector that has its own dynamism and agility to proactively respond to the changing requirements of the economy.  The Malaysian financial sector continues to evolve progressively in response to developments in both the domestic and external environment. As we transition from the first phase of the Financial Sector Masterplan into the second phase of the plan, significant developments have already taken place. In this year in particular, we are seeing a strengthening of the international dimension of our financial sector. This essentially serves to strengthen our economic and financial inter-linkages with the global economy. Some notable developments in this direction include the liberalisation of the foreign exchange administration rules earlier this year to allow for greater flexibility and efficiency in foreign exchange transactions as well as to increase foreign participation in issuing ringgit papers in our bond market and thus contribute to contribute toward enhancing the depth of the market. Another major development this year was the move to a managed float exchange rate regime for the ringgit. This is essentially to better position the nation to respond and benefit from the structural changes occurring in the region and the global economy.  Other further developments to strengthen our international integration include the increase in foreign participation in our domestic financial system. This includes the issuance of new licences for foreign Islamic banks to operate in Malaysia, the issuance of new stock-broking licences to foreign players as well as increases in the permitted foreign interest in our Islamic subsidiaries and investment banks. All this will serve to enhance the international integration of the domestic financial system. The launch of the ABF Malaysian Bond Index Fund is also aimed at promoting greater integration among the regional bond markets. On the domestic front, the year 2005 marks a significant milestone for the merchant banking industry. In March this year, the new framework for investment banking was unveiled, paving the way for the further rationalisation of domestic capital market intermediaries. As you may recall, the objectives of the framework are twofold: to facilitate internal rationalisation of the merchant bank, stockbroking company and discount house within the same financial group; and to promote the rationalisation of the discount house and universal broker industries. This integration is expected to promote a more competitive and dynamic financial system, enhance efficiency and strengthen the potential to capitalise on expanded business opportunities, both locally and abroad, thereby strengthening the competitive position of the new entity. Foreign equity participation in investment banks has also been liberalised, from 30% to 49%, as part of the overall efforts to strengthen their linkages globally and to enhance the transfer of specialised skills and expertise in the investment banking industry. Moving forward, the competitive pressures are expected to intensify in the investment banking industry. With the extension of the investment bank framework to universal brokers, 17 investment banks may emerge from the rationalisation exercise. Amid this more competitive and challenging environment, the ability of the investment banks to thrive will no longer depend on factors such as asset and capitalization levels, but on their capacity and capability to manage and utilise their resources in the most efficient and effective manner.  Of importance is the need for merchant banks to continuously review their comparative advantage, business focus and organisational structure to strengthen their strategic and operational agility to respond proactively to the competition and maintain their market niche. In this regard, investment in human capital and expertise is essential to deliver customised and unique value propositions. With the entry of new players into the industry, it is expected that staff mobility within the industry could increase. The challenge for merchant banks will be to continuously train and retain their pool of expertise.  2 BIS Review 83/2005 
The transformation of merchant banks into investment banks will also bring about new risks as well as a multitude of new opportunities. The placement of banking and capital market activities under one roof entails wider risks which need to be addressed to ensure that they do not pose undue risks to safety and soundness. Safeguards and Chinese walls are essential to manage conflict of interest situations within the investment banks.  As capital market intermediaries, investment banks would also need to carefully manage issues on investor protection and the need to promote fair, efficient and transparent markets. The principles of fair market practice to promote investor confidence and ensure the protection of their interests need to be embodied in investment banking operations. Reputation and trust are indeed valued assets and the cornerstone of banking business. As investment banks originate more complex financial solutions to meet the needs of the more discerning and sophisticated wholesale customers, they also need to be mindful of the importance of preserving trust and personal reputation in business practices. In this regard, focus will be accorded to strengthen the overall market conduct of investment banks, as any lapses in market conduct can have widespread implications on their reputation. The emphasis will be on promoting greater market discipline to drive the performance of investment banks. Disclosure-based initiatives will be continued to ensure that consumers and investors have access to appropriate information to allow them to make well-informed investment decisions. The changes in the merchant banking landscape will also bring a host of new opportunities. In this regard, offshoring represents an important avenue for merchant banks to diversify their business potential and income stream. The strengthened capacity of merchant banks arising from the transformation process will open new lucrative business opportunities, especially abroad. Merchant banks would need to capitalise on these opportunities to strengthen their presence beyond the domestic borders, particularly in areas where they have the niche and capabilities to compete with their counterparts abroad. Cross-border deals are no longer the exception but the norm. This is especially so with the liberalisation of the foreign exchange administration rules which provides broader opportunities for corporations to invest abroad. A greater degree of awareness of global developments and adoption of international best practices will thus enhance the capacity and capabilities of merchant banks to excel in their ventures abroad.  At the same time, the liberalisation of foreign equity participation in investment banks opens opportunities for investment banks to explore tie-ups and joint ventures with foreign parties to leverage on their expertise and distribution network to help Malaysian investment banks leapfrog in their areas of competitive advantage. Given the intensity of the competitive pressures, investment banks may not have the luxury to grow organically. The onset of increased competition will determine the pace of enhancements that investment banks must make to remain relevant and compete meaningfully in a more challenging operating environment. Finally, let me also mention a further area in the financial sector that is experiencing significant change, namely, the profound global growth in Islamic banking and finance. Islamic finance is practised in over 60 countries across the world. Assets of Islamic banks and Islamic assets of window-based conventional banks gross to over USD400 billion. Islamic mutual funds exceed USD300 billion. Islamic sovereign and corporate sukuk has breached the USD15 billion mark. The issuance of Islamic bonds or sukuk is expected to top USD10 billion for this year alone. The global market capitalisation of Dow Jones Islamic index is well over USD10 trillion. Most of this growth was experienced in the recent decade with the demand for Islamic financial assets continuing to increase. Also in demand are Shariah compliant hedging instruments to meet the needs of both investors and issuers.  The expansion of Islamic finance and demand for Islamic financial assets promise exciting opportunities for innovative and enterprising merchant bankers. Such opportunities are available not only in Malaysia but also in the region and globally. The time is opportune for tapping into the Islamic finance market.  Malaysia has had a head start in Islamic banking and finance. While we have the largest Islamic banking market in the world, the largest Islamic capital market and largest takaful market, still the potential generated by the unprecedented growth in the global Islamic finance industry is yet to be fully harnessed by the players in the Malaysian financial sector. As Islamic financial products increase in sophistication, a higher level of competencies, skills and structuring abilities of the merchant banking community would be needed. If Malaysia could emerge as a supplier of these high-end services, the nature of merchant banking would change significantly. On the part of the Government, major initiatives have been taken to create the enabling environment and create resources for the next phase of development of Islamic banking and finance. These include BIS Review 83/2005 3 
our efforts to build Shariah expertise, promotion of convergence of Shariah understanding, promoting and hosting IFSB, the international Islamic standard setting body and more recently work is being undertaken to streamline the regulatory regime for Islamic banking and Takaful. These cumulative efforts are aimed at promoting a more conducive environment for enhancing Malaysia's position as a hub for Islamic finance. Law reform work on these matters has already begun and is expected to be completed by next year. Work is also already underway to establish an international centre for education in Islamic finance to produce the professionals and expertise that is vital for the global development of Islamic finance.  Conclusion The year has therefore been marked by significant developments on several fronts. Going forward, we need to build on the successes to fully maximise the potential benefits. In this dynamic environment, it is the cumulative efforts of the industry that will allow this hard-earned progress to yield sustainable results. We now stand at the threshold of the development of the financial sector. The merchant banking industry will need to confront the emerging challenges squarely and seize the new opportunities that will emerge with its new intermediation structure. There will also be an important need to stay alert on the emerging domestic and global trends and to be aligned to be well positioned to respond to the new emerging environment and thus sustain the effectiveness of the performance and contribution of the sector to the economy. On that note, let me take this opportunity to wish you all a very happy new year, and a productive and successful year ahead.  4 BIS Review 83/2005 
Goh Chok Tong: Riding the Asian tide  Speech Mr Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister and Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Nomura Singapore Seminar, Tokyo, 8 November 2005. *      *      * Dr Junichi Ujiie, President of Nomura Securities Ladies and Gentlemen 1. Nowadays, it is popular to focus on the awesome transformation of China and its implications when discussing Asia. But doing so risks missing the dramatic changes in another key player - India. My theme is simple: the renaissance of China and India is changing Asia. Other countries in Asia, and in fact the world, will have to remake themselves to seize the opportunities generated by their rise.  2. I expect China and India to power Asia's growth over the next few decades. China's GDP today is one-seventh that of the US. But Goldman Sachs has predicted that China could overtake the US to become the world's largest economy by 2041. Goldman Sachs has also predicted that India's economy, currently about one-seventh of Japan's, could be larger than Japan's by 2032. Never before in history have we witnessed the simultaneous rise of two gigantic countries, which together make up more than one third of mankind.  3. China and India are altering global patterns of trade, investment, production and travel. Because of their sheer size, the earth shakes as the Chinese dragon and the Indian elephant move.  4. What do we do in the face of these developments? How do we adjust to the new realities and seize the opportunities therein? These are the key questions before us. 5. This fourth Nomura Singapore Seminar is therefore timely. This morning, I hope to contribute to a deeper understanding of the geopolitical forces at work and highlight some of the economic opportunities available as the global landscape is being reshaped. An ascendant dragon 6. First, China.  7. I first went to China in 1971, when I was working for Neptune Orient Lines. We were exploring the possibility of chartering ships to China. China then was in the grip of the Cultural Revolution. Everybody wore drab blue or grey Mao jackets and cloth shoes. Men and women looked alike but for the length of their hair. Chairman Mao's portraits were everywhere. The air was filled with revolutionary songs praising him and the glory of communism - from morning till night, at the airport, on trains, in the hotel lobby and even in the toilets! There was no escape! There was no private enterprise either.  8. My next visit was in 1975. Deng Xiaoping and the Gang of Four were locked in a fierce ideological struggle. Deng was branded a 'capitalist roader'. While on a field trip, I asked a worker where he had learned his technical skills. He pointed to the pocket of his Mao jacket and said, "The Little Red Book". Admission to university depended not on academic performance but how 'red' a person's political thinking was. So too the job a person was assigned. 9. Over the years, I have returned to China many times and witnessed its remarkable transformation first-hand. How China has changed! Revolutionary songs in public have given way to pop songs in karaoke lounges. Mao jackets have been discarded in favour of Gucci, Armani and other luxury brands. I am told that many Chinese go to Hong Kong to buy branded goods, while many Hong Kongers cross over to Shenzhen to buy cheap imitations. China is today the third biggest luxury goods market worldwide.  10. The physical transformation of China is remarkable enough but the mindset change is even more impressive. When Deng Xiaoping pronounced that the colour of the cat is not important so long as it catches mice, pragmatism supplanted ideological purity. Today, there are more capitalists in China than in Japan. According to a recent Xinhua article (13th October 2005) entitled " China's Rich Get Gloriously Richer", the total wealth of China's 400 richest people grew by 40 percent in 2004 and amounted to 7 percent of GDP. The Chinese have made a strategic choice to pursue what they call BIS Review 83/2005 1 
'socialism with Chinese characteristics'. But to me, it is capitalism with Chinese characteristics. China has also embraced globalisation and with its admission to the World Trade Organisation in 2001, China will have to play by international trade rules. There is no turning back. As China grows, it has a vested interest to strengthen the international system that has enabled its success. 11. I believe China should be able to sustain 8 percent annual growth over the next 20 years. China is drawing in investments, capital, technology, foreign management expertise and talent. It is investing heavily in education and human capital. Much of its growth is also internally generated and increasingly consumer-led.  12. China is forcing the pace of change throughout Asia. This is for the better. The Chinese dragon will usher in a new prosperous Asian Century. For example, as China grows, so will its appetite for imports. Credit Suisse First Boston expects China to become the second largest consumer market by 2014. That is less than 10 years away. The Chinese middle class is expected to reach 45 percent of the population by 2020, around 580 million or more than 4 times the current Japanese population.  13. However, China's growth will not be an upward-sloping straight line. The country faces very real challenges. In 2003 when I visited China, Premier Wen Jiabao explained to me the magnitude of problems facing China's development through the concept of 'division and multiplication'. China's wealth of resources became very small when divided by 1.3 billion people, while a small problem became huge when multiplied by 1.3 billion. Premier Wen also highlighted the divide between the coastal and inland regions and stressed that China's priority was on economic and social development.  14. China will also have to cope with the impact of development on the environment. Take for example the use of chopsticks. China uses 45 billion pairs of disposable chopsticks per year, which requires 25 million full-grown trees to make (International Herald Tribune, 27th October 2005). This means massive deforestation and an adverse impact on the environment. Another problem is the widening income gap. Bear in mind that there are 26 million Chinese still living in abject poverty, earning less than US$80 annually. China will also face the trickier problem of managing the demand for political change and greater political participation as it becomes a middle income country. For the first time, China recently published a White Paper on 'Building of Political Democracy in China'. 15. China's leaders know that they will retain the mandate of heaven only if they deliver the economic goods and a better standard of living. Having tasted the fruits of market-oriented policies, the Chinese people will want more. To grow, China needs a stable external environment. This is why China's leaders have been careful to assure the world that it will pursue a 'path of peaceful development' (). They are well aware that China's rapid growth is creating enormous pressures on the international system and that they need to craft a development and foreign policy strategy that will ensure the peace and stability needed for its growth. The trundling Indian elephant 16. Let me now turn to India, which is also shaking off old mindsets and taking pragmatic steps toward reform and liberalisation.  17. I first visited India as Prime Minister in 1994. Indian leaders and businessmen wanted to convince me of India's technical expertise, management skills and huge market. They wanted Singapore investments. The late Narasimha Rao, who was then Prime Minister, had just begun to reform India's economy, working closely with his then Finance Minister, Manmohan Singh. I encouraged them. I told the Indian leaders and businessmen that protectionism was the wrong development strategy: 900 million people should not produce for only 900 million people. They would be better off producing for the whole world.  18. Many observers had doubted whether India could shake off decades of central planning. Indeed, in its reform path, India had often taken two steps forward and one step back, sometimes in a zigzag. But I knew that India, like a big elephant with constant change of mahouts, would take time to turn around.  19. Since then, India's economic reforms have been creating a buzz. The mindset change of politicians and business leaders in this new India is palpable. 20. Today, India is attracting attention from foreign media and investors. Japan has traditionally not shown much interest in India. But this may change. I am told that Japanese companies have started to 2 BIS Review 83/2005 
explore the new India. Recently, when Nomura Securities launched its India Stock fund in Singapore, US$1billion was raised in a week. I urge Japanese companies to quicken the pace of this exploration.  21. India is changing, albeit not as quickly as China. There are many serious challenges. Like China, income disparity is a major problem. Reforms will be uneven and politically complex. The Indian system, with its decentralisation of power, makes change more difficult. Navigating the bureaucracy and its regulations requires connections, skill and lots of patience. However, while the pace may fluctuate, reforms are irreversible. Whichever party is in power will have to deliver the economic goods. This, together with the desire not to be left behind by China, will ensure that India stays on the path of reform. 22. India has many strengths, not least of which is its deep source of human capital, including a large pool of well-educated English-speaking professionals and workers. India has a young population, much younger than Japan's and China's. 55 percent of Indians are under 25 years old and 40 percent under 15.  23. India has carved a niche for itself as the world's back office and a global software centre. India is also working hard to change its investment outlook. In 2004, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into India was US$5.5 billion, less than 10 percent of China's US$61 billion. Under Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, fiscal consolidation has shown progress. Customs duties have been slashed. Another significant initiative is the development of Special Economic Zones, where superior infrastructure, flexible investment laws and special incentives are designed to draw in foreign investments. 24. There is strong competition among Indian states and cities for investments and to outperform each other. Recently, the Chief Minister of West Bengal called on me. West Bengal has been ruled by the Indian communists for almost 30 years. The Chief Minister wanted to promote foreign investments into West Bengal. His aim was to capture 25 percent of India's IT outsourcing market by 2010. He said that the Indian communists had drawn lessons from the collapse of the former Soviet Union and China's economic reforms. The choice was stark and simple: either perform or perish.  25. The recent bomb attacks in New Delhi have not affected India's growth trajectory. The Indian Government has responded swiftly and with determination. I have full confidence that it will be on top of the security situation. As India grows, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects that by 2010, India's exports will more than double, while imports will nearly triple. The consumer market could then be worth US$400 billion, making it one of the top five globally. To sustain an annual growth rate of 8 percent would require a huge injection of investments, both foreign and domestic, over the next decade. It is this immense demand for infrastructure, education, healthcare and consumer goods that will continue to draw foreign investors and businesses to India.  A reinvigorated ASEAN 26. Let me now move on to ASEAN.  27. Prospects for Southeast Asia have brightened considerably. Regional economies have remained stable, despite the recent Bali bombings.  28. With China and India becoming big players in the international market, Southeast Asia has no choice but to respond strategically. ASEAN is becoming increasingly integrated so that its market will be at least half as big as China's and India's. ASEAN made a fundamental strategic choice to form the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by 2020. It is also formulating an ASEAN Charter, a visionary document that will chart its future direction. 29. In addition, ASEAN is positioning itself to ride on the growth of China and India. ASEAN's total trade with China and India has grown significantly over the past decade, and in 2004 amounted to US$80 billion and US$17 billion respectively.  30. ASEAN is working hard to ensure that its Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with China and India are completed and fully implemented by 2010 and 2011 respectively. Besides China and India, ASEAN is also negotiating FTAs with other major economies like Japan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand. BIS Review 83/2005 3 
Japan's role and response 31. In the past decades, Japan has led the growth of China, South Korea and many other countries in the region in a 'flying geese' formation. Japan has been an important source of investments, capital and technology, and a major export market for many Asian countries. After a decade of stagnation, Japan is firmly back on the path of healthy sustained growth. Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's leadership and overwhelming victory in the recent election give cause for hope that his reforms will be sustained. As the second largest economy in the world, Japan will remain an important global player.  32. Japan, together with the US and China, form the strategic triangle that undergirds regional stability. With India's rise, a new strategic triangle of US-China-India will, in time, be superimposed upon it. Stable relations amongst the key players will be critical for regional peace and development.  33. Recent tensions in Sino-Japanese relations are of concern. Such strains are part of the deep ambivalence with which Beijing and Tokyo view each other. Both China and Japan have their respective positions on the history issue. China's attitude towards Japan is coloured by Japan's reluctance to come to terms with its World War II history, while Japan's attitude towards China is shaped by its anxiety over how China's rise will alter the regional balance and affect Japan's interests. Domestic politics and rising nationalism in both countries are complicating factors.  34. Fortunately, both countries want to avoid a collision. There are strong incentives for China and Japan to deepen ties. China needs investments, technology and know-how from Japan, while Japan needs the markets and production base in China. 35. The tensions in Sino-Japanese relations are understandable because there has never been a period in history when China and Japan are simultaneously strong powers. Today, both countries find that they must treat each other as equals. Naturally, the search for a new modus vivendi will be fraught with anxiety. While not forgetting the past, both sides must find a way to close the history issue and write a new chapter of cooperative relations. Working towards a mutually-beneficial future together is the best way to prevent history from repeating itself. 36. Japan's relations with India are less problematic. Prime Minister Koizumi's visit to India in April 2005 signalled a desire to establish a new basis for relations. But there is an undercurrent of cultural unease that needs to be transcended so as to realise the full potential of Japan-India cooperation.  37. ASEAN, as a group and individually, has much to offer Japan. ASEAN can be a strategic partner for Japan to tap into the growing economies of China and India. ASEAN can also offer Japan a competitive production base, supplies of natural resources including oil and gas, and additional markets for Japanese products.  38. Japan is already the top investor in Indonesia. Under President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono's leadership, Indonesia has begun to develop its economy, attract investments and play an active regional role. President Yudhoyono is also pressing ahead with difficult reforms to get the country moving on the fast track. 39. Vietnam is a relatively new partner for Japan. So it should not surprise you to learn that Japan is the third largest foreign investor there, while Singapore is second. Vietnam's bid to join the WTO has catalysed FDI flows totalling US$2.6 billion in the first nine months of 2005, about double the amount in the same period in 2004. Not surprisingly, Japanese companies are increasing their presence there.  Remaking Singapore 40. Singapore has been remaking itself to enhance our competitiveness and seize the opportunities in the region. 41. Reinventing ourselves to stay relevant is in our DNA. In the 1960s and 70s, when it was fashionable to be anti-MNC, Singapore welcomed MNCs. Over the past 40 years, we have grown in partnership with MNCs in manufacturing. This strategy will continue. The manufacturing sector will remain a key driver of our economy.  42. But we have started to build a second platform to drive an innovation- and knowledge-based economy. New areas of focus include Research and Development, biomedical sciences and the creative industry. We have also undertaken extensive measures aimed at strategically positioning Singapore as a leading international financial centre. 4 BIS Review 83/2005 
43. Singapore is also prepared to break old moulds and be flexible and practical in a changing world. For instance, we overturned our longstanding policy of disallowing casino gambling. To remake itself into a city with buzz, Singapore is developing Integrated Resorts, with casinos, convention facilities and world-class entertainment. Japan-Singapore partnership for the future 44. I see great potential in closer collaboration between Singapore and Japan. The landmark Japan-Singapore Economic Agreement for a New Age Partnership (JSEPA) provides an excellent framework. Japanese companies can use Singapore as a hub with radiating spokes to tap global opportunities. From Singapore, companies can service a combined population of 3 billion. That is why 7,000 MNCs choose to hub in Singapore. Of these, 4,000 manage global and regional responsibilities. Recognising this strategic value-add, many Japanese companies have further expanded their operations in Singapore. 45. Japanese companies can also take advantage of Singapore as a hub for knowledge and market intelligence. Over the years, we have developed a network of institutions that have a deep reservoir of knowledge on China, India and Southeast Asia. Our businessmen are also familiar with these countries. We are now building up links with the Middle East. 46. Japanese companies based in Singapore can enjoy not only benefits from the JSEPA, but also 10 other FTAs that Singapore has concluded with major economies like the US, South Korea and Australia. I would like to highlight the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA) between Singapore and India as it is the first comprehensive FTA that India has signed with any country.  Conclusion 47. The rise of China and India will shift the global economic centre of gravity from West to East. Remaking our economies cannot be an occasional exercise. Governments must respond boldly and continuously to the imperatives of our changing times. Likewise for companies. This is the only way to ride the rising Asian tide. 48. Thank you. I will be happy to take your questions. BIS Review 83/2005 5 
Stanley Fischer: Monitoring healthy and sustained growth in Israel Address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Annual Meeting of the Association of Banks, Tel Aviv, 24 November 2005. *      *      * I would like to start by thanking the Association of Banks for inviting me here, and for giving me the opportunity to address you. I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate Eitan Raf and Galia Maor on the privatization of Bank Leumi. That is certainly an important event signifying the end of a sad era in Israel's economic history, an era which started with the collapse of bank shares more than twenty years ago, in 1983, and which obliged the government to nationalize almost the entire banking system. Now, at last, we have reverted to a situation in which the banking system has regained its natural position as far as ownership is concerned, and it is currently in the hands of the business sector. The main thing is to draw the right conclusions from the whole episode. Some lessons have been learned, viz. the reform of the capital market proposed by the Bachar Committee. But that is by no means the end of the road, and the important goals facing the banking system in the near future are related to it. I will revert to those goals later. The banking system plays a very important role in Israel's economy-it is affected by it, and affects it. Israel's economy does not stand isolated, however, but is part of the world economy. That is the result of the globalization process that has taken place since the end of World War II and particularly since the 1980s. Stated quite simply, Israel's economy cannot be reviewed in isolation from the global economy. The global economy is currently experiencing a growth trend, and according to various forecasts the global growth rate in 2006 is expected to be between 3.3 percent, according to the World Bank, and 3.6 percent, according to most investment houses. Europe's economy, which has merely marked time in the last few years, is also expected to show a growth trend. Nevertheless, these developments are not without certain risks. These are expressed by some acceleration in world inflation, expected to be close to 3 percent in 2006 according to most investment houses, and this brings in its wake forecasts of further rises in central banks' interest rates, not only in the US but in Europe too. These risks derive mainly from the trend of rising energy prices - specifically, but not only, oil prices. The problem of the US balance of payments has also cast a cloud over the global economy for a considerable time. Having said all this, the overall global picture is a relatively optimistic one. The same global growth is one of the factors providing a boost for the growth which Israel's economy is currently enjoying, but it is not the only one. Israel's growth derives from the government's macroeconomic policy during the last few years, expressed in fiscal discipline-in accordance with the fiscal targets it determined-and in a series of reforms (in the labor market, the capital market, the ports, etc.), privatization (of banks, and companies like Bezeq and El-Al), and investment in the infrastructure (for example in the railway system). Another aspect of the same strategy is the monetary policy pursued by the Bank of Israel, which focuses mainly on maintaining low inflation in line with the government's target. Against this background, and assuming that the government will persist in the macroeconomic policy, the Bank of Israel recently published its forecasts for 2006, which show an expected growth rate of about 4.3 percent for GDP, and an even higher rate of 5.4 percent for business-sector product. Investment is expected to rise by 4.5 percent, and it must be understood that economic growth in the last two years has not led to a resurgence of investments; if growth is sustained, the day will come when a resurgence of investments will provide it with additional momentum. It is only natural that at the present time, in the run-up to a general election, questions should arise as to whether these forecasts, and those from other sources, are still valid. We are in a period of political uncertainty, which goes together with economic uncertainty, even if we are talking of a relatively short period of a few months, and it is good that the period of uncertainty should be relatively short. It is therefore well worthwhile to dispel all this uncertainty here and now, at least in the economic area. It is vital that the new government, however it is composed, be committed to the same macroeconomic strategy and structural reforms that created the conditions for healthy and sustained growth. Domestic BIS Review 82/2005 1 
and foreign investors must be sure that this strategy is not at issue, and that everyone is committed to it. And it is important that they should feel that right away. On our part, the Bank of Israel will continue to pursue an interest-rate policy consistent with the inflation target of between 1 percent and 3 percent a year, with the intention of reaching the mid-point. The economy does have the problem of poverty, and this should, indeed must, be tackled responsibly by adopting the necessary measures. But it must be tackled with open eyes, with reality constantly in view, and with a commitment to the strategy of long-term growth. Without such growth, problems such as poverty cannot be resolved, and it is therefore essential that economic policy be constantly directed towards the achievement and maintenance of growth. As I stated at the outset, the banking system is very important in every economy, and of course Israel is no exception. The importance, however, clearly lies in the banking system being healthy, stable and competitive. I have also mentioned the important, even dramatic, development that affected the financial system as a whole, and in particular the banking system-and that is the reform proposed by the Bachar Committee. I am pleased to see that the banks, or most of them, are already preparing themselves for this, and sales of provident funds and mutual funds are already taking place, and with some measure of success, so it seems to us. When I see this I am happy that the pessimistic scenarios predicted by some are not being realized. In the past, too, such scenarios preceded successful reforms, for instance in the foreign-currency market. It is natural that concern is felt before reforms and changes, but it must be understood that Israel's financial system is in need of additional reforms. It is up to the banking system today, and to a great extent also up to the Bank of Israel, to prepare itself to confront the new targets it faces in a proper manner: At the top of the list I would put Basel II. The Bank of Israel has placed high on its list of priorities the preparedness of the Banking Supervision Department to adopt the rules of the New Basel Capital Accord (Basel II). This also requires the banking system to organize itself accordingly, and that is no small matter. The second target is gearing up to meet the internal audit standards set out in Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 ("SOX 404"). This subject is also high on the priorities of the Banking Supervision Department, and of the whole banking system, and will be for the next two years. I have learned from my experience in Citigroup that SOX 404 is a burden, but I also know that it greatly improves management's internal control. These two important projects together constitute an overall format of management and control that will instill the highest standards in Israel's banking system, standards consistent with the most advanced world wide. The third target relates to the implementation of the Bachar reform. This involves the sale of provident funds and mutual funds by the banks; redefining banks' activity and profit centers in general and in the capital market/their capital-market activity; reorganization in the field of consultancy regarding pensions; preparations for competition in the credit markets from nonbank alternatives, etc. The fourth target is for the banking system to face up to current and future changes (we hope) in the capital and money markets, for example, the development of the interbank market following the abolition of transactions with "previous day's value date" by the Bank of Israel; future development of sophisticated financial instruments; future development of mortgage securitization; and the introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in which the Bank of Israel is deeply involved. Obviously that is not the whole story. These targets will result in a more efficient banking system and in greater competition in the capital and money markets and in the credit market. Competition on the retail banking side leaves much to be desired. Although some steps have been taken to improve competition in this area, such as the directive issued by the Supervisor of Banks making it easier for customers to transfer from one bank to another, the situation is still far from satisfactory. As long as there is no increase in the number of large banks - whether through the merger of small and medium banks or through the entry of foreign banks into the field of full retail banking in Israel - we will have to continue examining ways of removing the barriers in this area. It should be clear that this goal of strengthening competition in the banking system is one of the prime objectives of the Bank of Israel, and, I would assume, of every government in Israel. 2 BIS Review 82/2005 
John Hurley: The Central Bank and the Eurosystem Introductory remarks by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, at the Seminar for Irish Media, Dublin, 6 December 2005. *      *      * Introduction I would like to begin by thanking you all for making time to come here this morning. This promises to be a busy news week and I am sure there are many other demands on your time, so I am very grateful that so many of you have turned up this morning.  The aim of the session is to give an overview on the role of the Central Bank as a member of the Eurosystem. The main focus is on monetary policy, looking at the strategy, the experience to date and communication. The session will also include the launch of some new euro area statistics.  Experience and achievements For almost seven years now the euro area has had a single currency and a single monetary policy conducted by the Governing Council of the ECB. The introduction of the single currency has been an historical landmark. In twelve countries, the euro has replaced the national currency and rapidly become part of everyday life. For the business community, intra-euro area exchange rate volatility and the uncertainty it caused for trade and investment have been eliminated. In the financial area, the role of the euro in global markets and the growth in the use of the new currency outside the euro area have also been impressive. The euro has very quickly become an important part of the global financial system and the evidence of the past seven years is that its role can continue to grow.  Within the euro area, the key challenge has been to formulate and implement the single monetary policy. As you are well aware, it has not all been plain sailing. Since coming into being, the single monetary policy has been conducted in a very testing environment, characterised by a series of shocks. At various times, especially in the early years, there were periods of exceptional economic, financial and geopolitical uncertainty. The first 18 months witnessed a very strong increase in oil prices, the peak of the dotcom boom and a significant fall in the value of the euro. The subsequent correction following the collapse of the dotcom boom, allied to heightened geopolitical tensions, then triggered the most critical and sustained period of economic and financial uncertainty witnessed in decades. This persisted until early 2003, and while uncertainty has unwound considerably since, the sharp rise in oil prices has led to uncertainty returning periodically in the interim. On top of all this, we have also seen a sizeable appreciation of the euro since 2002, particularly against the dollar, taking it back to the level prevailing at its initial launch. From that short outline, it is clear that the economic and financial environment of the past seven years has provided a stiff test of the single monetary policy.  Given this background, what has been the outcome? Over the past seven years, the evidence indicates that both inflation and inflation expectations have remained firmly under control. Since the beginning of 1999, indicators of long-term inflation expectations in the euro area have remained below but close to 2 per cent. This suggests that the single monetary policy has been successful in anchoring long-term inflation expectations and that the public and the markets are convinced about the determination to maintain price stability over the medium-term. This has been a very significant achievement in a relatively short period of time and has been an important factor in permitting euro area interest rates to remain accommodative, even after last week's interest rate rise.  I would like to comment briefly on last week's move and to emphasise its consistency with the monetary policy strategy we have in place. The decision to increase interest rates was taken against the background of the risks to price stability that have been identified. The decision will help to keep medium to long-term inflation anchored at levels consistent with price stability. Even after this increase, interest rates remain low and continue to lend considerable support to growth. As to the future, I would emphasise that the Governing Council has not taken any 'ex ante' decision to engage in a series of interest rate increases. Our mandate is to maintain price stability and we will continue to monitor all developments closely. We will examine the data, make our assessment and act as appropriate to deliver price stability. BIS Review 82/2005 1 
The institutional framework The Eurosystem institutional set-up involves centralised decision-making on monetary policy issues and decentralised implementation of those decisions. I can assure you that the Central Bank of Ireland plays an important role in both areas. One of the features of the Governing Council is the democratic way in which it goes about its business. In a sense one should not be surprised by this: the Statute of the ESCB provides for each member to have one vote and specifically restricts weighted voting to financial matters. I am impressed by the manner in which these principles are observed in practice. Certainly, there is no sense of Governors operating in a representative capacity when addressing euro area policies. Equally, it is the force of an argument, rather than who makes it, that commands respect. I can assure you that we have a very comprehensive monetary policy preparation process in place in the Central Bank, which ensures that we play a full part in the formulation of euro area monetary policy.  We also play a full part in the monetary policy implementation process. At the operational level, Central Bank staff carry out the Eurosystem's money market management operations with Dublin based banks. The banking system in Ireland actually takes a disproportionately high share of funding in ECB operations. This reflects the importance of Dublin as a financial centre, as testified by the still growing number of financial institutions choosing Ireland as a location for their operations. Thus, in terms of our interaction with the market, it may be surprising but it is nonetheless true that membership of monetary union has actually brought the Central Bank in contact with a wider range of domestic counterparties than was the case before 1999. The Eurosystem is also responsible for the smooth operation of payment systems. The main instrument for carrying out this task is the provision of payment and securities settlement facilities. To this end, the Eurosystem has created TARGET for large-value payments in euro. At present, TARGET is a 'system of systems' made up of interlinked national payment systems, and again here the Central Bank plays a full part. In excess of one million transactions, amounting to almost EUR5 trillion, were processed through the Irish system in 2004. This represented 1.5 per cent by volume of the total transactions processed by the TARGET system last year.  While I have focussed on the Central Bank's responsibilities in relation to Eurosystem monetary policy, I would like to emphasise that this is only one part of what we do. Additional responsibilities, among other things, include contributing to the maintenance of financial stability and providing banknotes and coin; our full set of responsibilities are set out in the Three Year Strategic Plan which we published in 2004. This gives you a flavour of some of our activities and I feel I should now stop and hand over to Tom O'Connell and his team who will tell you a lot more about the role of the Central Bank as a member of the Eurosystem, with a particular focus on monetary policy. Once again I would like to thank you for taking the time to come here this morning. 2 BIS Review 82/2005 
Erkki Liikanen: A central bank's view on technology based efficiency and productivity in the financial markets  Opening speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, in the Bank of Finland seminar on Technology-driven Efficiencies and Risks in Financial Institutions, Helsinki, 21 November 2005. *      *      * Europe needs more growth. But we are aging. So growth cannot come from an increased labour contribution. We therefore need higher labour productivity. We need more investment, which in turn increases productivity. And we need better solutions, recipes, bringing a lot higher total factor productivity. This means faster technological change.  We are happy to have with us today Professor Matti Pohjola, the renowned economist, who has written extensively on ICT, productivity and growth.  We know that ICT can be a powerful tool in productivity growth, not only concerning ICT-investment but above all the use of ICT in new processes and ways of organising companies and the public sector.  In Europe, the use of IT in the services sector has not brought about the same increase in productivity that we have seen in the United States. The reason behind this, however, is not only slightly lower investment levels in ICT but – I believe – less competitive markets. When there is less competition, there is less pressure to innovate, and less pressure to increase efficiency.  This is why we need to have the real Internal Market as an opener of competition. And we need to abolish the remaining barriers to cross-border business in all areas.  Today, we have a common monetary policy but we don't have a common financial market.  We have made some progress in the financial markets, such as in the wholesale business generally and the integration of inter-bank large value payment systems and securities markets in particular. Both of which have proceeded well. Retail banking and securities settlement systems are where matters are lagging most. And the co-ordination and convergence of supervision require further work.  A Europe-wide financial sector will bring better and cheaper services and lower interest rates to all customers: to consumers, SMEs and large companies alike. Lending decisions are also decisions about innovation in other sectors. All of which promote growth.  From the macroeconomic point of view, the integration of the financial sector is significant for Europe, because:  - integrated and efficient financial markets would allow the dilution of risks by spreading them among countries and regions, and  - integrated financial markets can contribute to the efficient transmission of monetary policy.  * * * In the 1970s and 80s, Finland saw substantial investment in IT in the financial sector. But it was only after the financial crises in the early 1990's that the sector was forced to revise their operations, and ICT was widely used in both re-engineering the internal processes and in creating new distribution channels.  In the ten years that followed, banks cut their operating expenses by 50%. This process was initiated when public authorities set stark quantitative cost savings requirements as a condition to receiving capital support. On top of which, enhanced competition, due to deregulation, has increased the need for continuous re-engineering. Certainly, commonly created standards for customer-to-bank and inter-bank communication also played a significant role in this development.  From which we can see that we need IT-investment, we need competitive pressure and we need investment in innovating in the organisation to bring about productivity growth.  Now –and even more so in the future –tough competition in integrating markets force financial market institutions to further improve their performance and increase their efficiency. That is also what share -holders want. And to bring these improvements about, streamlined inter-bank payment systems and automated securities settlement systems are required in particular.  BIS Review 82/2005 1 
The European financial sector demonstrates, however, significant differences in efficiency, both between institutions and between national banking sectors. This question will be further elaborated in today's presentation by De Nederlandsche Bank's Jacob Bikker, the author of a well-known book in this area. Implementation of ICT has caused profound changes in many business lines, and yet there is the potential in further renewing and streamlining the processes – it should not be about carrying out the computerisation of old processes but rather about reinventing the processes and using the full capacity of new technology.  Efficiency comes from savings in personnel and time, streamlined and automated process flows, from less errors, from economies of scale and from lower processing costs per unit. Banks have created new sources of income by offering more sophisticated products which would not have been possible without the use of ICT. The whole banking landscape is changing. It is going to be of the utmost interest to hear Bob DeYoung's presentation on what the implications of these changes to the industry are, and how far this evolution can go.  A modern, networked economy also requires financial institutions to review their way of carrying out their business with their customers in order to produce added value. This often requires being part of their customers' business processes and doing more than was required of them earlier. An example of this is electronic account statements, with their structured references and other information for automated booking and reconciliation in the company's financial management. The demand for straight-through-processing from customer to the bank, between banks and to customer is intense. Aspect of these issues will be discussed during both Bo Harald's and David Blair's presentations in this seminar.  * * * From bricks and mortar to clicks and mortar is the most visible phenomenon of ICT in financial institutions A new distribution channel, the Internet, and mobile terminals, along with sufficient ATM- and payment card networks have made it possible to bring down the number of bank branches, giving savings in operating costs. Take, for example, one Finnish bank which has managed to cut its distribution costs by 25% and unit production costs for payments by 68% over a 3 year period. This was achieved by implementing multi-channel applications.  Customers have adopted the new way of banking, paying bills, checking credit card balances or trading in securities, independent of time or place, surprisingly fast. Coming generations will probably have difficulty in understanding how anyone ever queued at a bank branch to pay his bills – to say nothing of writing a cheque. Today, it is difficult to see how a bank could enter the Finnish or Nordic markets without a well-functioning and comprehensive Internet service.  New customer generations are also more willing and capable of extensively managing their finances using e-banking services. Housing loans, for example, are still largely negotiated in branches, but already we have seen how people request offers from various banks via the Internet before entering into final discussions with one bank. This reinforces the customer's negotiating power. And this increases competition.  Development also requires sufficient security elements to create and maintain public confidence. And here the challenges are growing. We need European level cooperation in network security. Here I hope that ENISA, the European Network Security Agency, will make its contribution. We need efficient cooperation among the law enforcement authorities to fight cyber crime. And we need the secure electronic identification and protection of data privacy. Identity theft, the worst case of e-crime, must be fought on all these fronts.  ICT implementation and exploitation often require huge investments. In many banks ICT has replaced personnel as the largest single item of expenditure. Old legacy systems are aging, and according to a recent survey, over 80% of ICT expenditure goes into maintenance of these systems. New investment is required, and these are challenging projects. In Europe, it seems the banking industry is very prudent in front of new investments. This may partly reflect caution due to over investments in the past, as for 2 K. But it may also mirror the risks currently a deficient vision of the future. Maybe there are not enough incentives – such as competition?  * * * Can regulation be used to enhance competition? This was the case with the Internal Market programme. Twelve or fifteen national regulations were replaced by a harmonized one. Active 2 BIS Review 82/2005 
competition policy was pursued. So a level playing field was created in a great number of sectors. And the regulatory costs were lower than in the past.  But in general, regulation can be a double-edged sword. The first priority is that markets are dynamic and search for growth. Sometimes, however, regulation is also required where market failure is evident.  The EU Commission's regulation (2560) on euro payment fees was the first step towards forcing the banking sector to do something about the intra-EU cross-border payment systems. By regulating the fees that banks were able collect from cross-border euro-denominated payments within the EU, the Commission – in effect – cut the banks' income and forced them to develop cost saving measures in the processing of these payments. The new draft on the new legal framework for payments is coming soon. This framework should have the effect of harmonising the general terms of payment transmission throughout Europe. This means that a payment initiated by a Finnish customer in Helsinki to an Italian bank's customer in Milan or a Portuguese bank's customer in Lisbon to a German bank's customer in Wilhelmshaven - or wherever in Europe - must not take longer than 3 banking days. Knowing the diverse terms of payment in use today, this will inevitably force the banking industry to improve their operations. This development will also benefit all companies involved with Europe-wide trade.  Banks have committed themselves to creating the single euro payments area, SEPA through their co-operation forum the EPC (European Payments Council). This development should result in an integrated euro payments market. Work on the definition of common payment instruments is in progress, but the infrastructure for handling them is still obscure.  Different levels of ICT usage in Europe and different traditions cause controversies in this SEPA work. The only option for Europe is to succeed in creating such an internal payments infrastructure that benefits the end customer and enhances economic growth. We must not build SEPA according to the lowest common denominator; instead it must become the momentum for the entire European financial sector. It could provide the required push for the banking industry to find the touchstone to guide them to a new level of competitiveness.  * * * Why do we need a conference such as this? In their individual statutes, the euro area central banks have been given the task to contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the various authorities relating to the prudential supervision and the stability of the financial system. On top of which, we are to contribute to the smooth operation of the payment and securities infrastructure. This is the basic task of the European System of Central Banks. The Bank of Finland has even been explicitly committed to participating in developing financial markets.  From this, you can see that the objective comes mainly from the need to boost economic growth; the solutions however lie at the micro-level. Two thirds of the topics covered by this conference take a micro approach. We need to interlink the forces of integration, competition, innovation and the use of technology. Within the financial markets, technology can give us that edge.  When setting up this conference my colleagues were faced with the difficulty of placing the issue before central bankers: the theme is partly a financial market policy issue, partly an oversight issue and we cannot ignore the fact that central bank operations are involved, too. It falls into the area of co-operation with supervisors, as technology changes the risk profile of financial institutions and the market as whole.  It is essential that new technologies, new products and processes are understood not only by market operators but also by the authorities. Contagion can take on new forms via networks and loss of public confidence. The new multi-channel world is more transparent than the old brick and mortar world. This understandably poses new demands on supervisory regulation – although it should not become a barrier to development. Co-operation across borders must be ensured in the integrated markets.  I would like to wrap this issue up by promoting e-banking, which to me covers various services in banking and securities markets while extending to the basic infrastructure that include payment systems and instruments. We at the Bank of Finland have felt this area should constitute a strategic focus. I believe you can share this vision.  How can we enforce such a strategy? Perhaps best through the provision of analysis and research focusing on efficiency and productivity in the financial sector. Some of this requires the development of BIS Review 82/2005 3 
methodology and we must surmount the difficulties of current research in capturing a multifaceted reality due to a shortfall in data. Therefore the accent remains on co-operation with market participants. After all, it is the market that will have to deliver the efficiencies.  I wish you all a lively debate. 4 BIS Review 82/2005 
